The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Tale of a Lonely Parish, by F. Marion
Crawford


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: A Tale of a Lonely Parish

Author: F. Marion Crawford

Release Date: October 4, 2004  [eBook #13597]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TALE OF A LONELY PARISH***


E-text prepared by Audrey Longhurst, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



A TALE OF A LONELY PARISH

by

F. MARION CRAWFORD

1886







TO My MOTHER

I DEDICATE THIS TALE A MEAN TOKEN OF A LIFELONG AFFECTION

SORRENTO, Christmas Day, 1885




CHAPTER I.


The Reverend Augustin Ambrose would gladly have given up taking pupils.
He was growing old and his sight was beginning to trouble him; he was
very weary of Thucydides, of Homer, of the works of Mr. Todhunter of
which the green bindings expressed a hope still unrealised, of conic
sections--even of his beloved Horace. He was tired of the stupidities of
the dull young men who were sent to him because they could not "keep up",
and he had long ceased to be surprised or interested by the remarks of
the clever ones who were sent to him because their education had not
prepared them for an English University. The dull ones could never be
made to understand anything, though Mr. Ambrose generally succeeded in
making them remember enough to matriculate, by dint of ceaseless
repetition and a system of _memoria technica_ which embraced most things
necessary to the salvation of dull youth. The clever ones, on the other
hand, generally lacked altogether the solid foundation of learning; they
could construe fluently but did not know a long syllable from a short
one; they had vague notions of elemental algebra and no notion at all of
arithmetic, but did very well in conic sections; they knew nothing of
prosody, but dabbled perpetually in English blank verse; altogether they
knew most of those things which they need not have known and they knew
none of those things thoroughly which they ought to have known. After
twenty years of experience Mr. Ambrose ascertained that it was easier to
teach a stupid boy than a clever one, but that he would prefer not to
teach at all.

Unfortunately the small tithes of a small country parish in Essex did not
furnish a sufficient income for his needs. He had been a Fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge, within a few years of taking his degree,
wherein he had obtained high honours. But he had married and had found
himself obliged to accept the first living offered to him, to wit, the
vicarage of Billingsfield, whereof his college held the rectory and
received the great tithes. The entire income he obtained from his cure
never at any time exceeded three hundred and forty-seven pounds, and in
the year when it reached that high figure there had been an unusually
large number of marriages. It was not surprising that the vicar should
desire to improve his circumstances by receiving one or two pupils. He
had married young, as has been said, and there had been children born to
him, a son and a daughter. Mrs. Ambrose was a good manager and a good
mother, and her husband had worked hard. Between them they had brought up
their children exceedingly well. The son had in his turn entered the
church, had exhibited a faculty of pushing his way which had not
characterised his father, had got a curacy in a fashionable Yorkshire
watering-place, and was thought to be on the way to obtain a first-rate
living. In the course of time, too, the daughter had lost her heart to a
young physician who had brilliant prospects and some personal fortune,
and the Reverend Augustin Ambrose had given his consent to the union. Nor
had he been disappointed. The young physician had risen rapidly in his
profession, had been elected a member of the London College, had
transferred himself to the capital and now enjoyed a rising practice in
Chelsea. So great was his success that it was thought he would before
long purchase the goodwill of an old practitioner who dwelt in the
neighbourhood of Brompton Crescent, and who, it was said, might shortly
be expected to retire.

It will be seen, therefore, that if Mr. Ambrose's life had not been very
brilliant, his efforts had on the whole been attended with success. His
children were both happy and independent and no longer needed his
assistance or support; his wife, the excellent Mrs. Ambrose, enjoyed
unfailing health and good spirits; he himself was still vigorous and
active, and as yet found no difficulty in obtaining a couple of pupils at
two hundred pounds a year each, for he had early got a reputation for
successfully preparing young gentlemen with whom no other private tutor
could do anything, and he had established the scale of his prices
accordingly. It is true that he had sacrificed other things for the sake
of imparting tuition, and more than once he had hesitated and asked
himself whether he should go on. Indeed, when he graduated, it was
thought that he would soon make himself remarkable by the publication of
some scholarly work; it was foretold that he might become a famous
preacher; it was asserted that he was a general favourite with the
Fellows of Trinity and would get a proportionately fat living--but he had
committed the unpardonable sin of allowing his chances of fortune to slip
from him. He had given up his fellowship, had married and had accepted an
insignificant country living. He asked nothing, and he got nothing. He
never attracted the notice of his bishop by doing anything extraordinary,
nor the notice of the public by appearing in print. He baptized, married
and buried the people of Billingsfield, Essex, and he took private
pupils. He wrote a sermon once a fortnight, and revised old ones for the
other three occasions out of four. His sermons were good in their way,
but were intended for simple folk and did no justice to the powers he had
certainly possessed in his youth. Indeed, as years went on, the dry
routine of his life produced its inevitable effect upon his mind, and the
productions of Mr. Ambrose grew to be exceedingly commonplace; and the
more commonplace he became, the more he regretted having done so little
with the faculties he enjoyed, and the more weary he became of the daily
task of galvanising the dull minds of his pupils into a spasmodic
activity, just sufficient to leap the ditch that separates the schoolboy
from the undergraduate. He had not only educated his children and seen
them provided for in the world; he had also saved a little money, and he
had insured his life for five hundred pounds. There was no longer any
positive necessity for continuing to teach, as there had been thirty
years ago, when he first married.

So much for the circumstances of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose.
Personally he was a man of good presence, five feet ten inches in height,
active and strong, of a ruddy complexion with smooth, thick grey hair and
a plentiful grey beard. He shaved his upper lip however, greatly to the
detriment of his appearance, for the said upper lip was very long and the
absence of the hirsute appendage showed a very large mouth with very thin
lips, generally compressed into an expression of remarkable obstinacy.
His nose was both broad and long and his grey eyes were bright and
aggressive in their glance. As a matter of fact Mr. Ambrose was combative
by nature, but his fighting instincts seem to have been generally
employed in the protection of rights he already possessed, rather than in
pushing on in search of fresh fields of activity. He was an active man,
fond of walking alone and able to walk any distance he pleased; a
charitable man with the charity peculiar to people of exceedingly
economical tendencies and possessing small fixed incomes. He would give
himself vast personal trouble to assist distress, as though aware that
since he could not give much money to the poor he was bound to give the
best of himself. The good Mrs. Ambrose seconded him in this as in all his
works; labouring hard when hard work could do any good, but giving
material assistance with a sparing hand. It sufficiently defines the two
to say that although many a surly labourer in the parish grumbled that
the vicar and his wife were "oncommon near", when money was concerned,
there was nevertheless no trouble in which their aid was not invoked and
their advice asked. But the indigent labourer not uncommonly retrieved
his position by asking a shilling of one of the young gentlemen at the
vicarage, who were generally open-handed, good-looking boys, blessed with
a great deal more money than brains.

At the time when this tale opens, however, it chanced that one of the two
young gentlemen at the vicarage was by no means in the position peculiar
to the majority of youths who sought the good offices of the Reverend
Augustin Ambrose. John Short, aged eighteen, was in all respects a
remarkable contrast to his companion the Honourable Cornelius Angleside.
John Short was apparently very poor; the Honourable Cornelius on the
other hand had plenty of money. Short was undeniably clever; Angleside
was uncommonly dull. Short was the son of a decayed literary man;
Angleside was the son of a nobleman. Short was by nature a hard worker;
Angleside was amazingly idle. Short meant to do something in the world;
Angleside had early determined to do nothing.

It would not be easy to define the reasons which induced Mr. Ambrose to
receive John Short under his roof. He had never before taken a pupil on
any but his usual terms, and at his time of life it was strange that he
should break through the rule. But here his peculiar views of charity
came into play. Short's father had been his own chum at school, and his
friend at college, but had failed to reap any substantial benefits from
his education. He had been a scholar in his way, but his way had not been
the way of other scholars, and when he had gone up for honours he had got
a bad third in classics. He would not enter the church, he could not
enter the law, he had no interest whatever, and he found himself
naturally thrust into the profession of literature. For a time he had
nearly starved; then he had met with some success and had, of course,
married without hesitation; after this he had had more misfortunes. His
wife had died leaving him an only son, whom in course of time he had sent
to school. But school was too expensive and he had reluctantly taken the
boy home again. It was in a fit of despair that he wrote to his old
friend Augustin Ambrose, asking his advice. The Reverend Augustin
considered the matter with the assistance of his wife, and being
charitable souls, they determined that they must help Short to educate
his son. Accordingly the vicar of Billingsfield wrote to his old friend
to say that if he could manage to pay a small sum for the lad's board,
he, the vicar, would complete the boy's education, so that he might at
least have a chance in the world. Short accepted the offer with boundless
gratitude and had hitherto not failed to pay the vicar the small sum
agreed upon. The result of all this was that Mr. Ambrose had grown very
fond of John, and John had derived great advantage from his position. He
possessed precisely what his father had lacked, namely a strong bent in
one direction, and there was no doubt that he would distinguish himself
if he had a chance. That chance the vicar had determined to give him. He
had made up his mind that his old friend's son should go to college and
show what he was able to do. It was not an easy thing to manage, but the
vicar had friends in Cambridge and John had brains; moreover the vicar
and John were both very obstinate people and had both determined upon the
same plan, so that there was a strong probability of their succeeding.

John Short was eighteen years of age, neither particularly good-looking
nor by any means the reverse. He had what bankers commonly call a lucky
face; that is to say he had a certain very prepossessing look of honesty
in his blue eyes, and a certain look of energetic goodwill in his
features. When he was much older and wore a beard he passed for a
handsome man, but at eighteen he could only boast the smallest of fair
whiskers, and when anybody took the trouble to look long at him, which
was not often, the verdict was that his jaw was too heavy and his mouth
too obstinate. In complexion he was fair, and healthy to look at,
generally sunburned in the summer, for he had a habit of reading out of
doors; his laugh was very pleasant, though it was rarely heard; his eyes
were honest but generally thoughtful; his frame was sturdy and already
inclined rather to strength than to graceful proportion; his head matched
his body well, being broad and well-shaped with plenty of prominence over
the brows and plenty of fulness above the temples. He had a way of
standing as though it would not be easy to move him, and a way of
expressing his opinion which seemed to challenge contradiction. But he
was not a combative boy. If any one argued with him, it soon appeared
that he was not really argumentative, but merely enthusiastic. It was not
necessary to agree with him, and there was small use in contradicting
him. The more he talked the more enthusiastic he grew as he developed his
own views; until seeing that he was not understood or that he was merely
laughed at, he would end his discourse with a merry laugh at himself, or
a shy apology for having talked so much. But the vicar assured his wife
that the boy's Greek and Latin verses were something very extraordinary
indeed, and much better than his own in his best days. For John was
passionately fond of the classics and did not propose to acquire any more
mathematical knowledge than was strictly necessary for his matriculation
and "little-go." He meant to be a famous scholar and he meant to get a
fellowship at his college in order to be perfectly independent and to
help his father.

John was a constant source of wonder to his companion the Honourable
Cornelius Angleside, who remembered to have seen fellows of that sort at
Eton but had never got near enough to them to know what they were really
like. Cornelius had a vague idea that there was some trick about
appearing to know so much and that those reading chaps were awful
humbugs. How the trick was performed he did not venture to explain, but
he was as firmly persuaded that it was managed by some species of
conjuring as that Messrs. Maskelyne and Cook performed their wonders by
sleight of hand. That one human brain should actually contain the amount
of knowledge John Short appeared to possess was not credible to the
Honourable Cornelius, and the latter spent more of his time in trying to
discover how John "did it" than in trying to "do it" himself.
Nevertheless, young Angleside liked Short after his own fashion, and
Short did not dislike Angleside. John's father had given him to
understand that as a general rule persons of wealth and good birth were a
set of overbearing, purse-proud bullies, who considered men of genius to
be little better than a set of learned monkeys, certainly not good enough
to black their boots. For John's father in his misfortunes had imbibed
sundry radical notions formerly peculiar to poor literary men, and not
yet altogether extinct, and he had accordingly warned his son that all
mammon was the mammon of unrighteousness, and that the people who
possessed it were the natural enemies of people who had to live by their
brains. But John had very soon discovered that though Cornelius Angleside
possessed the three qualifications for perdition, in the shape of birth,
wealth and ignorance, against which his poor father railed unceasingly,
he succeeded nevertheless in making himself very good company. Angleside
was not overbearing, he was not purse-proud and he was not a bully. On
the contrary he was unobtrusive and sufficiently simple in manner, and he
certainly never mentioned the subject of his family or fortune; John
rather pitied him, on the whole, until he began to discover that
Angleside looked up to him on account of his mental superiority, and then
John, being very human, began to like him.

The life at the vicarage of Billingsfield, Essex, was not remarkable for
anything but its extreme regularity. Prayers, breakfast, work, lunch, a
walk, work, dinner, work, prayers, bed. The programme never varied, save
as the seasons introduced some change in the hours of the establishment.
The vicar, who was fond of a little gardening and amused himself with a
variety of experiments in the laying of asparagus beds, found occasional
excitement in the pursuit of a stray cat which had managed to climb his
wire netting and get at the heads of his favourite vegetable, in which
thrilling chase he was usually aided by an old brown retriever answering,
when he answered at all, to the name of Carlo, and by the Honourable
Cornelius, whose skill in throwing stones was as phenomenal as his
ignorance of Latin quantities. The play was invariably opened by old
Reynolds, the ancient and bow-legged gardener, groom and man of all work
at the vicarage.

"Please sir, there's Simon Gunn's cat in the sparrergrass." The
information was accompanied by a sort of chuckle of evil satisfaction
which at once roused the sleeping passions of the Reverend Augustin
Ambrose.

"Dear me, Reynolds, then why don't you turn her out?" and without waiting
for an answer, the excellent vicar would spring from his seat and rush
down the lawn in the direction of the beds, closely followed by the
Honourable Cornelius, who picked up stones from the gravel path as he
ran, and whose long legs made short work of the iron fence at the bottom
of the garden. Meanwhile the aged Reynolds let Carlo loose from the yard
and the hunt was prosecuted with great boldness and ingenuity. The
vicar's object was to get the cat out of the asparagus bed as soon as
possible without hurting her, for he was a humane man and would not have
hurt a fly. Cornelius, on the other hand, desired the game to last as
long as possible, and endeavoured to prevent the cat's escape by always
hitting the wire netting at the precise spot where she was trying to get
over it. In this way he would often succeed in getting as much as half an
hour's respite from Horace. At last the vicar, panting with his exertions
and bathed in perspiration, would protest against the form of assault.

"Really, Angleside", he would say, "I believe I could throw straighter
myself. I'm quite sure Carlo can get her out if you leave him alone".

Whereupon Cornelius would put his hands in his pockets and look on, and
in a few minutes, when the cat had been driven out and the vicar's back
was turned, he would slip a sixpence into old Reynold's hand, and follow
his tutor reluctantly back to the study. Whether there was any connection
between the cat and the sixpence is uncertain, but during the last months
of Angleside's stay at the vicarage the ingenuity of Simon Gunn's yellow
cat in getting over the wire netting reached such a pitch that the vicar
began to prepare a letter to the Bishop Stortford _Chronicle_ on the
relations generally existing between cats and asparagus beds.

Another event in the life of the vicarage was the periodical lameness of
the vicar's strawberry mare, followed by the invariable discovery that
George Horsnell the village blacksmith had run a nail into her foot when
he shoed her last. Invariably, also, the vicar threatened that in future
the mare should be shod by Hawkins the rival blacksmith, who was a
dissenter and had consequently never been employed by the vicarage.
Moreover it was generally rumoured once every year that old Nat Barker,
the octogenarian cripple who had not been able to stand upon his feet for
twenty years, was at the point of death. He invariably recovered,
however, in time to put in an appearance by proxy at the distribution of
a certain dole of a loaf and a shilling on boxing day. It was told also
that in remote times the Puckeridge hounds had once come that way and
that the fox had got into the churchyard. A repetition of this stirring
event was anxiously looked for during many years, every time that the
said pack met within ten miles of Billingsfield, but hitherto it had been
looked for in vain. On the whole the life at the vicarage was not
eventful, and the studies of the two young men who imbibed learning at
the feet of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose were rarely interrupted.

Mrs. Ambrose herself represented the feminine element in the society of
the little place. The new doctor was a strange man, suspected of being a
free-thinker, and he was not married. The Hall, for there was a Hall at
Billingsfield, was uninhabited, and had been uninhabited for years. The
estate which belonged to it was unimportant and moreover was in Chancery
and seemed likely to stay there, for reasons no one ever mentioned at
Billingsfield, because no one knew anything about them. From time to time
a legal looking personage drove up to the Duke's Head, which was kept by
Mr. Abraham Boosey, who was also undertaker to the parish, and which was
thought to be a very good inn. The legal personage stayed a day or two,
spending most of his time at the Hall and in driving about to the
scattered farms which represented the estate, but he never came to the
vicarage, nor did the vicar ever seem to know what he was doing nor why
he came. "He came on business"--that was all that anybody knew. His
business was to collect rents, of course; but what he did with them, no
one was bold enough to surmise. The estate was in Chancery, it was said,
and the definition conveyed about as much to the mind of the average
inhabitant of Billingsfield, as if he had been informed that the moon was
in perigee or the sun in Scorpio. The practical result of its being in
Chancery was that no one lived there.

John Short liked Mrs. Ambrose and the Honourable Cornelius behaved to her
with well bred affability. She always said Cornelius had very nice
manners, as indeed he had and had need to have. Occasionally, perhaps
four or five times in the year, the Reverend Edward Pewlay, who had what
he called a tenor voice, and his wife, who played the pianoforte very
fairly, came over to assist at a Penny Reading. He lived "over Harlow
way," as the natives expressed it; he was what was called in those parts
a rabid Anglican, because he preached in his surplice and had services on
the Saints' days, and the vicar of Billingsfield did not sympathise in
his views. Nevertheless he was very useful at Penny Readings, and on one
of these occasions produced a very ingenious ghost for the delectation of
the rustics, by means of a piece of plate glass and a couple of lamps.

There had indeed been festivities at the vicarage to which as many as
three clergymen's wives had been invited, but these were rare indeed. For
months at a time Mrs. Ambrose reigned in undisputed possession of the
woman's social rights in Billingsfield. She was an excellent person in
every way. She had once been handsome and even now she was fine-looking,
of goodly stature, if also of goodly weight; rosy, even rubicund, in
complexion, and rotund of feature; looking at you rather severely out of
her large grey eyes, but able to smile very cheerfully and to show an
uncommonly good set of teeth; twisting her thick grey hair into a small
knot at the back of her head and then covering it with a neatly made cap
which she considered becoming to her time of life; dressed always with
extreme simplicity and neatness, glorying in her good sense and in her
stout shoes; speaking of things which she called "neat" with a devotional
admiration and expressing the extremest height of her disapprobation when
she said anything was "very untidy." A motherly woman, a practical woman,
a good housekeeper and a good wife, careful of small things because
generally only small things came in her way, devotedly attached to her
husband, whom she regarded with perfect justice as the best man of her
acquaintance, adding, however, with somewhat precipitous rashness that he
was the best man in the world. She took also a great interest in his
pupils and busied herself mightily with their welfare. Since the arrival
of the new doctor who was suspected of free-thinking, she had shown a
strong leaning towards homoeopathy, and prescribed small pellets of
belladonna for the Honourable Cornelius's cold and infinitesimal drops of
aconite for John Short's headaches, until she observed that John never
had a headache unless he had worked too much, and Angleside always had a
cold when he did not want to work at all. Especially in the department of
the commissariat she showed great activity, and the reputation the vicar
had acquired for feeding his pupils well had perhaps more to do with his
success than he imagined. She was never tired of repeating that
Englishmen needed plenty of good food, and she had no principles which
she did not practise. She even thought it right to lecture young
Angleside upon his idleness at stated intervals. He always replied with
great gentleness that he was awfully stupid, you know, and Mr. Ambrose
was awfully good about it and he hoped he should not be pulled when he
went up. And strange to relate he actually passed his examination and
matriculated, to his own immense astonishment and to the no small honour
and glory of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose, vicar of Billingsfield,
Essex. But when that great day arrived certain events occurred which are
worthy to be chronicled and remembered.




CHAPTER II.


In the warm June weather young Angleside went up to pass his examination
for entrance at Trinity. There is nothing particularly interesting or
worthy of note in that simple process, though at that time the custom of
imposing an examination had only been recently imported from Oxford. For
one whole day forty or fifty young fellows from all parts of the country
sat at the long dining-tables in the beautiful old hall and wrote as
busily as they could, answering the printed questions before them, and
eyeing each other curiously from time to time. The weather was warm and
sultry, the trees were all in full leaf and Cambridge was deserted. Only
a few hard-reading men, who stayed up during the Long, wandered out with
books at the backs of the colleges or strayed slowly through the empty
courts, objects of considerable interest to the youths who had come up
for the entrance examination--chiefly pale men in rather shabby clothes
with old gowns and battered caps, and a general appearance of being the
worse for wear.

Angleside had been in Cambridge before and consequently lost no time in
returning to Billingsfield when the examination was over. Short was to
spend the summer at the vicarage, reading hard until the term began, when
he was to go up and compete for a minor scholarship; Angleside was to
wait until he heard whether he had passed, and was then going abroad to
meet his father and to rest from the extreme exertion of mastering the
"Apology" and the first books of the "Memorabilia." John drove over to
meet the Honourable Cornelius, who was in a terrible state of anxiety and
left him no peace on the way asking him again and again to repeat the
answers to the questions which had been proposed, reckoning up the ones
he had answered wrong and the ones he thought he might have answered
right, and coming each time to a different conclusion, finally lighting a
huge brierwood pipe and swearing "that it was a beastly shame to subject
human beings to such awful torture." John calmed him by saying he fancied
Cornelius had "got through"; for John's words were a species of gospel to
Cornelius. By the time they reached the vicarage Angleside felt sanguine
of his success.

The vicar was not visible. It was a strange and unheard of thing--there
were visitors in the drawing-room. This doubtless accounted for the fact
that the fly from the Duke's Head was standing on the opposite side of
the road. The two young men went into their study, which was on the
ground floor and opened upon the passage which led to the drawing-room
from the little hall. Angleside remarked that by leaving the door open
they would catch a glimpse of the visitor when he went out. But the
visitor stayed long. The curiosity of the two was wrought up to a high
pitch; it was many months since there had been a real visitor at the
vicarage. Angleside suggested going out and finding old Reynolds--he
always knew everything that was going on.

"If we only wait long enough," said Short philosophically, "they are sure
to come out."

"Perhaps," returned Cornelius rather doubtfully.

"They" did come out. The drawing-room door opened and there was a sound
of voices. It was a woman's voice, and a particularly sweet voice, too.
Still no one came down the passage. The lady seemed to be lingering in
taking her leave. Then there was a sound of small feet and suddenly a
little girl stood before the open door of the study, looking wonderingly
at the two young men. Short thought he had never seen such a beautiful
child. She could not have been more than seven or eight years old, and
was not tall for her age; a delicate little figure, all in black, with
long brown curls upon her shoulders, flowing abundantly from beneath a
round black sailor's hat that was set far back upon her head. The child's
face was rather pale than very fair, of a beautiful transparent paleness,
with the least tinge of colour in the cheeks; her great violet eyes gazed
wonderingly into the study, and her lips parted in childlike uncertainty,
while her little gloved hand rested on the door-post as though to get a
sense of security from something so solid.

It was only for a moment. Both the young fellows smiled at the child
unconsciously. Perhaps she thought they were laughing at her; she turned
and ran away again; then passed a second time, stealing a long glance at
the two strangers, but followed immediately by the lady, who was probably
her mother, and whose voice had been heard for the last few moments. The
lady, too, glanced in as she went by, and John Short lost his heart then
and there; not that the lady was beautiful as the little girl was, but
because there was something in her face, in her figure, in her whole
carriage, that moved the boy suddenly as she looked at him and sent the
blood rushing to his cheeks and forehead.

She seemed young, but he never thought of her age. In reality she was
nine-and-twenty years old but looked younger. She was pale, far paler
than the little girl, but she had those same violet eyes, large, deep and
sorrowful, beneath dark, smooth eyebrows that arched high and rose a
little in the middle. Her mouth was perhaps large for her face but her
full lips curved gently and seemed able to smile, though she was not
smiling. Her nose was perhaps too small--her face was far from
faultless--and it had the slightest tendency to turn up instead of down,
but it was so delicately modelled that an artist would have pardoned it
that deviation from the classic. Thick brown hair waved across her white
forehead and was hidden under the black bonnet and the veil thrown back
over it. She was dressed in black and the close-fitting gown showed off
with unconscious vanity the lines of a perfectly moulded and perfectly
supple figure. But it was especially her eyes which attracted John's
sudden attention at that first glance, her violet eyes, tender, sad,
almost pathetic, seeming to ask sympathy and marvellously able to command
it.

It was but for a moment that she paused. Then came the vicar, following
her from the drawing-room, and all three went on. Presently Short heard
the front door open and Mr. Ambrose shouted to the fly.

"Muggins! Muggins!"

No one had ever been able to say why Abraham Boosey, the publican, had
christened his henchman with an appellation so vulgar, to say the least
of it--so amazingly cacophonous. The man's real name was plain Charles
Bird; but Abraham Boosey had christened him Muggins and Muggins he
remained. Muggins had had some beer and was asleep, for the afternoon was
hot and he had anticipated his "fours."

Short saw his opportunity and darted out of the study to the hall where
the lady and her little girl were waiting while the vicar tried to rouse
the driver of the fly by shouting at him. John blushed again as he passed
close to the woman with the sad eyes; he could not tell why, but the
blood mounted to the very roots of his hair, and for a moment he felt
very foolish.

"I'll wake him up, Mr. Ambrose," he said, running out hatless into the
summer's sun.

"Wake up, you lazy beggar!" he shouted in the ear of the sleeping
Muggins, shaking him violently by the arm as he stood upon the wheel.
Muggins grunted something and smiled rather idiotically. "It was only the
young gentleman's play," he would have said. Bless you! he did not mind
being shaken and screamed at! He slowly turned his horses and brought the
fly up to the door. John walked back and stood waiting.

"Thank you," said the lady in a voice that made his heart jump, as she
came out from under the porch and the vicar helped her to get in. Then it
was the turn of the little girl.

"Good-bye, my dear," said the vicar kindly as he took her hand.

"Good-bye," said the child. Then she hesitated and looked at John, who
was standing beside the clergyman. "Good-bye," she repeated, holding out
her little hand shyly towards him. John took it and grew redder than ever
as he felt that the lady was watching him. Then the little girl blushed
and laughed in her small embarrassment, and climbed into the carriage.

"You will write, then?" asked Mr. Ambrose as he shut the door.

"Yes--and thank you again. You are very, very kind to me," answered the
lady, and John thought that as she spoke there were tears in her voice.
She seemed very unhappy and to John she seemed very beautiful. Muggins
cracked his whip and the fly moved off, leaving the vicar and his pupil
standing together at the iron wicket gate before the house.

"Well? Do you think Angleside got through?" asked Mr. Ambrose, rather
anxiously.

Short said he thought Angleside was safe. He hoped the vicar would say
something about the lady, but to his annoyance, he said nothing at all.
John could not ask questions, seeing it was none of his business and was
fain to content himself with thinking of the lady's face and voice. He
felt very uncomfortable at dinner. He thought the excellent Mrs. Ambrose
eyed him with unusual severity, as though suspecting what he was thinking
about, and he thought the vicar's grey eye twinkled occasionally with the
pleasant sense of possessing a secret he had no intention of imparting.
As a matter of fact Mrs. Ambrose was supremely unconscious of the fact
that John had seen the lady, and looked at him with some curiosity,
observing that he seemed nervous and blushed from time to time and was
more silent than usual. She came to the conclusion that he had been
working too hard, as usual, and that night requested him to take two
little pellets of aconite, and to repeat the dose in the morning. Whether
it was the result of the homoeopathic medicine or of the lapse of a few
hours and a good night's rest, it is impossible to say; John, however,
was himself again the next morning and showed no further signs of
nervousness. But he kept his eyes and ears open, hoping for some news of
the exquisite creature who had made so profound an impression on his
heart.

In due time the joyful news arrived from Cambridge that the Honourable
Cornelius had passed his examination and was at liberty to matriculate at
the beginning of the term. The intelligence was duly telegraphed to his
father, and in a few hours came a despatch in answer, full of
affectionate congratulation and requesting that Cornelius should proceed
at once to Paris, where his father was waiting for him. The young man
took an affectionate leave of the vicar, of Mrs. Ambrose and especially
of John Short, for whom he had conceived an almost superstitious
admiration; old Reynolds was not forgotten in the farewell, and for
several days after Angleside's departure the aged gardener was observed
to walk somewhat unsteadily and to wear a peculiarly thoughtful
expression; while the vicar observed with annoyance that Strawberry, the
old mare, was less carefully groomed than usual. Strangely coincident
with these phenomena was the fact that Simon Gunn's yellow cat seemed to
have entirely repented of her evil practices, renouncing from the day
when Cornelius left for Paris her periodical invasion of the asparagus
beds at the foot of the garden. But the vicar was too practical a man to
waste time in speculating upon the occult relations of seemingly
disconnected facts. He applied himself with diligence to the work of
preparing John Short to compete for the minor scholarship. The labour was
congenial. He had never taken a pupil so far before, and it was a genuine
delight to him to bring his own real powers into play at last. As the
summer wore on, he predicted all manner of success for John Short, and
his predictions were destined before long to be realised, for John did
all he promised to do and more also. To have succeeded in pushing the
Honourable Cornelius through his entrance examination was a triumph
indeed, but an uninteresting one at best, and one which had no further
consequences. But to be the means of turning out the senior classic of
the University was an honour which would not only greatly increase the
good vicar's reputation but would be to him a source of the keenest
satisfaction during the remainder of his life; moreover the prospects
which would be immediately opened to John in case he obtained such a
brilliant success would be a very material benefit to his unlucky father,
whose talents yielded him but a precarious livelihood and whose pitiable
condition had induced his old schoolfellow to undertake the education of
his son.

Much depended upon John's obtaining one or more scholarships during his
career at college. To a man of inferior talents the vicar would have
suggested that it would be wiser to go to a smaller college than Trinity
where he would have less competition to expect; but as soon as he
realised John's powers, he made up his mind that it would be precisely
where competition was hottest that his pupil would have the greatest
success. He would get something--perhaps his father would make a little
more money--the vicar even dreamed of lending John a small sum--something
would turn up; at all events he must go to the largest college and do
everything in the best possible way. Meanwhile he must work as hard as he
could during the few months remaining before the beginning of his first
term.

Whether the lady ever wrote to Mr. Ambrose, John could not ascertain; she
was never mentioned at the vicarage, and it seemed as though the mystery
were never to be solved. But the impression she had made upon the young
man's mind remained and even gained strength by the working of his
imagination; for he thought of her night and day, treasuring up every
memory of her that he could recall, building romances in his mind,
conceiving the most ingenious reasons for the solitary visit she had made
to the vicarage, and inwardly vowing that if ever he should be at liberty
to follow his own inclinations he would go out into the world and search
for her. He was only eighteen then, and of a strongly susceptible
temperament. He had seen nothing of the world, for even when living in
London, in a dingy lodging, with his father, he had been perpetually
occupied with books, reading much and seeing little. Then he had been at
school, but he had seen the dark side of school life--the side which boys
who are known to be very poor generally see; and more than ever he had
resorted to study for comfort and relief from outward ills. Then at last
he had been transferred to a serener state in the vicarage of
Billingsfield and had grown up rapidly from a schoolboy to a young man;
but, as has been said, the feminine element at the vicarage was solely
represented by Mrs. Ambrose and the monotony of her maternal society was
varied only by the occasional visits of the mild young Mrs. Edward
Pewlay. John Short had indeed a powerful and aspiring imagination, but it
would have been impossible even by straining that faculty to its utmost
activity to think in the same breath of romance and of Mrs. Ambrose, for
even in her youth Mrs. Ambrose had not been precisely a romantic
character. John's fancy was not stimulated by his surroundings, but it
fed upon itself and grew fast enough to acquire an influence over
everything he did. It was not surprising that, when at last chance threw
in his way a being who seemed instantly to realise and fulfil his wildest
dreams of beauty and feminine fascination, he should have yielded without
a struggle to the delicious influence, feeling that henceforth his ideal
had taken shape and substance, and had thereby become more than ever the
ideal in which he delighted.

He gave her names, a dozen of them every day, christening her after every
heroine in fiction and history of whom he had ever read. But no name
seemed to suit her well enough; whereupon he wrote a Greek ode and a
Latin epistle to the fair unknown, but omitted to show them to the
Reverend Augustin Ambrose, though he was quite certain that they were the
best he had ever produced. Then he began to write a novel, but suddenly
recollected that a famous author had written one entitled "No Name," and
as that was the only title he could possibly give to the work he
contemplated he of course had no choice but to abandon the work itself.
He wrote more verses, and he dreamed more dreams, and he meanwhile
acquired much learning and in process of time realised that he had but a
few days longer to stay at Billingsfield. The Michaelmas term was about
to open and he must bid farewell to the hospitable roof and the learned
conversation of the good vicar. But when those last days came he realised
that he was leaving the scene of his only dream, and his heart grew sad.

Indeed he loved the old red brick vicarage with its low porch, overgrown
with creepers, its fragrant old flower garden, surrounding it on three
sides, its gabled roof, its south wall whereon the vicar constantly
attempted to train fig trees, maintaining that the climate of England had
grown warmer and that he would prove it--John loved it all, and
especially he loved the little study, lined with the books grown familiar
to him, and the study door, the door through which he had seen that
lovely face which he firmly believed was to inspire him to do great
things and to influence his whole life for ever after. He would leave the
door open and place himself just where he had sat that day, and then he
would look suddenly up with beating heart, almost fancying he could again
see those violet eyes gazing at him from the dusky passage--blushing then
to himself, like any girl, and burying himself in his book till the fancy
was grown too strong and he looked up again. He had attempted to sketch
her face on a bit of paper; but he had no skill and he thrust the drawing
into the paper basket, horrified at having made anything so hideous in
the effort to represent anything so beautiful, and returned to making
odes upon her, and Latin epistles, in which he succeeded much better.

And now the time had come when he must leave all this dreaming, or at
least the scene of it, and go to college and win scholarships and renown.
It was hard to go and he showed his regret so plainly that Mrs. Ambrose
was touched at what she took for his affection for the place and for
herself and for the vicar. John Short was indeed very grateful to her for
all the kindness she had shown him, and to Mr. Ambrose for the learning
he had acquired; for John was a fine fellow and never forgot an
obligation nor undervalued one. But when we are very young our hearts are
far more easily touched to joy and sadness by the chords and discords of
our own dreaming, than by the material doings of the world around us, or
by the strong and benevolent interest our elders are good enough to take
in us. We feel grateful to those same elders if we have any good in us,
but we are far from feeling a similar interest in them. We see in our
imaginations wonderful pictures, and we hear wonderful words, for
everything we dream of partakes of an unknown perfection and completely
throws into the shade the inartistic commonplaces of daily life. As John
Short grew older, he often regretted the society of his old tutor and in
the frequent absence of important buttons from his raiment he bitterly
realised that there was no longer a motherly Mrs. Ambrose to inspect his
linen; but when he took leave of them what hurt him most was to turn his
back upon the beloved old study, upon the very door through which he had
once, and only once, beheld the ideal of his first love dream.

Though the vicar was glad to see the boy started upon what he already
regarded as a career of certain victory, he was sorry to lose him, not
knowing when he should see him again. John intended to read through all
the vacations until he got his degree. He might indeed have come down for
a day or two at Christmas, but with his very slender resources even so
short a pleasure trip was not to be thought of lightly. It was therefore
to be a long separation, so long to look forward to that when John saw
the shabby little box which contained, all his worldly goods put up into
the back of the vicar's dogcart, and stood at last in the hall, saying
good-bye, he felt as though he was being thrust out into the world never
to return again; his heart seemed to rise in his throat, the tears stood
in his eyes and he could hardly speak a word. Even then he thought of
that day when he had waked up the sleepy Muggins to take away the
beautiful unknown lady. He felt he must be quick about his leave-taking,
or he would break down.

"You have been very good to me. I--I shall never forget it," he murmured
as he shook hands with Mrs. Ambrose. "And you, too, sir--" he added
turning to the vicar. But the old clergyman cut him short, being himself
rather uncertain about the throat.

"Good-bye, my lad. God bless you. We shall hear of you soon--showing them
what you can do with your Alcaics--Good-bye."

So John got into the dogcart and was driven off by the ancient
Reynolds--past the "Duke's Head," past the "Feathers," past the
churchyard and the croft--the "croat," they called it in
Billingsfield--and on by the windmill on the heath, a hideous bit of
grassless common euphemistically so named, and so out to the high-road
towards the railway station, feeling very miserable indeed. It is a
curious fact, too, in the history of his psychology that in proportion as
he got farther from the vicarage he thought more and more of his old
tutor and less and less of his unfinished dream, and he realised
painfully that the vicar was nearly the only friend he had in the world.
He would of course find Cornelius Angleside at Cambridge, but he
suspected that Cornelius, turned loose among a merry band of
undergraduates of his own position would be a very different person from
the idle youth he had known at Billingsfield, trembling in the intervals
of his idleness at the awful prospect of the entrance examination, and
frantically attempting to master some bit of stray knowledge which might
possibly be useful to him. Cornelius would hunt, would gamble, would go
to the races and would give wines at college; John was to be a reading
man who must avoid such things as he would avoid the devil himself, not
only because he was too wretchedly poor to have any share whatever in the
amusements of Cornelius and his set, but because every minute was
important, every hour meant not only learning but meant, most
emphatically, money. He thought of his poor father, grinding out the life
of a literary hack in a wretched London lodging, dining Heaven knew where
and generally supping not at all, saving every penny to help his son's
education, hard working, honest, lacking no virtue except the virtue of
all virtues--success. Then he thought how he himself had been favoured by
fortune during these last years, living under the vicar's roof, treated
with the same consideration as the high-born young gentlemen who had been
his companions, living well, sleeping well and getting the best education
in England for nothing or next to nothing, while that same father of his
had never ceased to slave day and night with his pen, honestly doing his
best and yet enjoying none of the good things of life. John thought of
all this and set his teeth boldly to face the world. A few months, he
thought, and he might have earned a scholarship--he might be independent.
Then a little longer--less than three years--and he might, nay, he would,
take high honours in the university and come back crowned with glory,
with the prospect of a fellowship, with every profession open to him,
with the world at his feet and with money in his hand to help his father
out of all his troubles.

That was how John Short went to Trinity. It was a hard struggle at first,
for he found himself much poorer than he had imagined, and it seemed as
though the ends could not possibly meet. There was no question of denying
himself luxuries; that would have been easy enough. In those first months
it was the necessities that he lacked, the coals for his little grate,
the oil for his one small lamp. But he fought bravely through it, having,
like many another young fellow who has weathered the storms of poverty in
pursuit of learning, an iron constitution, and an even stronger will. He
used to say long afterwards that feeling cold was a mere habit and that
when one thoroughly understood the construction of Greek verses, some
stimulus of physical discomfort was necessary to make the imagination
work well; in support of which assertion he said that he had never done
such good things by the comfortable fire in the study at Billingsfield
vicarage as he did afterwards on winter nights by the light of a tallow
candle, high up in Neville's Court. Moreover, if any one argued that it
was better for an extremely poor man not to go to Trinity, but to some
much smaller college, he answered that as far as he himself was concerned
he could not have done better, which was quite true and therefore
perfectly unanswerable. Where the competition was less, he would have
been satisfied with less, he said; where it was greatest a man could only
be contented when he had reached the highest point possible. But before
he attained his end he suffered more than any one knew, especially during
those first months. For when he had got his first scholarship, he
insisted upon sending back the little sums of hard-earned money his
father sent him from time to time, and he consequently had nearly as hard
work as before to keep himself warm and to keep oil in his lamp during
the long winter's evenings. But he succeeded, nevertheless.




CHAPTER III.


In the month of October of that year, a short time after John had taken
up his abode in Trinity College, an event occurred which shook
Billingsfield to its foundations; no less an event than the occupation of
the dwelling known as the "cottage." What the cottage was will appear
hereafter. The arrival of the new tenants occurred in the following
manner.

The Reverend Augustin Ambrose received a letter, which he immediately
showed to his wife, as he showed most of his correspondence; for he was
of the disposition which may be termed wife-consulting. Married men are
generally of two kinds; those who tell their wives everything and those
who tell them nothing. It is evident that the relative merits of the two
systems depend chiefly upon the relative merits of the wives in question.
Mr. Ambrose had no doubt of the advantages of his own method and he
carried it to its furthest expression, for he never did anything whatever
without consulting his better half. On the whole the plan worked well,
for the vicar had learning and his wife had common sense. He therefore
showed the letter to her and she read it, and read it again, and finally
put it away, writing across the envelope in her own large, clear hand the
words--Goddard, Cottage--indicative of the contents.

       *       *       *       *       *

"MY DEAR SIR--It is now nearly five months since I saw you last. Need I
tell you that the sense of your kindness is still fresh in my memory? You
do not know, indeed you cannot know, what an impression your goodness
made upon me. You showed me that I was acting rightly. It has been so
hard to act rightly. Of course you quite understand what I mean. I cannot
refer to the great sorrow which has overtaken me and my dear innocent
little Nellie. There is no use in referring to it, for I have told you
all. You allowed me to unburden my heart to you during my brief visit,
and ever since that day I have felt very much, I may say infinitely,
relieved.

"I am again about to ask you a favour; I trust indeed that I am not
asking too much, but I know by experience how kind you are and so I am
not afraid to ask this too. Do you remember speaking to me of the little
cottage? The picture you drew of it quite charmed me, and I have
determined to take it, that is, if it is still to be let and if it is not
asking quite too much of you. I mean, if you will take it for me. You
cannot think how grateful I shall be and I enclose a cheque. I am almost
sure you said thirty-six pounds. It was thirty-six, was it not? The
reason I venture to enclose the money is because you are so very kind,
but of course you do not know anything certain about me. But I am sure
you will understand. You said you were sure I could live with my little
girl in Billingsfield for three hundred a year. I find I have a little
more, in fact nearly five hundred. If you tell me that I can have the
cottage, I will come down at once, for town is very dreary and we have
been here all summer except a week at Margate. Let me thank you again,
you have been so very kind, and believe me, my dear sir, very sincerely
yours,

"MARY GODDARD."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Augustin, my dear, this is very exciting," said Mrs. Ambrose, as she
handed the cheque to her husband for inspection and returned the
letter to its envelope, preparatory to marking it for future reference;
and when, as has been said, she had written upon the outside the
words--Goddard, Cottage, and had put it away she turned upon her husband
with an inquiring manner peculiar to her. Mr. Ambrose was standing before
the window, looking out at the rain and occasionally glancing at the
cheque he still held in his hand.

"Just like a woman to send a cheque to 'bearer' through the post," he
remarked, severely. "However since I have got it, it is all right."

"I don't think it is all right, Augustin," said his wife. "We are taking
a great responsibility in bringing her into the parish. I am quite sure
she is a dissenter or a Romanist or something dreadful, to begin with."

"My dear," answered the vicar, mildly, "you make very uncharitable
suppositions. It seems to me that the most one can say of her is that she
is very unhappy and that she does not write very good English."

"Oh, I have no doubt she is very unhappy. But as you say we must not be
uncharitable. I suppose you will have to write about the cottage."

"I suppose so," said Mr. Ambrose doubtfully. "I cannot send her back the
money, and the cottage is certainly to let."

He deposited the cheque in the drawer of his writing-table and began to
walk up and down the room, glancing up from time to time at his wife who
was lifting one after another the ornaments which stood upon the
chimney-piece, in order to ascertain whether Susan had dusted underneath
them. She had many ways of assuring herself that people did their work
properly.

"No," said she, "you cannot send her back the money. But it is a very
solemn responsibility. I hope we are doing quite right."

"I certainly would not hesitate to return the cheque, my dear, if I
thought any harm would come of Mrs. Goddard's living here. But I don't
think there is any reason to doubt her story."

"Of course not. It was in the _Standard_, so there is no doubt about it.
I only hope no one else reads the papers here."

"They read them in the kitchen," added Mrs. Ambrose presently, "and they
probably take a paper at the Duke's Head. Mr. Boosey is rather a literary
character."

"Nobody will suppose it was that Goddard, my dear," said the vicar in a
reassuring tone of voice.

"No--you had better write about the cottage."

"I will," said the vicar; and he forthwith did. And moreover, with his
usual willingness to give himself trouble for other people, he took a
vast deal of pains to see that the cottage was really habitable. It
turned out to be in very good condition. It was a pretty place enough,
standing ten yards back from the road, beyond the village, just opposite
the gates of the park; a little square house of red brick with a high
pointed roof and a little garden. The walls were overgrown with creepers
which had once been trained with considerable care, but which during the
last two years had thriven in untrimmed luxuriance and now covered the
whole of the side of the house which faced the road. So thickly did they
grow that it was with difficulty that the windows could at first be
opened. The vicar sighed as he entered the darkened rooms. His daughter
had lived in the cottage when she first married the young doctor who had
now gone to London, and the vicar had been, and was, very fond of his
daughter. He had almost despaired of ever seeing her again in
Billingsfield; the only glimpses of her he could obtain were got by going
himself to town, for the doctor was so busy that he always put off the
projected visit to the country and his wife was so fond of him that she
refused to go alone. The vicar sighed as he forced open the windows upon
the lower floor and let the light into the bare and empty rooms which had
once been so bright and full of happiness. He wondered what sort of
person Mrs. Goddard would turn out to be upon nearer acquaintance, and
made vague, unconscious conjectures about her furniture as he stumbled
up the dark stairs to the upper story.

He was not left long in doubt. The arrangements were easily concluded,
for the cottage belonged to the estate in Chancery and the lawyer in
charge was very busy with other matters. The guarantee afforded by the
vicar's personal application, together with the payment of a year's rent
in advance so far facilitated matters that four days after she had
written to Mr. Ambrose the latter informed Mrs. Goddard that she was at
liberty to take possession. The vicar suggested that the Billingsfield
carrier, who drove his cart to London once a week, could bring her
furniture down in two trips and save her a considerable expense; Mrs.
Goddard accepted this advice and in the course of a fortnight was
installed with all her goods in the cottage. Having completed her
arrangements at last, she came to call upon the vicar's wife.

Mrs. Goddard had not changed since she had first visited Billingsfield,
five months earlier, though little Eleanor had grown taller and was if
possible prettier than ever. Something of the character of the lady in
black may have been gathered from the style of her letter to Mr. Ambrose;
that communication had impressed the vicar's wife unfavourably and had
drawn from her husband a somewhat compassionate remark about the bad
English it contained. Nevertheless when Mrs. Goddard came to live in
Billingsfield the Ambroses soon discovered that she was a very
well-educated woman, that she appeared to have read much and to have read
intelligently, and that she was on the whole decidedly interesting. It
was long, however, before Mrs. Ambrose entirely conquered a certain
antipathy she felt for her, and which she explained after her own
fashion. Mrs. Goddard was not a dissenter and she was not a Romanist; on
the contrary she appeared to be a very good churchwoman. She paid her
bills regularly and never gave anybody any trouble. She visited the
vicarage at stated intervals, and the vicarage graciously returned her
visits. The vicar himself even went to the cottage more often than Mrs.
Ambrose thought strictly necessary, for the vicar was strongly prejudiced
in her favour. But Mrs. Ambrose did not share that prejudice. Mrs.
Goddard, she said, was too effusive, talked too much about herself and
her troubles, did not look thoroughly straightforward, probably had
foreign blood. Ay, there was the rub--Mrs. Ambrose suspected that Mrs.
Goddard was not quite English. If she was not, why did she not say so,
and be done with it?

Mrs. Goddard was English, nevertheless, and would have been very much
surprised could she have guessed the secret cause of the slight coldness
she sometimes observed in the manner of the clergyman's wife towards her.
She herself, poor thing, believed it was because she was in trouble, and
considering the nature of the disaster which had befallen her, she was
not surprised. She was rather a weak woman, rather timid, and if she
talked a little too much sometimes it was because she felt embarrassed;
there were times, too, when she was very silent and sad. She had been
very happy and the great catastrophe had overtaken her suddenly, leaving
her absolutely without friends. She wanted to be hidden from the world,
and by one of those strange contrasts often found in weak people she had
suddenly made a very bold resolution and had successfully carried it out.
She had come straight to a man she had never seen, but whom she knew very
well by reputation, and had told him her story and asked him to help her;
and she had not come in vain. The person who advised her to go to the
Reverend Augustin Ambrose knew that there was not a better man to whom
she could apply. She had found what she wanted, a sort of deserted
village where she would never be obliged to meet any one, since there was
absolutely no society; she had found a good man upon whom she felt she
could rely in case of further difficulty; and she had not come upon false
pretences, for she had told her whole story quite frankly. For a woman
who was naturally timid she had done a thing requiring considerable
courage, and she was astonished at her own boldness after she had done
it. But in her peaceful retreat, she reflected that she could not
possibly have left England, as many women in her position would have
done, simply because the idea of exile was intolerable to her; she
reflected also that if she had settled in any place where there was any
sort of society her story would one day have become known, and that if
she had spent years in studying her situation she could not have done
better than in going boldly to the vicar of Billingsfield and explaining
her sad position to him. She had found a haven of rest after many months
of terrible anxiety and she hoped that she might end her days in peace
and in the spot she had chosen. But she was very young--not thirty years
of age yet--and her little girl would soon grow up--and then? Evidently
her dream of peace was likely to be of limited duration; but she resigned
herself to the unpleasant possibilities of the future with a good grace,
in consideration of the advantages she enjoyed in the present.

Mrs. Ambrose was at home when Mrs. Goddard and little Eleanor came to the
vicarage. Indeed Mrs. Ambrose was rarely out in the afternoon, unless
something very unusual called her away. She received her visitor with the
stern hospitality she exercised towards strangers. The strangers she saw
were generally the near relations of the young gentlemen whom her husband
received for educational purposes. She stood in the front drawing-room,
that is to say, in the most impressive chamber of that fortress which is
an Englishman's house. It was a formal room, arranged by a fixed rule and
the order of it was maintained inflexibly; no event could be imagined of
such terrible power as to have caused the displacement of one of those
chairs, of one of those ornaments upon the chimney-piece, of one of those
engravings upon the walls. The walls were papered with one shade of
green, the furniture was covered with material of another shade of green
and the well-spared carpet exhibited still a third variety of the same
colour. Mrs. Ambrose's sense of order did not extend to the simplest
forms of artistic harmony, but when it had an opportunity of impressing
itself upon inanimate objects which were liable to be moved, washed or
dusted, its effects were formidable indeed. She worshipped neatness and
cleanliness; she left the question of taste to others. And now she stood
in the keep of her stronghold, the impersonation of moral rectitude and
of practical housekeeping.

Mrs. Goddard entered rather timidly, followed by little Eleanor whose
ideas had been so much disturbed by the recent change in her existence,
that she had grown unusually silent and her great violet eyes were
unceasingly opened wide to take in the growing wonders of her situation.
Mrs. Goddard was still dressed in black, as when John Short had seen her
five months earlier. There was something a little peculiar in her
mourning, though Mrs. Ambrose would have found it hard to define the
peculiarity. Some people would have said that if she was really a widow
her gown fitted a little too well, her bonnet was a little too small, her
veil a little too short. Mrs. Ambrose supposed that those points were
suggested by the latest fashions in London and summed up the difficulty
by surmising that Mrs. Goddard had foreign blood.

"I should have called before," said the latter, deeply impressed by the
severe appearance of the vicar's wife, "but I have been so busy putting
my things into the cottage--"

"Pray don't think of it," answered Mrs. Ambrose. Then she added after a
pause, "I am very glad to see you." She appeared to have been weighing in
her conscience the question whether she could truthfully say so or not.
But Mrs. Goddard was grateful for the smallest advances.

"Thank you," she said, "you are so very kind. Will you tell Mr. Ambrose
how thankful I am for his kind assistance? Yes, Nellie and I have had
hard work in moving, have not we, dear?" She drew the beautiful child
close to her and gazed lovingly into her eyes. But Nellie was shy; she
hid her face on her mother's shoulder, and then looked doubtfully at Mrs.
Ambrose, and then hid herself again.

"How old is your little girl?" asked Mrs. Ambrose more kindly. She was
fond of children, and actually pitied any child whose mother perhaps had
foreign blood.

"Eleanor--I call her Nellie--is eight years old. She will be nine in
January. She is tall for her age," added Mrs. Goddard with affectionate
pride. As a matter of fact Nellie was small for her years, and Mrs.
Ambrose, who was the most truthful of women, felt that she could not
conscientiously agree in calling hex tall. She changed the subject.

"I am afraid you will find it very quiet in Billingsfield," she said
presently.

"Oh, I am used--that is, I prefer a very quiet place. I want to live very
quietly for some years, indeed I hope for the rest of my life. Besides it
will be so good for Nellie to live in the country--she will grow so
strong."

"She looks very well, I am sure," answered Mrs. Ambrose rather bluntly,
looking at the child's clear complexion and bright eyes. "And have you
always lived in town until now, Mrs. Goddard?" she asked.

"Oh no, not always, but most of the year, perhaps. Indeed I think so."
Mrs. Goddard felt nervous before the searching glance of the elder woman.
Mrs. Ambrose concluded that she was not absolutely straightforward.

"Do you think you can make the cottage comfortable?" asked the vicar's
wife, seeing that the conversation languished.

"Oh, I think so," answered her visitor, glad to change the subject, and
suddenly becoming very voluble as she had previously been very shy. "It
is really a charming little place. Of course it is not very large, but as
we have not got very many belongings that is all the better; and the
garden is small but extremely pretty and wild, and the kitchen is very
convenient; really I quite wonder how the people who built it could have
made it all so comfortable. You see there are one--two--the pantry, the
kitchen and two rooms on the ground floor and plenty of room upstairs for
everybody, and as for the sun! it streams into all the windows at once
from morning till night. And such a pretty view, too, of that old gate
opposite--where does it lead to, Mrs. Ambrose? It is so very pretty."

"It leads to the park and the Hall," answered Mrs. Ambrose.

"Oh--" Mrs. Goddard's tone changed. "But nobody lives there?" she asked
suddenly.

"Oh no--it is in Chancery, you know."

"What--what is that, exactly?" asked Mrs. Goddard, timidly. "Is there a
young heir waiting to grow up--I mean waiting to take possession?"

"No. There is a suit about it. It has been going on for forty years my
husband says, and they cannot decide to whom it belongs."

"I see," answered Mrs. Goddard. "I suppose they will never decide now."

"Probably not for some time."

"It must be a very pretty place. Can one go in, do you think? I am so
fond of trees--what a beautiful garden you have yourself, Mrs. Ambrose."

"Would you like to see it?" asked the vicar's wife, anxious to bring the
visit to a conclusion.

"Oh, thank you--of all things!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard. "Would not you
like to run about the garden, Nellie?"

The little girl nodded slowly and stared at Mrs. Ambrose.

"My husband is a very good gardener," said the latter, leading the way
out to the hall. "And so was John Short, but he has left us, you know."

"Who was John Short?" asked Mrs. Goddard rather absently, as she watched
Mrs. Ambrose who was wrapping herself in a huge blue waterproof cloak and
tying a sort of worsted hood over her head.

"He was one of the boys Mr. Ambrose prepared for college--such a good
fellow. You may have seen him when you came last June, Mrs. Goddard?"

"Had he very bright blue eyes--a nice face?"

"Yes--that is, it might have been Mr. Angleside--Lord Scatterbeigh's
son--he was here, too."

"Oh," said Mrs. Goddard, "perhaps it was."

"Mamma," asked little Nellie, "what is Laws Catterbay?"

"A peer, darling."

"Like the one at Brighton, mamma, with a band?"

"No, child," answered the mother laughing. "P, double E, R, peer--a rich
gentleman."

"Like poor papa then?" inquired the irrepressible Eleanor.

Mrs. Goddard turned pale and pressed the little girl close to her side,
leaning down to whisper in her ear.

"You must not ask foolish questions, darling--I will tell you by and by."

"Papa was a rich gentleman," objected the child.

Mrs. Goddard looked at Mrs. Ambrose, and the ready tears came into her
eyes. The vicar's wife smiled kindly and took little Nellie by the hand.

"Come, dear," she said in the motherly tone that was natural to her when
she was not receiving visitors. "Come and see the garden and you can play
with Carlo."

"Can't I see Laws Catterbay, too?" asked the little girl rather
wistfully.

"Carlo is a great, big, brown dog," said Mrs. Ambrose, leading the child
out into the garden, while Mrs. Goddard followed close behind. Before
they had gone far they came upon the vicar, arrayed in an old coat, his
hands thrust into a pair of gigantic gardening gloves and a battered old
felt hat upon his head. Mrs. Goddard had felt rather uncomfortable in the
impressive society of Mrs. Ambrose and the sight of the vicar's genial
face was reassuring in the extreme. She was not disappointed, for he
immediately relieved the situation by asking all manner of kindly
questions, interspersed with remarks upon his garden, while Mrs. Ambrose
introduced little Nellie to the acquaintance of Carlo who had not seen so
pretty a little girl for many a day, and capered and wagged his feathery
tail in a manner most unseemly for so clerical a dog.

So it came about that Mrs. Goddard established herself at Billingsfield
and made her first visit to the vicarage. After that the ice was broken
and things went on smoothly enough. Mrs. Ambrose's hints concerning
foreign blood, and her husband's invariable remonstrance to the effect
that she ought to be more charitable, grew more and more rare as time
went on, and finally ceased altogether. Mrs. Goddard became a regular
institution, and ceased to astonish the inhabitants. Mr. Thomas Reid, the
sexton, was heard to remark from time to time that he "didn't hold with
th'm newfangle fashins in dress;" but he was a regular old conservative,
and most people agreed with Mr. Abraham Boosey of the Duke's Head, who
had often been to London, and who said she did "look just A one, slap up,
she did!"

Mrs. Goddard became an institution, and in the course of the first year
of her residence in the cottage it came to be expected that she should
dine at the vicarage at least once a week; and once a week, also, Mr. and
Mrs. Ambrose went up and had tea with her and little Eleanor at the
cottage. It came to pass also that Mrs. Goddard heard a vast deal of talk
about John Short and his successes at Trinity, and she actually developed
a lively interest in his career, and asked for news of him almost as
eagerly as though he had been already a friend of her own. In very quiet
places people easily get into the sympathetic habit of regarding their
neighbours' interests as very closely allied to their own. The constant
talk about John Short, the vicar's sanguine hopes for his brilliant
future, and Mrs. Ambrose's unlimited praise of his moral qualities,
repeated day by day and week by week produced a vivid impression on Mrs.
Goddard's mind. It would have surprised her and even amused her beyond
measure had she had any idea that she herself had for a long time
absorbed the interest of this same John Short, that he had written
hundreds of Greek and Latin verses in her praise, while wholly ignorant
of her name, and that at the very time when without knowing him, she was
constantly mentioning him as though she knew him intimately well, he
himself was looking back to the one glimpse he had had of her, as to a
dream of unspeakable bliss.

It never occurred to Mr. Ambrose's mind to tell John in the occasional
letters he wrote that Mrs. Goddard had settled in Billingsfield. John, he
thought, could take no possible interest in knowing about her, and
moreover, Mrs. Goddard herself was most anxious never to be mentioned
abroad. She had come to Billingsfield to live in complete obscurity, and
the good vicar had promised that as far as he and his wife were concerned
she should have her wish. To tell even John Short, his own beloved pupil,
would be to some extent a breach of faith, and there was assuredly no
earthly reason why John should be told. It might do harm, for of course
the young fellow had made acquaintances at Cambridge; he had probably
read about the Goddard case in the papers, and might talk about it. If he
should happen to come down for a day or two he would probably meet her;
but that could not be avoided. It was not likely that he would come for
some time. The vicar himself intended to go up to Cambridge for a day or
two after Christmas to see him; but the winter flew by and Mr. Ambrose
did not go. Then came Easter, then the summer and the Long vacation. John
wrote that he could not leave his books for a day, but that he hoped to
run down next Christmas. Again he did not come, but there came the news
of his having won another and a more important scholarship; the news also
that he was already regarded as the most promising man in the university,
all of which exceedingly delighted the heart of the Reverend Augustin
Ambrose, and being told with eulogistic comments to Mrs. Goddard, tended
to increase the interest she felt in the existence of John Short, so that
she began to long for a sight of him, without exactly knowing why.

Gradually, too, as she and her little girl passed many peaceful days in
the quiet cottage, the sad woman's face grew less sorrowful. She spoke of
herself more cheerfully and dwelt less upon the subject of her grief. She
had at first been so miserable that she could hardly talk at all without
referring to her unhappy situation though, after her first interview with
Mrs. Ambrose, no one had ever heard her mention any details connected
with her trouble. But now she never approached the subject at all. Her
face lost none of its pathetic beauty, it is true, but it seemed to
express sorrow past rather than present. Meanwhile little Nellie grew
daily more lovely, and absorbed more and more of her mother's attention.




CHAPTER IV.


Events of such stirring interest as the establishment of Mrs. Goddard in
Billingsfield rarely come alone; for it seems to be in the nature of
great changes to bring other changes with them, even when there is no
apparent connection whatever between them. It took nearly two years for
Billingsfield to recover from its astonishment at Mrs. Goddard's arrival,
and before the excitement had completely worn off the village was again
taken off its feet by unexpected news of stupendous import, even as of
old Pompeii was overthrown by a second earthquake before it had wholly
recovered from the devastation caused by the first. The shock was indeed
a severe one. The Juxon estate was reported to be out of Chancery, and a
new squire was coming to take up his residence at the Hall.

It is not known exactly how the thing first became known, but there was
soon no doubt whatever that it was true. Thomas Reid, the sexton, who
remembered that the old squire died forty years ago come Michaelmas, and
had been buried in a "wonderful heavy" coffin, Thomas Reid the stern
censor of the vicar's sermons, a melancholic and sober man, so far lost
his head over the news as to ask Mr. Ambrose's leave to ring the bells,
Mr. Abraham Boosey having promised beer for the ringers. Even to the
vicar's enlightened mind it seemed fitting that there should be some
festivity over so great an event and the bells were accordingly rung
during one whole afternoon. Thomas Reid's ringers never got beyond the
first "bob" of a peal, for with the exception of the sexton himself and
old William Speller the wheelwright, who pulled the treble bell, they
were chiefly dull youths who with infinite difficulty had been taught
what changes they knew by rote and had very little idea of ringing by
scientific rule. Moreover Mr. Boosey was liberal in the matter of beer
that day and the effect of each successive can that was taken up the
stairs of the old tower was immediately apparent to every one within
hearing, that is to say as far as five miles around.

The estate was out of Chancery at last. For forty years, ever since the
death of the old squire, no one had rightfully called the Hall his own.
The heir had lived abroad, and had lived in such an exceedingly eccentric
manner as to give ground for a suit _de lunatico inquirendo_, brought by
another heir. With the consistency of judicial purpose which
characterises such proceedings the courts appeared to have decided that
though the natural possessor, the eccentric individual who lived abroad,
was too mad to be left in actual possession, he was not mad enough to
justify actual possession in the person of the next of kin. Proceedings
continued, fees were paid, a certain legal personage already mentioned
came down from time to time and looked over the estate, but the matter
was not finally settled until the eccentric individual died, after forty
years of eccentricity, to the infinite relief and satisfaction of all
parties and especially of his lawful successor Charles James Juxon now,
at last, "of Billingsfield Hall, in the county of Essex, Esquire."

In due time also Mr. Juxon appeared. It was natural that he should come
to see the vicar, and as it happened that he called late in the afternoon
upon the day when Mrs. Goddard and little Eleanor were accustomed to dine
at the vicarage, he at once had an opportunity of making the acquaintance
of his tenant; thus, if we except the free-thinking doctor, it will be
seen that Mr. Juxon was in the course of five minutes introduced to the
whole of the Billingsfield society.

He was a man inclining towards middle age, of an active and vigorous
body, of a moderate intelligence and of decidedly prepossessing
appearance. His features were of the strong, square type, common to men
whose fathers for many generations have lived in the country. His eyes
were small, blue and very bright, and to judge from the lines in his
sunburned face he was a man who laughed often and heartily. He had an
abundance of short brown hair, parted very far upon one side and brushed
to a phenomenal smoothness, and he wore a full brown beard, cut rather
short and carefully trimmed. He immediately won the heart of Mrs. Ambrose
on account of his extremely neat appearance. There was no foreign blood
in him, she was sure. He had large clean hands with large and polished
nails. He wore very well made clothes, and he spoke like a gentleman.
The vicar, too, was at once prepossessed in his favour, and even little
Eleanor, who was generally very shy before strangers, looked at him
admiringly and showed little of her usual bashfulness. But Mrs. Goddard
seemed ill at ease and tried to keep out of the conversation as much as
possible.

"There have been great rejoicings at the prospect of your arrival," said
the vicar when the new-comer had been introduced to both the ladies. "I
fancy that if you had let it be known that you were coming down to-day
the people would have turned out to meet you at the station."

"The truth is, I rather avoid that sort of thing," said the squire,
smiling. "I would rather enter upon my dominions as quietly as possible."

"It is much better for the people, too," remarked Mrs. Ambrose. "Their
idea of a holiday is to do no work and have too much beer."

"I daresay that would not hurt them much," answered Mr. Juxon cheerfully.
"By the bye, I know nothing about them. I have never been here before.
My man of business wanted to come down and show me over the estate, and
introduce me to the farmers and all that, but I thought it would be such
a bore that I would not have him."

"There is not much to tell, really," said Mr. Ambrose. "The society of
Billingsfield is all here," he added with a smile, "including one of your
tenants."

"Are you my tenant?" asked Mr. Juxon pleasantly, and he looked at Mrs.
Goddard.

"Yes," said she, "I have taken the cottage."

"The cottage? Excuse me, but you know I am a stranger here--what is the
cottage?"

"Such a pretty place," answered Mrs. Ambrose, "just opposite the park
gate. You must have seen it as you came down."

"Oh, is that it?" said the squire. "Yes, I saw it, and I wished I lived
there instead of in the Hall. It looks so comfortable and small. The Hall
is a perfect wilderness."

Mrs. Goddard felt a sudden fear lest her new landlord should take it into
his head to give her notice. She only took the cottage by the year and
her present lease ended in October. The arrival of a squire in possession
at the Hall was a catastrophe to which she had not looked forward. The
idea troubled her. She had accidentally made Mr. Juxon's acquaintance,
and she knew enough of the world to understand that in such a place he
would regard her as a valuable addition to the society of the vicar and
the vicar's wife. She would meet him constantly; there would be visitors
at the Hall--she would have to meet them, too. Her dream of solitude was
at an end. For a moment she seemed so nervous that Mr. Juxon observed her
embarrassment and supposed it was due to his remark about living in the
cottage himself.

"Do not be afraid, Mrs. Goddard," he said quickly, "I am not going to do
anything so uncivil as to ask you to give up the cottage. Besides, it
would be too small, you know."

"Have you any family, Mr. Juxon?" inquired Mrs. Ambrose with a severity
which startled the squire. Mrs. Ambrose thought that if there was a Mrs.
Juxon, she had been unpardonably deceived. Of course Mr. Juxon should
have said that he was married as soon as he entered the room.

"I have a very large family," answered the squire, and after enjoying for
a moment the surprise he saw in Mrs. Ambrose's face, he added with a
laugh, "I have a library of ten thousand volumes--a very large family
indeed. Otherwise I have no encumbrances, thank heaven."

"You are a scholar?" asked Mr. Ambrose eagerly.

"A book fancier, only a book fancier," returned the squire modestly. "But
I am very fond of the fancy."

"What is a book fancier, mamma?" asked little Eleanor in a whisper. But
Mr. Juxon heard the child's question.

"If your mamma will bring you up to the Hall one of these days, Miss
Goddard, I will show you. A book fancier is a terrible fellow who has
lots of books, and is pursued by a large evil genius telling him he must
buy every book he sees, and that he will never by any possibility read
half of them before he dies."

Little Eleanor stared for a moment with her great violet eyes, and then
turning again to her mother, whispered in her ear.

"Mamma, he called me Miss Goddard!"

"Run out and play in the garden, darling," said her mother with a smile.
But the child would not go and sat down on a stool and stared at the
squire, who was immensely delighted.

"So you are going to bring all your library, Mr. Juxon?" asked the vicar
returning to the charge.

"Yes--and I beg you will make any use of it you please," answered the
visitor. "I have a great fondness for books and I think I have some
valuable volumes. But I am no great scholar, as you are, though I read a
great deal. I have always noticed that the men who accumulate great
libraries do not know much, and the men who know a great deal have very
few books. Now I will wager that you have not a thousand volumes in your
house, Mr. Ambrose."

"Five hundred would be nearer the mark," said the vicar.

"The fewer one has the nearer one approaches to Aquinas's _homo unius
libri_," returned the squire. "You are nine thousand five hundred degrees
nearer to ideal wisdom than I am."

Mr. Ambrose laughed.

"Nevertheless," he said, "you may be sure that if you give me leave to
use your books, I will take advantage of the permission. It is in writing
sermons that one feels the want of a good library."

"I should think it would be an awful bore to write sermons," remarked the
squire with such perfect innocence that both the vicar and Mrs. Goddard
laughed loudly. But Mrs. Ambrose eyed Mr. Juxon with renewed severity.

"I should fancy it would be a much greater bore, as you call it, to the
congregation if my husband never wrote any new ones," she said stiffly.
Whereat the squire looked rather puzzled, and coloured a little. But Mr.
Ambrose came to the rescue.

"Yes, indeed, my wife is quite right. There are no people with such
terrible memories as churchwardens. They remember a sermon twenty years
old. But as you say, the writing of sermons is not an easy task when a
man has been at it for thirty years and more. A man begins by being
enthusiastic, then his mind gets into a groove and for some time, if he
happens to like the groove, he writes very well. But by and by he has
written all there is to be said in the particular line he has chosen and
he does not know how to choose another. That is the time when a man needs
a library to help him."

"I really don't think you have reached that point, Mr. Ambrose," remarked
Mrs. Goddard. She admired the vicar and liked his sermons.

"You are fortunately not in the position of my churchwardens," answered
Mr. Ambrose. "You have not been listening to me for thirty years."

"How long have you been my tenant, Mrs. Goddard?" asked the squire.

"Nearly two years," she answered thoughtfully, and her sad eyes rested a
moment upon Mr. Juxon's face with an expression he remembered. Indeed he
looked at her very often and as he looked his admiration increased, so
that when he rose to take his leave the predominant impression of the
vicarage which remained in his mind was that of her face. Something of
the same fascination took hold of him which had seized upon John Short
when he caught sight of Mrs. Goddard through the open door of the study,
something of that unexpected interest which in Mrs. Ambrose had at first
aroused a half suspicious dislike, now long forgotten.

Before the squire left he invited the whole party to come and dine with
him at the Hall on the following Saturday. He must have some kind of a
house warming, he said, for he was altogether too lonely up there. Mrs.
Goddard would bring Eleanor, of course; they would dine early--it would
not be late for the little girl. If they all liked they could call it tea
instead of dinner. Of course everything was topsy-turvy in the Hall, but
they would excuse that. He hoped to establish friendly relations with his
vicar and with his tenant--his fair tenant. Might he call soon and see
whether there was anything that could be done to improve the cottage?
Before the day when they were all coming to dine? He would call
to-morrow, then. Anything that needed doing should be done, Mrs. Goddard
might be sure. When the books arrived he would let Mr. Ambrose know, of
course, and they would have a day together.

So he went away, leaving the impression that he was a very good-natured
and agreeable man. Even Mrs. Ambrose was mollified. He had shocked her by
his remark about sermon writing, but he had of course not meant it, and
he appeared to mean to be very civil. It was curious to see how all
severity vanished from Mrs. Ambrose's manner so soon as the stranger who
aroused it was out of sight and hearing. She appeared as a formidably
stern type of the British matron to the chance visitors who came to the
vicarage; but they were no sooner gone than her natural temper was
restored and she was kindness and geniality itself.

But Mrs. Goddard was very thoughtful. She was not pleased at the fact of
an addition to the Billingsfield community, and yet she liked the
appearance of the squire. He had declared his intention of calling upon
her on the following day, and she would be bound to receive him. She was
young, she had been shut off from the world for two years, and the
prospect of Mr. Juxon's acquaintance was in itself not unpleasant; but
the idea that he was to be permanently established in the Hall frightened
her. She had felt since she came to Billingsfield that from the very
first she had put herself upon a footing of safety by telling her story
to the vicar. But the vicar would, not without her permission repeat that
story to Mr. Juxon. Was she herself called upon to do so? She was a very
sensitive woman, and her impressionable nature had been strongly affected
by what she had suffered. An almost morbid fear of seeming to make false
pretences possessed her. She was more than thirty years of age, it is
true, but she saw plainly enough in her glass that she was more than
passably good-looking still. There were one or two grey threads in her
brown waving hair and she took no trouble to remove them; no one ever
noticed them. There were one or two lines, very faint lines, in her
forehead; no one ever saw them. She could hardly see them herself.
Supposing--why should she not suppose it?--supposing Mr. Juxon were to
take a fancy to her, as a lone bachelor of forty and odd might easily
take a fancy to a pretty woman who was his tenant and lived at his gate,
what should she do? He was an honest man, and she was a conscientious
woman; she could not deceive him, if it came to that. She would have to
tell him the whole truth. As she thought of it, she turned pale and
trembled. And yet she had liked his face, she had told him he might call
at the cottage, and her woman's instinct foresaw that she was to see him
often. It was not vanity which made her think that the squire might grow
to like her too much. She had had experiences in her life and she knew
that she was attractive; the very fear she had felt for the last two
years lest she should be thrown into the society of men who might be
attracted by her, increased her apprehension tenfold. She could not look
forward with indifference to the expected visit, for the novelty of
seeing any one besides the vicar and his wife was too great; she could
not refuse to see the squire, for he would come again and again until she
received him; and yet, she could not get rid of the idea that there was
danger in seeing him. Call it as one may, that woman's instinct of peril
is rarely at fault.

In the late twilight of the June evening Mrs. Goddard and Eleanor waited
home together by the broad road which led towards the park gate.

"Don't you think Mr. Juxon is very kind, mamma?" asked the child.

"Yes, darling, I have no doubt he is. It was very good of him to ask you
to go to the Hall."

"And he called me Miss Goddard," said Eleanor. "I wonder whether he will
always call me Miss Goddard."

"He did not know your name was Nellie," explained her mother.

"Oh, I wish nobody knew, mamma. It was so nice. When shall I be grown up,
mamma?"

"Soon, my child--too soon," said Mrs. Goddard with a sigh. Nellie looked
at her mother and was silent for a minute.

"Mamma, do you like Mr. Juxon?" she asked presently.

"No, dear--how can one like anybody one has only seen once?"

"Oh--but I thought you might," said Nellie. "Don't you think you will,
mamma? Say you will--do!"

"Why?" asked her mother in some surprise. "I cannot say anything about
it. I daresay he is very nice."

"It will be so delightful to go to the Hall to dinner and be waited
on by big real servants--not like Susan at the vicarage, or Martha. Won't
you like it, mamma? Of course Mr. Juxon will have real servants, just
like--like poor papa." Nellie finished her speech rather doubtfully as
though not sure how her mother would take it. Mrs. Goddard sighed again,
but said nothing. She could not stop the child's talking--why should
Nellie not speak of her father? Nellie did not know.

"I think it will be perfectly delightful," said Nellie, seeing she got no
answer from her mother, and as though putting the final seal of
affirmation to her remarks about the Hall. But she appeared to be
satisfied at not having been contradicted and did not return to the
subject that evening.

Mr. Juxon lost no time in keeping his word and on the following morning
at about eleven o'clock, when Mrs. Goddard was just hearing the last of
Nellie's lesson in geography and little Nellie herself was beginning to
be terribly tired of acquiring knowledge in such very warm weather, the
squire's square figure was seen to emerge from the park gate opposite,
clad in grey knickerbockers and dark green stockings, a rose in his
buttonhole and a thick stick in his hand, presenting all the traditional
appearance of a thriving country gentleman of the period. He crossed the
road, stopped a moment and whistled his dog to heel and then opened the
wicket gate that led to the cottage. Nellie sprang to the window in wild
excitement.

"Oh what a dog!" she cried. "Mamma, _do_ come and see! And Mr. Juxon is
coming, too--he has green stockings!"

But Mrs. Goddard, who was not prepared for so early a visit, hastily put
away what might be described as the debris of Nellie's lessons, to wit, a
much thumbed book of geography, a well worn spelling book, a very
particularly inky piece of blotting paper, a pen of which most of the
stock had been subjected to the continuous action of Nellie's teeth for
several months, and an ancient doll, without the assistance of which, as
a species of Stokesite _memoria teohnica_, Nellie declared that she could
not say her lessons at all. Those things disappeared, and, with them,
Nellie's troubles, into a large drawer set apart for the purpose. By the
time Mr. Juxon had rung the bell and Martha's answering footstep was
beginning to echo in the small passage, Mrs. Goddard had passed to the
consideration of Nellie herself. Nellie's fingers were mightily inky, but
in other respects she was presentable.

"Run and wash your hands, child, and then you may come back," said her
mother.

"Oh mamma, _must_ I go? He's just coming in." She gave one despairing
look at her little hands, and then ran away. The idea of missing one
moment of Mr. Juxon's visit was bitter, but to be caught with inky
fingers by a beautiful gentleman with green stockings and a rose in his
coat would be more terribly humiliating still. There was a sound as of
some gigantic beast plunging into the passage as the front door was
opened, and a scream of terror from Martha followed by a good-natured
laugh from the squire.

"You'll excuse _me_, sir, but he don't bite, sir, does he? Oh my! what a
dog he is, sir--"

"Is Mrs. Goddard in?" inquired Mr. Juxon, holding the hound by the
collar. Martha opened the door of the little sitting-room and the squire
looked in. Martha fled down the passage.

"Oh my! What a tremendious dog that is, to be sure!" she was heard to
exclaim as she disappeared into the back of the cottage.

"May I come in?" asked Mr. Juxon, rather timidly and with an expression
of amused perplexity on his brown face. "Lie down, Stamboul!"

"Oh, bring him in, too," said Mrs. Goddard coming forward and taking Mr.
Juxon's hand. "I am so fond of dogs." Indeed she was rather embarrassed
and was glad of the diversion.

"He is really very quiet," said the squire apologetically, "only he is a
little impetuous about getting into a house." Then, seeing that Mrs.
Goddard looked at the enormous animal with some interest and much wonder,
he added, "he is a Russian bloodhound--perhaps you never saw one? He was
given to me in Constantinople, so I call him Stamboul--good name for a
big dog is not it?"

"Very," said Mrs. Goddard rather nervously. Stamboul was indeed an
exceedingly remarkable beast. Taller than the tallest mastiff, he
combined with his gigantic strength and size a grace and swiftness of
motion which no mastiff can possess. His smooth clean coat, of a
perfectly even slate colour throughout, was without folds, close as a
greyhound's, showing every articulation and every swelling muscle of his
body. His broad square head and monstrous jaw betrayed more of the
quickness and sudden ferocity of the tiger than those suggested by the
heavy, lion-like jowl of the English mastiff. His ears, too, were close
cropped, in accordance with the Russian fashion, and somehow the
compactness this gave to his head seemed to throw forward and bring into
prominence his great fiery eyes, that reflected red lights as he moved,
and did not tend to inspire confidence in the timid stranger.

"Do sit down," said Mrs. Goddard, and when the squire was seated Stamboul
sat himself down upon his haunches beside him, and looked slowly from his
master to the lady and back again, his tongue hanging out as though
anxious to hear what they might have to say to each other.

"I thought I should be sure to find you in the morning," began Mr. Juxon,
after a pause. "I hope I have not disturbed you?"

"Oh, not at all. Nellie has just finished her lessons."

"The fact is," continued the squire, "that I was going to survey the
nakedness of the land which has fallen to my lot, and as I came out of
the park I saw the cottage right before me and I could not resist the
temptation of calling. I had no idea we were such near neighbours."

"Yes," said Mrs. Goddard, "it is very near."

Mr. Juxon glanced round the room. He was not exactly at a loss for words,
but Mrs. Goddard did not seem inclined to encourage the conversation. He
saw that the room was not only exceedingly comfortable but that its
arrangement betrayed a considerable taste for luxury. The furniture was
of a kind not generally seen in cottages, and appeared to have formed
part of some great establishment. The carpet itself was of a finer and
softer kind than any at the Hall. The writing-table was a piece of richly
inlaid work, and the implements upon it were of the solid, severe and
valuable kind that are seen in rich men's houses. A clock which was
undoubtedly of the Louis Quinze period stood upon the chimneypiece. On
the walls were hung three or four pictures which, Mr. Juxon thought, must
be both old and of great value. Upon a little table by the fireplace lay
four or five objects of Chinese jade and Japanese ivory and a silver
chatelaine of old workmanship. The squire saw, and wondered why such a
very pretty woman, who possessed such very pretty things, should choose
to come and live in his cottage in the parish of Billingsfield. And
having seen and wondered he became interested in his charming tenant and
endeavoured to carry on the conversation in a more confidential strain.




CHAPTER V.


"You have done more towards beautifying the cottage than I could have
hoped to do," said Mr. Juxon, leaning back in his chair and resting one
hand on Stamboul's great head.

"It was very pretty of itself," answered Mrs. Goddard, "and fortunately
it is not very big, or my things would look lost in it."

"I should not say that--you have so many beautiful things. They seem to
suit the place so well. I am sure you will never think of taking them
away."

"Not if I can help it--I am too glad to be quiet."

"You have travelled a great deal, Mrs. Goddard?" asked the squire.

"No--not exactly that--only a little, after all. I have not been to
Constantinople for instance," she added looking at the hound Mr. Juxon
had brought from the East. "You are indeed a traveller."

"I have travelled all my life," said the squire, indifferently, as though
the subject of his wanderings did not interest him. "From what little I
have seen of Billingsfield I fancy you will find all the quiet you could
wish, here. Really, I realise that at my own gate I must come to you for
information. What sort of man is that excellent rector down there, whom I
met last night?"

The squire's tone became more confidential as he put the question.

"Well--he is not a rector, to begin with," answered Mrs. Goddard with a
smile, "he is the vicar, and he is a most good man, whom I have always
found most kind."

"I can readily fancy that," said Mr. Juxon. "But his wife seems to be of
the severe type."

"No--she struck me so at first, too. I think it is only with strangers.
She is such a motherly sort of woman, you do not know! She only has that
little manner when you first meet her."

"What a strange thing that is!" remarked the squire, looking at Mrs.
Goddard. "The natural belief of English people in each other's depravity
until they have had time to make acquaintance! And is there no one else
here--no doctor--no doctor's wife?"

"Not a soul," answered Mrs. Goddard. "There is a doctor, but the vicarage
suspects him of free thought. He certainly never goes to church. He has
no wife."

"This is the most Arcadian retreat I ever was in. Upon my word, I am a
very lucky man."

"I suppose that it must be a relief when one has travelled so much,"
replied Mrs. Goddard.

"Or suffered very much," added the squire, half unconsciously, looking at
her sad face.

"Yes," she answered. At that moment the door opened and Nellie entered
the room, having successfully grappled with the inkstains. She went
straight to the squire, and held out her hand, blushing a little, but
looking very pretty. Then she saw the huge head of Stamboul who looked up
at her with a ferociously agreeable canine smile, and thwacked the carpet
with his tail as he sat; Nellie started back.

"Oh, what a dog!" she exclaimed. But very soon she was on excellent
terms with him; little Nellie was not timid, and Stamboul, who liked
people who were not afraid of him and was especially fond of children,
did his best to be amusing.

"He is a very good dog," remarked Mr. Juxon. "He once did me a very good
service."

"How was that?"

"I was riding in the Belgrade forest one summer. I was alone with
Stamboul following. A couple of ruffians tried to rob me. Stamboul caught
one of them."

"Did he hurt him very much?"

"I don't know--he killed him before the fellow could scream, and I shot
the other," replied the squire calmly.

"What a horrible story!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard, turning pale. "Come
here, Nellie--don't touch that dreadful dog!"

"Do not be afraid--he is perfectly harmless. Come here Stamboul!" The
huge beast obeyed, wagging his tail, and sat down at his master's feet,
still looking rather wistfully at Nellie who had been playing with him.
"You see," continued Mr. Juxon, "he is as quiet as a lamb--would not hurt
a fly!"

"I think it is dreadful to have such animals about," said Mrs. Goddard in
a low voice, still looking at the dog with horror.

"I am sorry I told you. It may prejudice you against him. I only meant to
explain how faithful he is, that is all. You see a man grows fond of a
creature that has saved his life."

"I suppose so, but it is rather startling to see such an animal so near
to one. I fear I am very nervous."

"By the bye." said the squire with the bold irrelevancy of a man who
wants to turn the subject, "are you fond of flowers?"

"I?" said Mrs. Goddard in surprise. "Yes--very. Why?"

"I thought you would not mind if I had the garden here improved a little.
One might put in a couple of frames. I did not see any flowers about. I
am so fond of them myself, you see, that I always look for them."

"You are very kind," answered Mrs. Goddard. "But I would not have you
take any trouble on my account. We are so comfortable and so fond of the
cottage already--"

"Well, I hope you will grow to like it even better," returned the squire
with a genial smile. "Anything I can do, you know--" he rose as though to
take his leave. "Excuse me, but may I look at that picture? Andrea del
Sarto? Yes, I thought so--wonderful--upon my word, in a cottage in
Billingsfield. Where did you find it?"

"It was my husband's," said Mrs. Goddard.

"Ah--ah, yes," said the squire in a subdued tone. "I beg your pardon," he
added, as people often do, unconsciously, when they fancy they have
accidentally roused in another a painful train of thought. Then he turned
to go. "We dine at half-past seven, you know, so as to be early for Miss
Nellie," he said, as he went out.

Mrs. Goddard was glad he was gone, though she felt that he was not
unsympathetic. The story of the dog had frightened her, and her own
mention of her husband had made her nervous and sad. More than ever she
felt that fear of being in a false position, which had assailed her when
she had first met the squire on the previous evening. He had at once
opened relations with her in a way which showed that he intended to be
intimate; he had offered to improve her cottage, had insisted upon making
frames in her garden, had asked her to dinner with the Ambroses and had
established the right to talk to her whenever he got a chance. He
interested her, too, which was worse. His passing references to his
travels and to his adventures, of which he spoke with the indifference
of a man accustomed to danger, his unassuming manner, his frank
ways--everything about him awakened her interest. She had supposed that
in two years the very faculty of being interested by a man would be
dulled if not destroyed; she found to her annoyance that though she had
seen Mr. Juxon only twice she could not put him out of her thoughts. She
was, moreover, a nervous, almost morbid, woman, and the natural result of
trying to forget his existence was that she could think of nothing else.

How much better it would be, she thought, if he knew her story from the
first. He might then be as friendly as he pleased; there would be no
danger in it, to him or to her. She almost determined to go at once and
ask the vicar's advice. But by the time she had nearly made up her mind
it was the hour for luncheon, and little Nellie's appetite was exigent.
By the time lunch was over her determination had changed. She had
reflected that the vicar would think her morbid, that, with his usual
good sense, he would say there was no necessity for telling the squire
anything; indeed, that to do so would be undignified. If the squire were
indeed going to lead the life of a recluse as he proposed doing, he was
not really a man to cause her any apprehension. If he had travelled about
the world for forty years, without having his heart disturbed by any of
the women he must have met in that time, he was certainly not the kind of
man, when once he had determined to settle in his home, to fall in love
with the first pretty woman he met. It was absurd; there was no
likelihood of it; it was her own miserable vanity, she told herself,
which made the thing seem probable, and she would not think any more
about it. She, a woman thirty-one years of age, with a daughter who ere
long would be growing up to womanhood! To be afraid of a mere stranger
like Mr. Juxon--afraid lest he should fall in love with her! Could
anything be more ridiculous? Her duty was to live quietly as she had
lived before, to take no more notice of the squire than was necessary in
order to be civil, and so all would be well.

And so it seemed for a long time. The squire improved the garden of the
cottage and Mrs. Goddard and Nellie, with the Ambroses, dined at the
Hall, which at first seemed an exceedingly dreary and dismal place, but
which, as they returned thither again and again, grew more and more
luxurious, till the transformation was complete. Mr. Juxon brought all
manner of things to the house; vans upon vans arrived, laden with boxes
of books and pictures and oriental carpets and rare objects which the
squire had collected in his many years of travel, and which he appeared
to have stored in London until he had at last inherited the Hall. The
longer the Ambroses and Mrs. Goddard knew him, the more singularly
impressed they were with his reticence concerning himself. He appeared to
have been everywhere, to have seen everything, and he had certainly
brought back a vast collection of more or less valuable objects from his
travels, besides the large library he had accumulated and which contained
many rare and curious editions of ancient books. He was evidently a man
of very good education, and a much better scholar than he was willing to
allow. The vicar delighted in his society and when the two found
themselves together in the great room which Mr. Juxon had lined with
well-filled shelves, they remained for hours absorbed in literary and
scholastic talk. But whenever the vicar approached the subject of the
squire's past life, the latter became vague and gave ambiguous answers to
any direct questions addressed to him. He evidently disliked talking of
himself, though he would talk about anything else that occurred to him
with a fluency which Mrs. Ambrose declared was the only un-English thing
about him. The consequence was that the vicar became more and more
interested in his new acquaintance, and though the squire was so frank
and honest a man that it was impossible to suspect him of any doubtful
action in the past, Mr. Ambrose suspected that he had a secret. Indeed
after hearing the story Mrs. Goddard had confided to his ears, nothing
would have surprised the vicar. After finding that so good, so upright
and so honourable a woman as the fair tenant of the cottage could be put
into such a singularly painful position as that in which she now found
herself, it was not hard to imagine that this singular person who had
inherited the Hall might also have some weighty reason for loving the
solitude of Billingsfield.

To chronicle the small events which occurred in that Arcadian parish,
would be to overstep the bounds of permissible tediousness. In such
places all events move slowly and take long to develop to their results.
The passions which in our own quickly moving world spring up, flourish,
wither and are cut down in a month require, when they are not stimulated
by the fertilising heat of artificial surroundings, a longer period for
their growth; and when that growth is attained they are likely to be
stronger and more deeply rooted. It is not true that the study of them is
less interesting, nor that they have less importance in themselves. The
difficulty of narrative is greater when they are to be described, for it
is necessary to carry the imagination in a short time over a long period,
to show how from small incidents great results follow, and to show also
how the very limited and trivial nature of the surroundings may cause
important things to be overlooked. Amidst such influences acquaintance is
soon made between the few persons so thrown together, but each is apt to
regard such new acquaintance merely as bearing upon his or her own
particular interests. It is surprising to see how people will live side
by side in solitude, even in danger, in distant settlements, in the
mining districts of the West, in up-country stations in India, on board
ship, even, for months and years, without knowing anything of each
other's previous history; whereas in the crowded centres of civilisation
and society the first questions are "Where does he come from?" "What are
his antecedents?" "What has he done in the world?" And unless a man can
answer such inquiries to the general satisfaction he is likely to be
heavily handicapped in the social race. But in more primitive situations
men are ruled by more primitive feelings of mutual respect; it is
considered that a man should not be pressed to speak of things he shows
no desire to discuss and that, provided he does not interfere with his
neighbour's wellbeing, his past life is nobody's business. One may feel
curiosity concerning him, but under no circumstances is one justified in
asking questions.

For these reasons, although Mr. Juxon's arrival and instalment in the
Hall were regarded with satisfaction by the little circle at
Billingsfield, while he himself was at once received into intimacy and
treated with cordial friendliness, he nevertheless represented in the
minds of all an unsolved enigma. And to the squire the existence of one
of the circle was at least as problematical as his own life could seem to
any of them. The more he saw of Mrs. Goddard, the more he wondered at her
and speculated about her and the less he dared to ask her any questions.
But he understood from Mr. Ambrose's manner, that the vicar at least was
in possession of her secret, and he inferred from what he was able to
judge about the vicar's character that the latter was not a man to extend
his friendship to any one who did not deserve it. Whatever Mrs. Goddard's
story was, he felt sure that her troubles had not been caused by her own
misconduct. She was in every respect what he called a good woman. Of
course, too, she was a widow; the way in which she spoke of her husband
implied that, on those rare occasions when she spoke of him at all.
Charles James Juxon was a gentleman, whatever course of life he had
followed before settling in the country, and he did not feel that he
should be justified in asking questions about Mrs. Goddard of the vicar.
Besides, as time went on and he found his own interest in her increasing,
he began to nourish the hope that he might one day hear her story from
her own lips. In his simplicity it did not strike him that he himself had
grown to be an object of interest to her.

Somehow, during the summer and autumn of that year, Mrs. Goddard
contracted a habit of watching the park gate from the window of the
cottage, particularly at certain hours of the day. It was only a habit,
but it seemed to amuse her. She used to sit in the small bay window with
her books, reading to herself or teaching Nellie, and it was quite
natural that from time to time she should look out across the road. But
it rarely happened, when she was installed in that particular place, that
Mr. Juxon failed to appear at the gate, with his dog Stamboul, his green
stockings, his stick and the inevitable rose in his coat. Moreover he
generally crossed the road and, if he did not enter the cottage and spend
a quarter of an hour in conversation, he at least spoke to Mrs. Goddard
through the open window. It was remarkable, too, that as time went on
what at first had seemed the result of chance, recurred with such
invariable regularity as to betray the existence of a fixed rule. Nellie,
too, who was an observant child, had ceased asking questions but watched
her mother with her great violet eyes in a way that made Mrs. Goddard
nervous. Nellie liked the squire very much but though she asked her
mother very often at first whether she, too, was fond of that nice Mr.
Juxon, the answers she received were not encouraging. How was it
possible, Mrs. Goddard asked, to speak of liking anybody one had known so
short a time? And as Nellie was quite unable to answer such an inquiry,
she desisted from her questions and applied herself to the method of
personal observation. But here, too, she was met by a hopeless
difficulty. The squire and her mother never seemed to have any secrets,
as Nellie would have expressed it. They met daily, and daily exchanged
very much the same remarks concerning the weather, the garden, the
vicar's last sermon. When they talked about anything else, they spoke of
books, of which the squire lent Mrs. Goddard a great number. But this was
a subject which did not interest Nellie very much; she was not by any
means a prodigy in the way of learning, and though she was now nearly
eleven years old was only just beginning to read the Waverley novels. On
one occasion she remarked to her mother that she did not believe a word
of them and did not think they were a bit like real life, but the
momentary fit of scepticism soon passed and Nellie read on contentedly,
not omitting however to watch her mother in order to find out, as her
small mind expressed it, "whether mamma really liked that nice Mr.
Juxon." Events were slowly preparing themselves which would help her to
come to a satisfactory conclusion upon that matter.

Mr. Juxon himself was in a very uncertain state of mind. After knowing
Mrs. Goddard for six months, and having acquired the habit of seeing her
almost every day, he found to his surprise that she formed a necessary
part of his existence. It need not have surprised him, for in spite of
that lady's surmise with regard to his early life, he was in reality a
man of generous and susceptible temperament. He recognised in the
charming tenant of the cottage many qualities which he liked, and he
could not deny that she was exceedingly pretty. Being a strong man he was
particularly attracted by the pathetic expression of her face, the
perpetual sadness that was visible there when she was not momentarily
interested or amused. Had he suspected her paleness and air of secret
suffering to be the result of any physical infirmity, she would not have
interested him so much. But Mrs. Goddard's lithe figure and easy grace of
activity belied all idea of weakness. It was undoubtedly some hidden
suffering of mind which lent that sadness to her voice and features, and
which so deeply roused the sympathies of the squire. At the end of six
months Mr. Juxon was very much interested in Mrs. Goddard, but despite
all his efforts to be agreeable he seemed to have made no progress
whatever in the direction of banishing her cares. To tell the truth, it
did not enter his mind that he was in love with her. She was his tenant;
she was evidently very unhappy about something; it was therefore
undeniably his duty as a landlord and as a gentleman to make life
easy for her.

He wondered what the matter could be. At first he had been inclined to
think that she was poor and was depressed by poverty. But though she
lived very simply, she never seemed to be in difficulties. Five hundred
pounds a year go a long way in the village of Billingsfield. It was
certainly not want of money which made her unhappy. The interest of the
sum represented by the pictures hung in her little sitting-room, not to
mention the other objects of value she possessed, would have been alone
sufficient to afford her a living. The squire himself would have given
her a high price for these things, but in six months she never in the
most distant manner suggested that she wished to part with them. The idea
then naturally suggested itself to Mr. Juxon's mind that she was still
mourning for her husband, and that she would probably continue to mourn
for him until some one, himself for instance, succeeded in consoling her
for so great a loss.

The conclusion startled the squire. That was not precisely the part he
contemplated playing, nor the species of consolation he proposed to
offer. Mrs. Goddard was indeed a charming woman, and the squire liked
charming women and delighted in their society. But Mr. Juxon was a
bachelor of more than forty years standing, and he had never regarded
marriage as a thing of itself, for himself, desirable. He immediately
thrust the idea from his mind with a mental "_vade retro Satanas_!" and
determined that things were very agreeable in their present state, and
might go on for ever; that if Mrs. Goddard was unhappy that did not
prevent her from talking very pleasantly whenever he saw her, which was
nearly every day, and that her griefs were emphatically none of his
business. Before very long however Mr. Juxon discovered that though it
was a very simple thing to make such a determination it was a very
different thing to keep it. Mrs. Goddard interested him too much. When he
was with her he was perpetually longing to talk about herself instead of
about the weather and the garden and the books, and once or twice he was
very nearly betrayed into talking about himself, a circumstance so
extraordinary that Mr. Juxon imagined he must be either ill or going mad,
and thought seriously of sending for the doctor. He controlled the
impulse, however, and temporarily recovered; but strange to say from that
time forward the conversation languished when he found himself alone with
Mrs. Goddard, and it seemed very hard to maintain their joint interest in
the weather, the garden and the books at the proper standard of
intensity. They had grown intimate, and familiarity had begun to breed a
contempt of those petty subjects upon which their intimacy had been
founded. It is not clear why this should be so, but it is true,
nevertheless, and many a couple before Charles Juxon and Mary Goddard had
found it out. As the interest of two people in each other increases their
interest in things, as things, diminishes in like ratio, and they are
very certain ultimately to reach that point described by the Frenchman's
maxim--"a man should never talk to a woman except of herself or himself."

If Mr. Juxon was not in love with Mary Goddard he was at least rapidly
approaching a very dangerous state; for he saw her every day and could
not let one day go by without seeing her, and moreover he grew silent in
her company, to a degree which embarrassed her and made him feel himself
more stupid than he had ever dreamed possible; so that he would sometimes
stay too long, in the hope of finding something to say, and sometimes he
would leave her abruptly and go and shut himself up with his books, and
busy himself with his catalogues and his bindings and the arrangement of
his rare editions. One day at last, he felt that he had behaved so very
absurdly that he was ashamed of himself, and suddenly disappeared for
nearly a week. When he returned he said he had been to town to attend a
great sale of books, which was perfectly true; he did not add that the
learned expert he employed in London could have done the business for him
just as well. But the trip had done him no good, for he grew more silent
than ever, and Mrs. Goddard even thought his brown face looked a shade
paler; but that might have been the effect of the winter weather.
Ordinary sunburn she reflected, as she looked at her own white skin in
the mirror, will generally wear off in six months, though freckles will
not.

If Mr. Juxon was not in love, it would be very hard to say what Mary
Goddard felt. It was not true that time was effacing the memory of the
great sorrow she had suffered. It was there still, that memory, keen and
sharp as ever; it would never go away again so long as she lived. But she
had been soothed by the quiet life in Billingsfield; the evidences of the
past had been removed far from her, she had found in the Reverend
Augustin Ambrose one of those rare and manly natures who can keep a
secret for ever without ever referring to its existence even with the
person who has confided it. For a few days she had hesitated whether to
ask the vicar's advice about Mr. Juxon or not. She had thought it her
duty to allow Mr. Ambrose to tell the squire whatever he thought fit of
her own story. But she had changed her mind, and the squire had remained
in ignorance. It was best so, she thought; for now, after more than six
months, Mr. Juxon had taken the position of a friend towards her, and, as
she thought, showed no disposition whatever to overstep the boundaries of
friendship. The regularity of his visits and the sameness of the
conversation seemed of themselves a guarantee of his simple goodwill. It
did not strike her as possible that if he were going to fall in love with
her at all, that catastrophe should be postponed beyond six months from
their first acquaintance. Nor did it seem extraordinary to her that she
should actually look forward to those visits, and take pleasure in that
monotonous intercourse. Her life was very quiet; it was natural that she
should take whatever diversion came in her way, and should even be
thankful for it. Mr. Juxon was an honest gentleman, a scholar and a man
who had seen the world. If what he said was not always very original it
was always very true, a merit not always conceded to the highest
originality. He spoke intelligently; he told her the news; he lent her
the newest books and reviews, and offered her his opinions upon them,
with the regularity of a daily paper. In such a place, where
communications with the outer world seemed as difficult as at the
antipodes, and where the remainder of society was limited to the
household of the vicarage, what wonder was it if she found Mr. Juxon an
agreeable companion, and believed the companionship harmless?

But far down in the involutions of her feminine consciousness there was
present a perpetual curiosity in regard to the squire, a curiosity she
never expected to satisfy, but was wholly unable to repress. Under the
influence of this feeling she made remarks from time to time of an
apparently harmless nature, but which in the squire promoted that strange
inclination to talk about himself, which he had lately observed and which
caused him so much alarm. He said to himself that he had nothing to be
concealed, and that if any one had asked him direct questions concerning
his past he would have answered them boldly enough. But he knew himself
to be so singularly averse to dwelling on his own affairs that he
wondered why he should now be impelled to break through so good a rule.
Indeed he had not the insight to perceive that Mrs. Goddard lost no
opportunity of leading him to the subject of his various adventures, and,
if he had suspected it, he would have been very much surprised.

Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose were far from guessing what an intimacy had sprung
up between the two. Both the cottage and the Hall lay at a considerable
distance from the vicarage, and though Mrs. Ambrose occasionally went to
see Mrs. Goddard at irregular hours in the morning and afternoon, it was
remarkable that the squire never called when she was there. Once Mrs.
Ambrose arrived during one of his visits, but thought it natural enough
that Mr. Juxon should drop in to see his tenant. Indeed when she called
the two were talking about the garden--as usual.




CHAPTER VI.


John Short had almost finished his hard work at college. For two years
and a half he had laboured on acquiring for himself reputation and a
certain amount of more solid advantage in the shape of scholarships.
Never in that time had he left Cambridge even for a day unless compelled
to do so by the regulations of his college. His father had found it hard
to induce him to come up to town; and, being in somewhat easier
circumstances since John had declared that he needed no further help to
complete his education, he had himself gone to see his son more than
once. But John had never been to Billingsfield and he knew nothing of the
changes that had taken place there. At last, however, Short felt that he
must have some rest before he went up for honours; he had grown thin and
even pale; his head ached perpetually, and his eyes no longer seemed so
good as they had been. He went to a doctor, and the doctor told him that
with his admirable constitution a few days of absolute rest would do all
that was necessary. John wrote to Mr. Ambrose to say that he would at
last accept the invitation so often extended and would spend the week
between Christmas and New Year's day at Billingsfield.

There were great rejoicings at the vicarage. John had never been
forgotten for a day since he had left, each successive step in his career
had been hailed with hearty delight, and now that at last he was coming
back to rest himself for a week before the final effort Mrs. Ambrose was
as enthusiastic as her husband. Even Mrs. Goddard, who was not quite sure
whether she had ever seen John or not, and the squire who had certainly
never seen him, joined in the general excitement. Mrs. Goddard asked the
entire party to tea at the cottage and the squire asked them to come and
skate at the Hall and to dine afterwards; for the weather was cold and
the vicar said John was a very good skater. Was there anything John could
not do? There was nothing he could not do much better than anybody else,
answered Mr. Ambrose; and the good clergyman's pride in his pupil was
perhaps not the less because he had at first received him on charitable
considerations, and felt that if he had risked much in being so generous
he had also been amply rewarded by the brilliant success of his
undertaking.

When John arrived, everybody said he was "so much improved." He had got
his growth now, being close upon one and twenty years of age; his blue
eyes were deeper set; his downy whiskers had disappeared and a small
moustache shaded his upper lip; he looked more intellectual but not less
strong, though Mrs. Ambrose said he was dreadfully pale--perhaps he owed
some of the improvement observed in his appearance to the clothes he
wore. Poor boy, he had been but scantily supplied in the old days; he
looked prosperous, now, by comparison.

"We have had great additions to our society, since you left us," said the
vicar. "We have got a squire at the Hall, and a lady with a little girl
at the cottage."

"Such a nice little girl," remarked Mrs. Ambrose.

When John found out that the lady at the cottage was no other than the
lady in black to whom he had lost his heart two years and a half before,
he was considerably surprised. It would be absurd to suppose that the
boyish fancy which had made so much romance in his life for so many
months could outlast the excitements of the University. It would be
absurd to dignify such a fancy by any serious name. He had grown to be a
man since those days and he had put away childish things. He blushed to
remember that he had spent hours in writing odes to the beautiful
unknown, and whole nights in dreaming of her face. And yet he could
remember that as much as a year after he had left Billingsfield he still
thought of her as his highest ideal of woman, and still occasionally
composed a few verses to her memory, regretting, perhaps, the cooling of
his poetic ardour. Then he had gradually lost sight of her in the hard
work which made up his life. Profound study had made him more prosaic and
he believed that he had done with ideals for ever, after the manner of
many clever young fellows who at one and twenty feel that they are
separated from the follies of eighteen by a great and impassable gulf.
The gulf, however, was not in John's case so wide nor so deep but what,
at the prospect of being suddenly brought face to face, and made
acquainted, with her who for so long had seemed the object of a romantic
passion, he felt a strange thrill of surprise and embarrassment. Those
meetings of later years generally bring painful disillusion. How many of
us can remember some fair-haired little girl who in our childhood
represented to us the very incarnation of feminine grace and beauty, for
whom we fetched and carried, for whom we bound nosegays on the heath and
stole apples from the orchard and climbed upon the table after desert, if
we were left alone in the dining-room, to lay hands on some beautiful
sweetmeat wrapped in tinsel and fringes of pink paper--have we not met
her again in after-life, a grown woman, very, very far from our ideal of
feminine grace and beauty? And still in spite of changes in herself and
ourselves there has clung to her memory through all those years enough of
romance to make our heart beat a little faster at the prospect of
suddenly meeting her, enough to make us wonder a little regretfully if
she was at all like the little golden-haired child we loved long ago.

But with John the feeling was stronger than that. It was but two years
and a half since he had seen Mrs. Goddard, and, not even knowing her
name, had erected for her a pedestal in his boyish heart. There was
moreover about her a mystery still unsolved. There was something odd and
strange in her one visit to the vicarage, in the fact that the vicar had
never referred to that visit and, lastly, it seemed unlike Mr. Ambrose to
have said nothing of her settlement in Billingsfield in the course of all
the letters he had written to John since the latter had left him. John
dwelt upon the name--Goddard--but it held no association for him. It was
not at all like the names he had given her in his imagination. He
wondered what she would be like and he felt nervously anxious to meet
her. Somehow, too, what he heard of the squire did not please him; he
felt an immediate antagonism to Mr. Juxon, to his books, to his amateur
scholarship, even to his appearance as described by Mrs. Ambrose, who
said he was such a thorough Englishman and wondered how he kept his hair
so smooth.

It was not long before he had an opportunity of judging for himself of
what Mr. Ambrose called the recent addition to Billingsfield society. On
the very afternoon of his arrival the vicar proposed to walk up to the
Hall and have a look at the library, and John readily assented. It was
Christmas Eve and the weather, even in Essex, was sharp and frosty. The
muddy road was frozen hard and the afternoon sun, slanting through the
oak trees that bordered the road beyond the village, made no perceptible
impression on the cold. The two men walked briskly in the direction of
the park gate. Before they had quite reached it however, the door of the
cottage opposite was opened, and Stamboul, the Russian bloodhound,
bounded down the path, cleared the wicket gate in his vast stride, and
then turning suddenly crouched in the middle of the road to wait for his
master. But the dog instantly caught sight of the vicar, with whom he was
on very good terms, and trotted slowly up to him, thrusting his great
nose into his hand, and then proceeding to make acquaintance with John.
He seemed to approve of the stranger, for he gave a short sniff of
satisfaction and trotted back to the wicket of the cottage. At this
moment Mrs. Goddard and Nellie came out, followed by the squire arrayed
in his inevitable green stockings. There was however no rose in his coat.
Whether the greenhouses at the Hall had failed to produce any in the
bitter weather, or whether Mr. Juxon had transferred the rose from his
coat to the possession of Mrs. Goddard, is uncertain. The three came out
into the road where the vicar and John stood still to meet them.

"Mrs. Goddard," said the clergyman, "this is Mr. Short, of whom you have
heard--John, let me introduce you to Mr. Juxon."

John felt that he blushed violently as he took Mrs. Goddard's hand. He
would not have believed that he could feel so much embarrassed, and he
hated himself for betraying it. But nobody noticed his colour. The
weather was bright and cold, and even Mrs. Goddard's pale and delicate
skin had a rosy tinge.

"We were just going for a walk," she explained.

"And we were going to see you at the Hall," said the vicar to Mr. Juxon.

"Let us do both," said the latter. "Let us walk to the Hall and have
a cup of tea. We can look at the ice and see whether it will bear
to-morrow."

Everybody agreed to the proposal, and it so fell out that the squire and
the vicar went before while John and Mrs. Goddard followed and Nellie
walked between them, holding Stamboul by the collar, and talking to him
as she went. John looked at his companion, and saw with a strange
satisfaction that his first impression, the impression he had cherished
so long, had not been a mistaken one. Her deep violet eyes were still
sad, beautiful and dreamy. Her small nose was full of expression, and was
not reddened by the cold as noses are wont to be. Her rich brown hair
waved across her forehead as it did on that day when John first saw her;
and now as he spoke with her, her mouth smiled, as he had been sure it
would. John felt a curious sense of pride in her, in finding that he had
not been deceived, that this ideal of whom he had dreamed was really and
truly very good to look at. He knew little of the artist's rules of
beauty; he had often looked with wonder at the faces in the illustrations
to Dr. Smith's classical dictionary, and had tried to understand where
the beauty of them lay, and at Cambridge he had seen and studied with
interest many photographs and casts from the antiques. But to his mind
the antique would not bear comparison for a moment with Mrs. Goddard, who
resembled no engraving nor photograph nor cast he had ever seen.

And she, too, looked at him, and said to herself that he did not look
like what she had expected. He looked like a lean, fresh young Englishman
of moderate intelligence and in moderate circumstances. And yet she knew
that he was no ordinary young fellow, that he was wonderfully gifted, in
fact, and likely to make a mark in the world. She resolved to take a
proper interest in him.

"Do you know," she said, "I have heard so much about you, that I feel as
though I had met you before, Mr. Short."

"We really have met," said John. "Do you remember that hot day when you
came to the vicarage and I waked up Muggins for you?"

"Yes--was that you? You have changed. That is, I suppose I did not see
you very well in the hurry."

"I suppose I have changed in two years and a half. I was only a boy then,
you know. But how have you heard so much about me?"

"Billingsfield," said Mrs. Goddard with a faint smile, "is not a large
place. The Ambroses are very fond of you and always talk of what you are
doing."

"And so you really live here, Mrs. Goddard? How long is it since you
came? Mr. Ambrose never told me--"

"I have been here more than two years--two years last October," she
answered quietly.

"The very year I left--only a month after I was gone. How strange!"

Mrs. Goddard looked up nervously. She was frightened lest John should
have made any deductions from the date of her arrival. But John was
thinking in a very different train of thought.

"Why is it strange?" she asked.

"Oh, I hardly know," said John in considerable embarrassment. "I was only
thinking--about you--that is, about it all."

The answer did not tend to quiet Mrs. Goddard's apprehensions.

"About me?" she exclaimed. "Why should you think about me?"

"It was very foolish, of course," said John. "Only, when I caught sight
of you that day I was very much struck. You know, I was only a boy, then.
I hoped you would come back--but you did not." He blushed violently, and
then glanced at his companion to see whether she had noticed it.

"No," she said, "I did not come back for some time."

"And then I was gone. Mr. Ambrose never told me you had come."

"Why should he?"

"Oh, I don't know. I think he might. You see Billingsfield has been a
sort of home to me, and it is a small place; so I thought he might have
told me the news."

"I suppose he thought it would not interest you," said Mrs. Goddard. "I
am sure I do not know why it should. But you must be very fond of the
place, are you not?"

"Very. As I was saying, it is very like home to me. My father lives in
town you know--that is not at all like home. One always associates the
idea of home with the country, and a vicarage and a Hall, and all that."

"Does one?" said Mrs. Goddard, picking her way over the frozen mud of the
road. "Take care, Nellie, it is dreadfully slippery!"

"How much she has grown," remarked John, looking at the girl's active
figure as she walked before them. "She was quite a little girl when I saw
her first."

"Yes, she grows very fast," answered Mrs. Goddard rather regretfully.

"You say that as though you were sorry."

"I? No. I am glad to see her grow. What a funny remark."

"I thought you spoke sadly," explained John.

"Oh, dear no. Only she is coming to the awkward age."

"She is coming to it very gracefully," said John, who wanted to say
something pleasant.

"That is the most any of us can hope to do," answered Mrs. Goddard with a
little smile. "We all have our awkward age, I suppose."

"I should not think you could remember yours."

"Why? Do you think it was so very long ago?" Mrs. Goddard laughed.

"No--I cannot believe you ever had any," said John.

The boyish compliment pleased Mrs. Goddard. It was long since any one had
flattered her, for flattery did not enter into the squire's system for
making himself agreeable.

"Do they teach that sort of thing at Cambridge?" she asked demurely.

"What sort of thing?"

"Making little speeches to ladies," said she.

"No--I wish they did," said John, laughing. "I should know much better
how to make them. We learn how to write Greek odes to moral
abstractions."

"What a dreadful thing to do!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard.

"Do you think so? I do not know. Now, for instance, I have written a
great many Greek odes to you--"

"To me?" interrupted his companion in surprise.

"Do you think it is so very extraordinary?"

"Very."

"Well--you see--I only saw you once--you won't laugh?"

"No," said Mrs. Goddard, who was very much amused, and was beginning to
think that John Short was the most original young man she had ever met.

"I only saw you once, when you came to the vicarage, and I had not the
least idea what your name was. But I--I hoped you would come back; and so
I used to write poems to you. They were very good, too," added John in a
meditative tone, "I have never written any nearly so good as they were."

"Really?" Mrs. Goddard looked at him rather incredulously and then
laughed.

"You said you would not laugh," objected John.

"I cannot help it in the least," said she. "It seems so funny."

"It did not seem funny to me, I can assure you," replied John rather
warmly. "I thought it very serious."

"You don't do it now, do you?" asked Mrs. Goddard, looking up at him
quietly.

"Oh no--a man's ideals change so much, you know," answered John, who felt
he had been foolishly betrayed into telling his story, and hated to be
laughed at.

"I am very glad of that. How long are you going to stay here, Mr. Short?"

"Until New Year's Day, I think," he answered. "Perhaps you will have time
to forget about the poetry before I go."

"I don't know why," said Mrs. Goddard, noticing his hurt tone. "I
think it was very pretty--I mean the way you did it. You must be a born
poet--to write verses to a person you did not know and had only seen
once!"

"It is much easier than writing verses to moral abstractions one has
never seen at all," explained John, who was easily pacified. "When a man
writes a great deal he feels the necessity of attaching all those
beautiful moral qualities to some real, living person whom he can see--"

"Even if he only sees her once," remarked Mrs. Goddard demurely.

"Yes, even if he only sees her once. You have no idea how hard it is to
concentrate one's faculties upon a mere idea; but the moment a man sees a
woman whom he can endow with all sorts of beautiful qualities--why it's
just as easy as hunting."

"I am glad to have been of so much service to you, even
unconsciously--but, don't you think perhaps Mrs. Ambrose would have done
as well?"

"Mrs. Ambrose?" repeated John. Then he broke into a hearty laugh. "No--I
have no hesitation in saying that she would not have done as well. I am
deeply indebted to Mrs. Ambrose for a thousand kindnesses, for a great
deal more than I can tell--but, on the whole, I say, no; I could not have
written odes to Mrs. Ambrose."

"No, I suppose not. Besides, fancy the vicar's state of mind! She would
have had to call him in to translate your poetry."

"It is very singular," said John in a tone of reflection. "But, if I had
not done all that, we should not be talking as we are now, after ten
minutes acquaintance."

"Probably not," said Mrs. Goddard.

"No--certainly not. By the bye, there is the Hall. I suppose you have
often been there since Mr. Juxon came--what kind of man is he?"

"He has been a great traveller," answered his companion. "And then--well,
he is a scholar and has an immense library--"

"And an immense dog--yes, but I mean, what kind of man is he himself?"

"He is very agreeable," said Mrs. Goddard quietly. "Very well bred, very
well educated. We find him a great addition in Billingsfield."

"I should think so, if he is all you say," said John discontentedly. His
antagonism against Mr. Juxon was rapidly increasing. Mrs. Goddard looked
at him in some surprise, being very far from understanding his tone.

"I think you will like him," she said. "He knows all about you from the
Ambroses, and he always speaks of you with the greatest admiration."

"Really? It is awfully kind of him, I am sure. I am very much obliged,"
said John rather contemptuously.

"Why do you speak like that?" asked Mrs. Goddard gravely. "You cannot
possibly have any cause for disliking him. Besides, he is a friend of
ours--"

"Oh, of course, then it is different," said John. "If he is a friend of
yours--"

"Do you generally take violent dislikes to people at first sight, Mr.
Short?"

"Oh, dear no. Not at all--at least, not dislikes. I suppose Mr. Juxon's
face reminds me of somebody I do not like. I will behave like an angel.
Here we are."

The effect of this conversation upon the two persons between whom it took
place was exceedingly different. Mrs. Goddard was amused, without being
altogether pleased. She had made the acquaintance of a refreshingly young
scholar whom she understood to be full of genius. He was enthusiastic,
simple, seemingly incapable of concealing anything that passed through
his mind, unreasonable and evidently very susceptible. On the whole, she
thought she should like him, though his scornful manner in speaking of
the squire had annoyed her. The interest she could feel in him, if she
felt any at all, would be akin to that of the vicar in the boy. He was
only a boy; brilliantly talented, they said, but still a mere boy. She
was fully ten years older than he--she might almost be his mother--well,
not quite that, but very nearly. It was amusing to think of his writing
odes to her. She wished she could see translations of them, and she
almost made up her mind to ask him to show them to her.

John on the other hand experienced a curious sensation. He had never
before been in the society of so charming a woman. He looked at her and
looked again, and came to the conclusion that she was not only charming
but beautiful. He had not the least idea of her age; it is not the manner
of his kind to think much about the age of a woman, provided she is not
too young. The girl might be ten. Mrs. Goddard might have married at
sixteen--twenty-six, twenty-seven--what was that? John called himself
twenty-two. Five years was simply no difference at all! Besides, who
cared for age?

He had suddenly found himself almost on a footing of intimacy with this
lovely creature. His odes had served him well; it had pleased her to hear
the story. She had laughed a little, of course; but women, as John knew,
always laugh when they are pleased. He would like to show her his odes.
As he walked through the park by her side he felt a curious sense of
possession in her which gave him a thrill of exquisite delight; and when
they entered the Hall he felt as though he were resigning her to the
squire, which gave him a corresponding sense of annoyance. When an
Englishman experiences these sensations, he is in love. John resolved
that whatever happened he would walk back with Mrs. Goddard.

"Come in," said the squire cheerily. "We are not so cold as we used to be
up here."

A great fire of logs was burning upon the hearth in the Hall. Stamboul
stalked up to the open chimney, scratched the tiger's skin which served
for a rug, and threw himself down as though his day's work were done.
Mr. Juxon went up to Mrs. Goddard.

"I think you had better take off your coat," he said. "The house is very
warm."

Mrs. Goddard allowed the squire to help her in removing the heavy black
jacket lined and trimmed with fur, which she wore. John eyed the
proceeding uneasily and kept on his greatcoat.

"Thank you--I don't mind the heat," he said shortly when the squire
suggested to him that he might be too warm. John was in a fit of
contrariety. Mrs. Goddard glanced at him, as he spoke, and he thought he
detected a twinkle of amusement in her eyes, which did not tend to smooth
his temper.

"You will have some tea, Mrs. Goddard?" said Mr. Juxon, leading the way
into the library, which he regarded as the most habitable room in the
house. Mrs. Goddard walked by his side and the vicar followed, while John
and Nellie brought up the rear.

"Is not it a beautiful place?" said Nellie, who was anxious that the
new-comer should appreciate the magnificence of the Hall.

"Can't see very well," said John, "it is so dark."

"Oh, but it is beautiful," insisted Miss Nellie. "And they have lots of
lamps here in the evening. Perhaps Mr. Juxon will have them lighted
before we go. He is always so kind."

"Is he?" asked John with a show of interest.

"Yes--he brings mamma a rose every day," said Nellie.

"Not really?" said John, beginning to feel that he was justified in
hating the squire with all his might.

"Yes--and books, too. Lots of them--but then, he has so many. See, this
is the library. Is not it splendid!"

John looked about him and was surprised. The last rays of the setting sun
fell across the open lawn and through the deep windows of the great room,
illuminating the tall carved bookcases, the heavily gilt bindings, the
rich, dark Russia leather and morocco of the folios. The footsteps of the
party fell noiselessly upon the thick carpet and almost insensibly the
voices of the visitors dropped to a lower key. A fine large wood fire was
burning on the hearth, carefully covered with a metal netting lest any
spark should fly out and cause damage to the treasures accumulated in the
neighbouring shelves.

"Pray make yourself at home, Mr. Short," said the squire, coming up to
John. "You may find something of interest here. There are some old
editions of the classics that are thought rare--some specimens of
Venetian printing, too, that you may like to look at. Mr. Ambrose can
tell you more about them than I."

John's feeling of antagonism, and even his resentment against Mr. Juxon,
roused by Nellie's innocent remark about the roses, were not proof
against the real scholastic passion aroused by the sight of rare and
valuable books. In a few minutes he had divested himself of his greatcoat
and was examining the books with an expression of delight upon his face
which was pleasant to see. He glanced from time to time at the other
persons in the room and looked very often at Mrs. Goddard, but on the
whole he was profoundly interested in the contents of the library. Mrs.
Goddard was installed in a huge leathern easy-chair by the fire, and the
squire was handing her one after another a number of new volumes which
lay upon a small table, and which she appeared to examine with interest.
Nellie knew where to look for her favourite books of engravings and had
curled herself up in a corner absorbed in "Hyde's Royal Residences." The
vicar went to look for something he wanted to consult.

"What do you think of our new friend?" asked Mrs. Goddard of the squire.
She spoke in a low tone and did not look up from the new book he had just
handed her.

"He appears to have a very peculiar temper," said Mr. Juxon. "But he
looks clever."

"What do you think he was talking about as we came through the park?"
asked Mrs. Goddard.

"What?"

"He was saying that he saw me once before he went to college, and--fancy
how deliciously boyish! he said he had written ever so many Greek odes to
my memory since!" Mrs. Goddard laughed a little and blushed faintly.

"Let us hope, for the sake of his success, that you may continue to
inspire him," said the squire gravely. "I have no doubt the odes were
very good."

"So he said. Fancy!"




CHAPTER VII.


Mrs. Goddard did not mean to walk home with John; but on the other hand
she did not mean to walk with the squire. She revolved the matter in her
mind as she sat in the library talking in an undertone with Mr. Juxon.
She liked the great room, the air of luxury, the squire's tea and the
squire's conversation. It is worth noticing that his flow of talk was
more abundant to-day than it had been for some time; whether it was
John's presence which stimulated Mr. Juxon's imagination, or whether
Mrs. Goddard had suddenly grown more interesting since John Short's
appearance it is hard to say; it is certain that Mr. Juxon talked better
than usual.

The afternoon, however, was far spent and the party had only come to make
a short visit. Mrs. Goddard rose from her seat.

"Nellie, child, we must be going home," she said, calling to the little
girl who was still absorbed in the book of engravings which she had taken
to the window to catch the last of the waning light.

John started and came forward with alacrity. The vicar looked up; Nellie
reluctantly brought her book back.

"It is very early," objected the squire. "Really, the days have no
business to be so short."

"It would not seem like Christmas if they were long," said Mrs. Goddard.

"It does not seem like Christmas anyhow," remarked John, enigmatically.
No one understood his observation and no one paid any attention to it.
Whereupon John's previous feeling of annoyance returned and he went to
look for his greatcoat in the dark corner where he had laid it.

"You must not come all the way back with us," said Mrs. Goddard as they
all went out into the hall and began to put on their warm things before
the fire. "Really--it is late. Mr. Ambrose will give me his arm."

The squire insisted however, and Stamboul, who had had a comfortable nap
by the fire, was of the same opinion as his master and plunged wildly at
the door.

"Will you give me your arm, Mr. Ambrose?" said Mrs. Goddard, looking
rather timidly at the vicar as they stood upon the broad steps in the
sparkling evening air. She felt that she was disappointing both the
squire and John, but she had quite made up her mind. She had her own
reasons. The vicar, good man, was unconsciously a little flattered by her
choice, as with her hand resting on the sleeve of his greatcoat he led
the way down the park. The squire and John were fain to follow together,
but Nellie took her mother's hand, and Stamboul walked behind affecting
an unusual gravity.

"You must come again when there is more daylight," said Mr. Juxon to his
companion.

"Thank you," said John. "You are very good." He intended to relapse into
silence, but his instinct made him ashamed of seeming rude. "You have a
magnificent library," he added presently in a rather cold tone.

"You have been used to much better ones in Cambridge," said the squire,
modestly.

"Do you know Cambridge well, Mr. Juxon?"

"Very well. I am a Cambridge man, myself."

"Indeed?" exclaimed John, immediately discovering that the squire was not
so bad as he had thought. "Indeed! I had no idea. Mr. Ambrose never told
me that."

"I am not sure that he is aware of it," said Mr. Juxon quietly. "The
subject never happened to come up."

"How odd!" remarked John, who could not conceive of associating with a
man for any length of time without asking at what University he had
been.

"I don't know," answered Mr. Juxon. "There are lots of other things to
talk about."

"Oh--of course," said John, in a tone which did not express conviction.

Meanwhile Mr. Ambrose and Mrs. Goddard walked briskly in front; so
briskly in fact that Nellie occasionally jumped a step, as children say,
in order to keep up with them.

"What a glorious Christmas eve!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard, as they turned a
bend in the drive and caught sight of the western sky still clear and
red. "And there is the new moon!" The slender crescent was hanging just
above the fading glow.

"Oh mamma, have you wished?" cried Nellie. "You must, you know, when you
see the new moon!"

Mrs. Goddard did not answer, but she sighed faintly and drew a little
closer to the worthy vicar as she walked. She always wished, whether
there was a new moon or not, and she always wished the same wish. Perhaps
Mr. Ambrose understood, for he was not without tact. He changed the
subject.

"How do you like our John Short?" he asked.

"Very much, I think," answered Mrs. Goddard. "He is so fresh and young."

"He is a fine fellow. I was sure you would like him. Is he at all like
what you fancied he would be?"

"Well no--not exactly. I know you told me how he looked, but I always
thought he would be rather Byronic--the poetical type, if you know what
I mean."

"He has a great deal of poetry in him," said Mr. Ambrose in a tone of
profound admiration. "He writes the best Greek verse I ever saw."

"Oh yes--I daresay," replied Mrs. Goddard smiling in the dusk. "I am sure
he must be very clever."

So they chatted quietly as they walked down the park. But the squire and
John did not make progress in their conversation, and by the time they
reached the gate they had yielded to an awkward silence. They had both
been annoyed because Mrs. Goddard had taken the vicar's arm instead of
choosing one of themselves, but the joint sense of disappointment did not
constitute a common bond of interest. Either one would have suffered
anything rather than mention Mrs. Goddard to the other in the course of
the walk. And yet Mr. Juxon might have been John's father. At the gate of
the cottage they separated. The squire said he would turn back. Mrs.
Goddard had reached her destination. John and the vicar would return to
the vicarage. John tried to linger a moment, to get a word with Mrs.
Goddard. He was so persistent that she let him follow her through the
wicket gate and then turned quickly.

"What is it?" she asked, rather suddenly, holding out her hand to say
good-bye.

"Oh, nothing," answered John. "That is--would you like to see one of
those--those little odes of mine?"

"Yes, certainly, if you like," she answered frankly, and then laughed.
"Of course I would. Good-night."

He turned and fled. The vicar was waiting for him, and eyed him rather
curiously as he came back. Mr. Juxon was standing in the middle of the
road, making Stamboul jump over his stick, backwards and forwards.

"Good-night," he said, pausing in his occupation. The vicar and John
turned away and walked homewards. Before they turned the corner towards
the village John instinctively looked back. Mr. Juxon was still making
Stamboul jump the stick before the cottage, but as far as he could see in
the dusk, Mrs. Goddard and Nellie had disappeared within. John felt that
he was very unhappy.

"Mr. Ambrose," he began. Then he stopped and hesitated. "Mr. Ambrose," he
continued at last, "you never told me half the news of Billingsfield in
your letters."

"You mean about Mrs. Goddard? Well--no--I did not think it would interest
you very much."

"She is a very interesting person," said John. He could have added that
if he had known she was in Billingsfield he would have made a great
sacrifice in order to come down for a day to make her acquaintance. But
he did not say it.

"She is a great addition," said the vicar.

"Oh--very great, I should think."

Christmas eve was passed at the vicarage in preparation for the morrow.
Mrs. Ambrose was very active in binding holly wherever it was possible to
put it. The mince-pies were tasted and pronounced a success, and old
Reynolds was despatched to the cottage with a small basket containing a
certain number of them as a present to Mrs. Goddard. An emissary appeared
from the Hall with a variety of articles which the squire begged to
contribute towards the vicar's Christmas dinner; among others a haunch of
venison which Mrs. Ambrose pronounced to be in the best condition. The
vicar retorted by sending to the Hall a magnificent Cottenham cheese
which, as a former Fellow of Trinity, he had succeeded in obtaining.
Moreover Mr. Ambrose himself descended to the cellar and brought up
several bottles of Audit ale which he declared must be allowed to stand
some time in the pantry in order to bring out the flavour and to be
thoroughly settled. John gave his assistance wherever it was needed and
enjoyed vastly the old-fashioned preparations for Christmas day. It was
long since the season had brought him such rejoicing and he intended to
rejoice with a good will towards men and especially towards the Ambroses.
After dinner the whole party, consisting of three highly efficient
persons and old Reynolds, adjourned to the church to complete the
decorations for the morrow.

The church of Billingsfield, known as St. Mary's, was quite large enough
to contain twice the entire population of the parish. It was built upon a
part of the foundations of an ancient abbey, and the vicar was very proud
of the monument of a crusading Earl of Oxford which he had caused to be
placed in the chancel, it having been discovered in the old chancel of
the abbey in the park, far beyond the present limits of the church. The
tower was the highest in the neighbourhood. The whole building was of
gray rubble, irregular stones set together with a crumbling cement, and
presented an appearance which, if not architecturally imposing, was at
least sufficiently venerable. At the present time the aisles were full of
heaped-up holly and wreaths; a few lamps and a considerable number of
tallow candles shed a rather feeble light amongst the pillars; a crowd of
school children, not yet washed for the morrow, were busy under the
directions of the schoolmistress in decorating the chancel; Mr. Thomas
Reid the conservative sexton was at the top of a tall ladder, presumably
using doubtful language to himself as every third nail he tried to drive
into the crevices of the stone "crooked hisself and larfed at him," as he
expressed it; the organ was playing and a dozen small boys with three or
four men were industriously practising the anthem "Arise, Shine,"
producing strains which if not calculated altogether to elevate the heart
by their harmony, would certainly have caused the hair of a sensitive
musician to rise on end; three or four of the oldest inhabitants were
leaning on their sticks in the neighbourhood of the great stove in the
middle aisle, warming themselves and grumbling that "times warn't as they
used to be;" Mr. Abraham Boosey was noisily declaring that he had
"cartlods more o' thim greens" to come, and Muggins, who had had some
beer, was stumbling cheerfully against the pews in his efforts to bring a
huge load of fir branches to the foot of Mr. Thomas Reid's long ladder.
It was a thorough Christmas scene and John Short's heart warmed as he
came back suddenly to the things which for three years had been so
familiar to him and which he had so much missed in his solitude at
Cambridge. Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose set to work and John followed their
example. Even the prickly holly leaves were pleasant to touch and there
was a homely joy in the fir branches dripping with half melted snow.

Before they had been at work very long, John was aware of a little
figure, muffled in furs and standing beside him. He looked up and saw
little Nellie's lovely face and long brown curls.

"Can't I help you, Mr. Short?" she asked timidly. "I like to help, and
they won't let me."

"Who are 'they'?" asked John kindly, but looking about for the figure of
Nellie's mother.

"The schoolmistress and Mrs. Ambrose. They said I should dirty my frock."

"Well," said John, doubtfully, "I don't know. Perhaps you would. But you
might hold the string for me--that won't hurt your clothes, you know."

"There are more greens this year," remarked Nellie, sitting down upon the
end of the choir bench where John was at work and taking the ball of
string in her hand. "Mr. Juxon has sent a lot from the park."

"He seems to be always sending things," said John, who had no reason
whatever for saying so, except that the squire had sent a hamper to the
vicarage. "Did he stay long before dinner?" he added, in the tone people
adopt when they hope to make children talk.

"Stay long where?" asked Nellie innocently.

"Oh, I thought he went into your house after we left you," answered John.

"Oh no--he did not come in," said Nellie. John continued to work in
silence. At some distance from where he was, Mrs. Goddard was talking to
Mrs. Ambrose. He could see her graceful figure, but he could hardly
distinguish her features in the gloom of the dimly-lighted church. He
longed to leave Nellie and to go and speak to her, but an undefined
feeling of hurt pride prevented him. He would not forgive her for having
taken the vicar's arm in coming home through the park; so he stayed where
he was, pricking his fingers with the holly and rather impatiently
pulling the string off the ball which Nellie held. If Mrs. Goddard wanted
to speak to him, she might come of her own accord, he thought, for he
felt that he had behaved foolishly in asking if she wished to see his
odes. Somehow, when he thought about it, the odes did not seem so good
now as they had seemed that afternoon.

Mrs. Goddard had not seen him at first, and for some time she remained in
consultation with Mrs. Ambrose. At last she turned and looking for Nellie
saw that she was seated beside John; to his great delight she came
towards him. She looked more lovely than ever, he thought; the dark fur
about her throat set off her delicate, sad face like a frame.

"Oh--are you here, too, Mr. Short?" she said.

"Hard at work, as you see," answered John. "Are you going to help, Mrs.
Goddard? Won't you help me?"

"I wanted to," said Nellie, appealing to her mother, "but they would not
let me, so I can only hold the string."

"Well, dear--we will see if we can help Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard
good-naturedly, and she sat down upon the choir bench.

John never forgot that delightful Christmas Eve. For nearly two hours he
never left Mrs. Goddard's side, asking her advice about every branch and
bit of holly and following out to the letter her most minute suggestions.
He forgot all about the squire and about the walk back from the park, in
the delight of having Mrs. Goddard to himself. He pushed the school
children about and spoke roughly to old Reynolds if her commands were not
instantly executed; he felt in the little crowd of village people that he
was her natural protector, and he wished he might never have anything in
the world to do save to decorate a church in her company. He grew more
and more confidential and when the work was all done he felt that he had
thoroughly established himself in her good graces and went home to dream
of the happiest day he had ever spent. The organ ceased playing, the
little choir dispersed, the school children were sent home, Mr. Abraham
Boosey retired to the bar of the Duke's Head, Muggins tenderly embraced
every tombstone he met on his way through the churchyard, the
"gentlefolk" followed Reynolds' lantern towards the vicarage, and Mr.
Thomas Reid, the conservative and melancholic sexton, put out the lights
and locked the church doors, muttering a sour laudation of more primitive
times, when "the gentlefolk minded their business."

For the second time that day, John and Mr. Ambrose walked as far as the
cottage, to see Mrs. Goddard to her home. When they parted from her and
Nellie, John was careful not to say anything more about the odes, a
subject to which Mrs. Goddard had not referred in the course of the
evening. John thanked her rather effusively for her help--he could never
have got through those choir benches without her, he said; and the vicar
added that he was very much obliged, too, and surreptitiously conveyed
to Mrs. Goddard's hand a small package intended for Miss Nellie's
Christmas stocking, from him and his wife, and which he had forgotten to
give earlier. Nellie was destined to have a fuller stocking than usual
this year, for the squire had remembered her as well as Mr. Ambrose.

John went to bed in his old room at the vicarage protesting that he had
enjoyed the first day of his holiday immensely. As he blew out the light,
he thought suddenly how often in that very room he had gone to bed
dreaming about the lady in black and composing verses to her, till
somehow the Greek terminations would get mixed up with the Latin roots,
the quantities all seemed to change places, and he used to fall asleep
with a delicious half romantic sense of happiness always unfulfilled yet
always present. And now at last it began to be fulfilled in earnest; he
had met the lady in black at last, had spent nearly half a day in her
company and was more persuaded than ever that she was really and truly
his ideal. He did not go to sleep so soon as in the old days, and he was
sorry to go to sleep at all; he wanted to enjoy all his delicious
recollections of that afternoon before he slept and, as he recapitulated
the events which had befallen him and recalled each expression of the
face that had charmed him and every intonation of the charmer's voice, he
felt that he had never been really happy before, that no amount of
success at Cambridge could give him half the delight he had
experienced during one hour in the old Billingsfield church, and that
altogether life anywhere else was not worth living. To-morrow he would
see Mrs. Goddard again, and the next day and the day after that and
then--"bother the future!" ejaculated John, and went to sleep.

He awoke early, roused by the loud clanging of the Christmas bells, and
looking out he saw that the day was fine and cold and bright as Christmas
day should be, and generally is. The hoar frost was frozen into fantastic
shapes upon his little window, the snow was clinging to the yew branches
outside and the robins were hopping and chirping over the thin crust of
frozen snow that just covered the ground. The road was hard and brown as
on the previous day, and the ice in the park would probably bear. Perhaps
Mrs. Goddard would skate in the afternoon between the services, but
then--Juxon would be there. "Never mind Juxon," quoth John to himself,
"it is Christmas day!"

At the vicarage and elsewhere, all over the land, those things were done
which delight the heart of Englishmen at the merry season. Everybody
shook hands with everybody else, everybody cried "Merry Christmas!" to
his neighbour in the street, with an intonation as though he were saying
something startlingly new and brilliant which had never been said before.
Every labourer who had a new smock-frock put it on, and those who had
none had at least a bit of new red worsted comforter about their throats
and began the day by standing at their doors in the cold morning, smoking
a "ha'p'orth o' shag" in a new clay pipe, greeting each other across the
village street. Muggins, who had spent a portion of the night in
exchanging affectionate Christmas wishes with the tombstones in the
churchyard, appeared fresh and ruddy at an early hour, clad in the long
black coat and tall hat which he was accustomed to wear when he drove Mr.
Boosey's fly on great festivals. Most of the cottages in the single
street sported a bit of holly in their windows, and altogether the
appearance of Billingsfield was singularly festive and mirthful. At
precisely ten minutes to eleven the vicar and Mrs. Ambrose, accompanied
by John, issued from the vicarage and went across the road by the private
path to the church. As they entered the porch Mr. Reid, who stood
solemnly tolling the small bell, popularly nicknamed the "Ting-tang,"
and of which the single rope passed down close to the south door,
vouchsafed John a sour smile of recognition. John felt as though he had
come home. Mrs. Goddard and Nellie appeared a moment afterwards and took
their seats in the pew traditionally belonging to the cottage, behind
that of the squire who was always early, and the sight of whose smoothly
brushed hair and brown beard was a constant source of satisfaction to
Mrs. Ambrose. John and Mrs. Ambrose sat on the opposite side of the
aisle, but John's eyes strayed very frequently towards Mrs. Goddard; so
frequently indeed that she noticed it and leaned far back in her seat to
avoid his glance. Whereupon John blushed and felt that the vicar, who was
reading the Second Lesson, had probably noticed his distraction. It was
hard to realise that two years and a half had passed since he had sat in
that same pew; perhaps, however, the presence of Mrs. Goddard helped him
to understand the lapse of time. But for her it would have been very
hard; for the vicar's voice sounded precisely as it used to sound; Mrs.
Ambrose had not lost her habit of removing one glove and putting it into
her prayer book as a mark while she found the hymn in the accompanying
volume; the bright decorations looked as they looked years ago above the
organ and round the chancel; from far down the church, just before the
sermon, came the old accustomed sound of small boys shuffling their
hobnailed shoes upon the stone floor and the audible guttural whisper of
the churchwarden admonishing them to "mind the stick;" the stained-glass
windows admitted the same pleasant light as of yore--all was unchanged.
But Mrs. Goddard and Nellie occupied the cottage pew, and their presence
alone was sufficient to mark to John the fact that he was now a man.

The service was sympathetic to John Short. He liked the simplicity of it,
even the rough singing of the choir, as compared with the solemn and
magnificent musical services of Trinity College Chapel. But it seemed
very long before it was all over and he was waiting for Mrs. Goddard
outside the church door.

There were more greetings, more "Merry Christmas" and "Many happy
returns." Mrs. Goddard looked more charming than ever and was quite as
cordial as on the previous evening.

"How much better it all looked this morning by daylight," she said.

"I think it looked very pretty last night," answered John. "There is
nothing so delightful as Christmas decorations, is there?"

"Perhaps you will come down next year and help us again?" suggested Mrs.
Goddard.

"Yes--well, I might come at Easter, for that matter," answered the young
man, who after finding it impossible to visit Billingsfield during two
years and a half, now saw no difficulty whatever in the way of making two
visits in the course of six months. "Do you still decorate at Easter?" he
asked.

"Oh yes--do you think you can come?" she said pleasantly. "I thought you
were to be very busy just then."

"Yes, that is true," answered John. "But of course I could come, you
know, if it were necessary."

"Hardly exactly necessary--" Mrs. Goddard laughed.

"The doctor told me some relaxation was absolutely indispensable for my
health," said John rather sententiously.

"You don't really look very ill--are you?" She seemed incredulous.

"Oh no, of course not--only a little overworked sometimes."

"In that case I have no doubt it would do you good," said Mrs. Goddard.

"Do you really think so?" asked John, hopefully.

"Oh--that is a matter for your doctor to decide. I cannot possibly tell,"
she answered.

"I think you would make a very good doctor, Mrs. Goddard," said John
venturing on a bolder flight.

"Really--I never thought of trying it," she replied with a little laugh.
"Good morning, Mr. Ambrose. Nellie wants to thank you for your beautiful
present. It was really too good of you."

The vicar came out of the vestry and joined the group in the path. Mrs.
Ambrose, who had been asking Tom Judd's wife about her baby, also came
up, and the squire, who had been presenting Mr. Reid with ten shillings
for his Christmas box and who looked singularly bereaved without the
faithful Stamboul at his heels, sauntered up and began congratulating
everybody. In the distance the last of the congregation, chiefly the old
women and cripples who could not keep up with the rest, hobbled away
through the white gate of the churchyard.

It had been previously agreed that if the ice would bear there should be
skating in the afternoon and the squire was anxious to inform the party
that the pond was in excellent condition.

"As black as your hat," he said cheerfully. "Stamboul and I have been
sliding all over it, so of course it would bear an ox. It did not crack
anywhere."

"Do you skate, Mrs. Goddard?" asked John.

"Not very well--not nearly so well as Nellie. But I am very fond of it."

"Will you let me push you about in a chair, then? It is capital fun."

"Very good fun for me, no doubt," answered Mrs. Goddard, laughing.

"I would rather do it than anything else," said John in a tone of
conviction. "It is splendid exercise, pushing people about in chairs."

"So it is," said the squire, heartily. "We will take turns, Mr. Short."
The suggestion did not meet with any enthusiastic response from John, who
wished Mr. Juxon were not able to skate.

Poor John, he had but one idea, which consisted simply in getting Mrs.
Goddard to himself as often and as long as possible. Unfortunately this
idea did not coincide with Mr. Juxon's views. Mr. Juxon was an older,
slower and calmer man than the enthusiastic young scholar, and though
very far from obtruding his views or making any assertion of his rights,
was equally far from forgetting them. He was a man more of actions than
words. He had been in the habit of monopolising Mrs. Goddard's society
for months and he had no intention of relinquishing his claims, even for
the charitable purpose of allowing a poor student to enjoy his Christmas
holiday and bit of romance undisturbed. If John had presented himself as
a boy, it might have been different; but John emphatically considered
himself a man, and the squire was quite willing to treat him as such,
since he desired it. That is to say he would not permit him to "cut him
out" as he would have expressed it. The result of the position in which
John and Mr. Juxon soon found themselves was to be expected.




CHAPTER VIII.


John did not sleep so peacefully nor dream so happily that night as on
the night before. The course of true love had not run smooth that
afternoon. The squire had insisted upon having his share of the lovely
Mrs. Goddard's society and she herself had not seemed greatly disturbed
at a temporary separation from John. The latter amused her for a little
while; the former held the position of a friend whose conversation she
liked better than that of other people. John was disappointed and thought
of going back to Cambridge the next day. So strong, indeed, was his
sudden desire to leave Billingsfield without finishing his visit, that
before going to bed he had packed some of his belongings into his small
portmanteau; the tears almost stood in his eyes as he busied himself
about his room and he muttered certain formulae of self-accusation as he
collected his things, saying over and over in his heart--"What a fool I
am! Why should she care for me? What am I that she should care for me?"
etc. etc. Then he opened his window and looked at the bright stars which
shone out over the old yew tree; but it was exceedingly cold, and so he
shut it again and went to bed, feeling very uncomfortable and unhappy.

But when he awoke in the morning he looked at his half-packed portmanteau
and laughed, and instead of saying "What a fool I am!" he said "What a
fool I was!"--which is generally and in most conditions of human affairs
a much wiser thing to say. Then he carefully took everything out of the
portmanteau again and replaced things as they had lain before in his
room, lest perchance Susan, the housemaid, should detect what had passed
through his mind on the previous evening and should tell Mrs. Ambrose.
And from all this it appears that John was exceedingly young, as indeed
he was, in spite of his being nearly one and twenty years of age. But
doubtless if men were willing to confess their disappointments and
foolish, impetuous resolutions, many would be found who have done
likewise, being in years much older than John Short. Unfortunately for
human nature most men would rather confess to positive wrong-doing than
to any such youthful follies as these, while they are young; and when
they are old they would rather be thought young and foolish than confess
the evil deeds they have actually done.

John, however, did not moralise upon his situation. The weather was again
fine and as he dressed his spirits rose. He became magnanimous and
resolved to forget yesterday and make the most of today. He would see
Mrs. Goddard of course; perhaps he would show her a little coldness at
first, giving her to understand that she had not treated him well on the
previous afternoon; then he would interest her by his talk--he would
repeat to her one of those unlucky odes and translate it for her benefit,
making use of the freedom he would thus get in order to make her an
unlimited number of graceful compliments. Perhaps, too, he ought to pay
more attention to Nellie, if he wished to conciliate her mother. Women,
he reflected, have such strange prejudices!

He wondered whether it would be proper for him to call upon Mrs. Goddard.
He was not quite sure about it, and he was rather ashamed of having so
little knowledge of the world; but he believed that in Billingsfield he
might run the risk. There had been talk of skating again that morning,
and so, about ten o'clock, John told Mr. Ambrose he would go for a short
walk and then join them all at the pond in the park. The project seemed
good, and he put it into execution. As he walked up the frozen road, he
industriously repeated in his mind the Greek verses he was going to
translate to Mrs. Goddard; he had no copy of them but his memory was very
good. He met half a dozen labourers, strolling about with their pipes
until it was time to go and have a pint of beer, as is their manner upon
holidays; they touched their hats to him, remembering his face well, and
he smiled happily at the rough fellows, contrasting his situation with
theirs, who from the misfortune of social prejudice were not permitted to
go and call upon Mrs. Goddard. His heart beat rather fast as he went up
to the door of the cottage, and for one unpleasant moment he again
doubted whether it was proper for him to make such an early visit. But
being bent on romantic adventure he rang boldly and inquired for Mrs.
Goddard.

She was surprised to see John at that hour and alone; but it did not
enter her head to refuse him admittance. Indeed as he stood in the little
passage he heard the words which passed between her and Martha.

"What is it, Martha?"

"It's a young gentleman, mam. I rather think, mam, it's the young
gentleman that's stopping at the vicarage."

"Oh--ask him to come in."

"In 'ere, mam?"

"No--into the sitting-room," said Mrs. Goddard, who was busy in the
dining-room.

John was accordingly ushered in and told to wait a minute; which he did,
surveying with surprise the beautiful pictures, the rich looking
furniture and the valuable objects that lay about upon the tables. He
experienced a thrill of pleasure, for he felt sure that Mrs. Goddard
possessed another qualification which he had unconsciously attributed to
her--that of being accustomed to a certain kind of luxury, which in
John's mind was mysteriously connected with his romance. It is one of the
most undefinable of the many indefinite feelings to which young men in
love are subject, especially young men who have been, or are, very poor.
They like to connect ideas of wealth and comfort, even of a luxurious
existence, with the object of their affections. They desire the world of
love to be new to them, and in order to be wholly new in their
experience, it must be rich. The feeling is not so wholly unworthy as it
might seem; they instinctively place their love upon a pedestal and
require its surroundings to be of a better kind than such as they have
been accustomed to in their own lives. King Cophetua, being a king, could
afford to love the beggar maid, and a very old song sings of a "lady who
loved a swine," but the names of the poor young men who have loved above
their fortune and station are innumerable as the swallows in spring. John
saw that Mrs. Goddard was much richer than he had ever been, and without
the smallest second thought was pleased. In a few moments she entered the
room. John had his speech ready.

"I thought, if you were going to skate, I would call and ask leave to go
with you," he said glibly, as she gave him her hand.

"Oh--thanks. But is not it rather early?"

"It is twenty minutes past ten," said John, looking at the clock.

"Well, let us get warm before starting," said Mrs. Goddard, sitting down
by the fire. "It is so cold this morning."

John thought she was lovely to look at as she sat there, warming her
hands and shielding her face from the flame with them at the same time.
She looked at him and smiled pleasantly, but said nothing. She was still
a little surprised to see him and wondered whether he himself had
anything to say.

"Yes," said John, "it is very cold--traditional Christmas weather. Could
not be finer, in fact, could it?"

"No--it could not be finer," echoed Mrs. Goddard, suppressing a smile.
Then as though to help him out of his embarrassment by giving an impulse
to the conversation, she added, "By the bye, Mr. Short, while we are
warming ourselves why do not you let me hear one of your odes?"

She meant it kindly, thinking it would give him pleasure, as indeed it
did. John's heart leaped and he blushed all over his face with delight.
Mrs. Goddard was not quite sure whether she had done right, but she
attributed his evident satisfaction to his vanity as a scholar.

"Certainly," he said with alacrity, "if you would like to hear it. Would
you care to hear me repeat the Greek first?"

"Oh, of all things. I do not think I have ever heard Greek."

John cleared his throat and began, glancing at his hostess rather
nervously from time to time. But his memory never failed him, and he went
on to the end without a break or hesitation.

"How do you think it sounds?" he asked timidly when he had finished.

"It sounds very funny," said Mrs. Goddard. "I had no idea Greek sounded
like that--but it has a pleasant rhythm."

"That is the thing," said John, enthusiastically. "I see you really
appreciate it. Of course nobody knows how the ancients pronounced Greek,
and if one pronounced it as the moderns do, it would sound all wrong--but
the rhythm is the thing, you know. It is impossible to get over that."

Mrs. Goddard was not positively sure what he meant by "getting over the
rhythm;" possibly John himself could not have defined his meaning very
clearly. But his cheeks glowed and he was very much pleased.

"Yes, of course," said Mrs. Goddard confidently. "But what does it all
mean, Mr. Short?"

"Would you really like to know?" asked John in fresh embarrassment. He
suddenly realised how wonderfully delightful it was to be repeating his
own poetry to the woman for whom it was written.

"Indeed yes--what is the use of your telling me all sorts of things in
Greek, if you do not tell me what they mean?"

"Yes--you will promise not to be offended?"

"Of course," said Mrs. Goddard; then blushing a little she added, "it is
quite--I mean--quite the sort of thing, is not it?"

"Oh quite," said John, blushing too, but looking grave for a moment. Then
he repeated the English translation of the verses which, as they were
certainly not so good as the original, may be omitted here. They set
forth that in the vault of the world's night a new star had appeared
which men had not yet named, nor would be likely to name until the power
of human speech should be considerably increased, and the verses dwelt
upon the theme, turning it and revolving it in several ways, finally
declaring that the far-darting sun must look out for his interests unless
he meant to be outshone by the new star. Translated into English there
was nothing very remarkable about the performance though the original
Greek ode was undoubtedly very good of its kind. But Mrs. Goddard was
determined to be pleased.

"I think it is charming," she said, when John had reached the end and
paused for her criticism.

"The Greek is very much better," said John doubtfully. "I cannot write
English verses--they seem to me so much harder."

"I daresay," said Mrs. Goddard. "But did you really write that
when--" she stopped not knowing exactly how to express herself. But
John had his answer ready.

"Oh, I wrote ever so many," he said, "and I have got them all at
Cambridge. But that is the only one I quite remember. I wrote them just
after the day when I waked up Muggins--the only time I had seen you till
now. I think I could--"

"How funny it seems," said Mrs. Goddard, "without knowing a person, to
write verses to them! How did you manage to do it?"

"I was going to say that I think--I am quite sure--I could write much
better things to you now."

"Oh, that is impossible--quite absurd, Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard,
laughing more gaily than usual.

"Why?" asked John, somewhat emboldened by his success. "I do not see why,
if one has an ideal, you know, one should not understand it much better
when one comes near to it."

"Yes--but--how can I possibly be your ideal?" She felt herself so much
older than John that she thought it was out of the question to be
annoyed; so she treated him in a matter of fact way, and was really
amused at his talk.

"I don't see why not," answered John stoutly. "You might be any man's
ideal."

"Oh, really--" ejaculated Mrs. Goddard, somewhat startled at the force of
the sweeping compliment. To be told point-blank, even by an enthusiastic
youth of one and twenty, that one is the ideal woman, must be either very
pleasant or very startling.

"Excuse me," she said quickly, before he could answer her, "you know of
course I am very ignorant--yes I am--but will you please tell me what is
an 'ideal'?"

"Why--yes," said John, "it is very easy. Ideal comes from idea. Plato
meant, by the idea, the perfect model--well, do you see?"

"Not exactly," said Mrs. Goddard.

"It is very simple. When I, when anybody, says you are the ideal woman,
it is meant that you are the perfect model, the archetype of a woman."

"Yes--but that is absurd," said his companion rather coldly.

"I am sorry that it should seem absurd," said John in a persuasive tone;
"it seems very natural to me. A man thinks for a long time about
everything that most attracts him and then, on a sudden, he sees it all
before him, quite real and alive, and then he says he has realised his
ideal. But you liked the verses, Mrs. Goddard?" he added quickly, hoping
to bring back the smile that had vanished from her face. He had a strong
impression that he had been a little too familiar. Probably Mrs. Goddard
thought so too.

"Oh yes, I think they are very nice," she answered. But the smile did not
come back. She was not displeased, but she was not pleased either; she
was wondering how far this boy would go if she would let him. John,
however, felt unpleasantly doubtful about what he had done.

"I hope you are not displeased," he said.

"Oh, not in the least," said she. "Shall we go to the park and skate?"

"I am not sure that I will skate to-day," said John, foolishly. Mrs.
Goddard looked at him in unfeigned surprise.

"Why not? I thought it was for that--"

"Oh, of course," said John quickly. "Only it is not very amusing to skate
when Mr. Juxon is pushing you about in a chair."

"Really--why should not he push me about, if I like it?"

"If you like it--that is different," answered John impatiently.

Mrs. Goddard began to think that John was very like a spoiled child, and
she resented his evident wish to monopolise her society. She left the
room to get ready for the walk, vaguely wishing that he had not come.

"I have made a fool of myself again," said John to himself, when he was
left alone; and he suddenly wished he could get out of the house without
seeing her again. But before he had done wishing, she returned.

"Where is Miss Nellie?" he asked gloomily, as they walked down the path.
"I hope she is coming too."

"She went up to the pond with Mr. Juxon, just before you came."

"Do you let her go about like that, without you?" asked John severely.

"Why not? Really, Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard, glancing up at his face,
"either you dislike Mr. Juxon very much, or else I think you take a
good deal upon yourself in remarking--in this way--"

She was naturally a little timid, but John's youth and what she
considered as his extraordinary presumption inspired her with courage to
protest. The effect upon John was instantaneous.

"Pray forgive me," he said humbly, "I am very silly. I daresay you are
quite right and I do not like Mr. Juxon. Not that I have the smallest
reason for not liking him," he continued quickly, "it is a mere personal
antipathy, a mere idea, I daresay--very foolish of me."

"It is very foolish to take unreasonable dislikes to people one knows
nothing about," she said quietly. "Will you please open the gate?" They
were standing before the bars, but John was so much disturbed in mind
that he stood still, quite forgetting to raise the long iron latch.

"Dear me--I beg your pardon--I cannot imagine what I was thinking of," he
said, making the most idiotic excuse current in English idiom.

"Nor I," said Mrs. Goddard, with a little laugh, as he held the gate back
for her to pass. It was a plain white gate with stone pillars, and there
was no gatehouse. People who came to the Hall were expected to open it
for themselves. Mrs. Goddard was so much amused at John's absence of mind
that her good humour returned, and he felt that since that object was
attained he no longer regretted his folly in the least. The cloud that
had darkened the horizon of his romance had passed quickly away, and once
more he said inwardly that he was enjoying the happiest days of his life.
If for a moment the image of Mr. Juxon entered the field of his
imaginative vision in the act of pushing Mrs. Goddard's chair upon the
ice, he mentally ejaculated "bother the squire!" as he had done upon the
previous night, and soon forgot all about him. The way through the park
was long, the morning was delightful and Mrs. Goddard did not seem to be
in a hurry.

"I wish the winter would last for ever," he said presently.

"So do I," answered his companion, "it is the pleasantest time of the
year. One does not feel that nature is dead because one is sure she will
very soon be alive again."

"That is a charming idea," said John, "one might make a good subject of
it."

"It is a little old, perhaps. I think I have heard it before--have not
you?"

"All good ideas are old. The older the better," said John confidently.
Mrs. Goddard could not resist the temptation of teazing him a little.
They had grown very intimate in forty-eight hours; it had taken six
months for Mr. Juxon to reach the point John had won in two days.

"Are they?" she asked quietly. "Is that the reason you selected me for
the 'idea' of your ode, which you explained to me?"

"You?" said John in astonishment. Then he laughed. "Why, you are not any
older than I am!"

"Do you think so?" she inquired with a demure smile. "I am very much
older than you think."

"You must be--I mean, you know, you must be older than you look."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Goddard, still smiling, and just resting the tips
of her fingers upon his arm as she stepped across a slippery place in the
frozen road. "Yes, I am a great deal older than you."

John would have liked very much to ask her age, but even to his youthful
and unsophisticated mind such a question seemed almost too personal. He
did not really believe that she was more than five years older than he,
and that seemed to be no difference at all.

"I don't know," he said. "I am nearly one and twenty."

"Yes, I know," said Mrs. Goddard, who had heard every detail concerning
John from Mr. Ambrose, again and again. "Just think," she added with a
laugh, "only one and twenty! Why when I was one and twenty I was--" she
stopped short.

"What were you doing then?" asked John, trying not to seem too curious.

"I was living in London," she said quietly. She half enjoyed his
disappointment.

"Yes," he said, "I daresay. But what--well, I suppose I ought not to ask
any questions."

"Certainly not," said she. "It is very rude to ask a lady questions about
her age."

"I do not mean to be rude again," said John, pretending to laugh. "Have
you always been fond of skating?" he asked, fixing his eye upon a distant
tree, and trying to look unconscious.

"No--I only learned since I came here. Besides, I skate very badly."

"Did Mr. Juxon teach you?" asked John, still gazing into the distance.
From not looking at the path he slipped on a frozen puddle and nearly
fell. Whereat, as usual, when he did anything awkward, he blushed to the
brim of his hat.

"Take care," said Mrs. Goddard, calmly. "You will fall if you don't look
where you are going. No; Mr. Juxon was not here last year. He only came
here in the summer."

"It seems to me that he has always been here," said John, trying to
recover his equanimity. "Then I suppose Mr. Ambrose taught you to skate?"

"Exactly--Mr. Ambrose taught me. He skates very well."

"So will you, with a little more practice," answered her companion in a
rather patronising tone. He intended perhaps to convey the idea that Mrs.
Goddard would improve in the exercise if she would actually skate, and
with him, instead of submitting to be pushed about in a chair by Mr.
Juxon.

"Oh, I daresay," said Mrs. Goddard indifferently. "We shall soon be
there, now. I can hear them on the ice."

"Too soon," said John with regret.

"I thought you liked skating so much."

"I like walking with you much better," he replied, and he glanced at her
face to see if his speech produced any sign of sympathy.

"You have walked with me; now you can skate with Nellie," suggested Mrs.
Goddard.

"You talk as though I were a child," said John, suddenly losing his
temper in a very unaccountable way.

"Because I said you might skate with Nellie? Really, I don't see why. Mr.
Juxon is not a child, and he has been skating with her all the morning."

"That is different," retorted John growing very red.

"Yes--Nellie is much nearer to your age than to Mr. Juxon's," answered
Mrs. Goddard, with a calmness which made John desperate.

"Really, Mrs. Goddard," he said stiffly, "I cannot see what that has to
do with it."

"'The atrocious crime of being a young man, which the lady so much older
than myself has charged--' How does the quotation end, Mr. Short?"

"'Has, with such spirit and decency, charged upon me, I shall neither
attempt to palliate nor deny,'" said John savagely. "Quite so, Mrs.
Goddard. I shall not attempt to palliate it, nor will I venture to deny
it."

"Then why in the world are you so angry with me?" she asked, suddenly
turning her violet eyes upon him. "I was only laughing, you know."

"Only laughing!" repeated John. "It is more pleasant to laugh than to be
laughed at."

"Yes--would not you allow me the pleasure then, just for once?"

"Certainly, if you desire it. You are so extremely merry--"

"Come, Mr. Short, we must not seem to have been quarrelling when we reach
the pond. It would be too ridiculous."

"Everything seems to strike you in a humorous light to-day," answered
John, beginning to be pacified by her tone.

"Do you know, you are much more interesting when you are angry," said
Mrs. Goddard.

"And you only made me angry in order to see whether I was interesting?"

"Perhaps--but then, I could not help it in the least."

"I trust you are thoroughly satisfied upon the point, Mrs. Goddard? If
there is anything more that I can do to facilitate your researches in
psychology--"

"You would help me? Even to the extent of being angry again?" She smiled
so pleasantly and frankly that John's wrath vanished.

"It is impossible to be angry with you. I am very sorry if I seemed to
be," he answered. "A man who has the good fortune to be thrown into your
society is a fool to waste his time in being disagreeable."

"I agree with the conclusion, at all events--that is, it is much better
to be agreeable. Is it not? Let us be friends."

"Oh, by all means," said John.

They walked on for some minutes in silence. John reflected that he had
witnessed a phase of Mrs. Goddard's character of which he had been very
far from suspecting the existence. He had not hitherto imagined her to be
a woman of quick temper or sharp speech. His idea of her was formed
chiefly upon her appearance. Her sad face, with its pathetic expression,
suggested a melancholy humour delighting in subdued and tranquil
thoughts, inclined naturally to the romantic view, or to what in the eyes
of youths of twenty appears to be the romantic view of life. He had
suddenly found her answering him with a sharpness which, while it roused
his wits, startled his sensibilities. But he was flattered as well. His
instinct and his observation of Mrs. Goddard when in the society of
others led him to believe that with Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose, or even with
Mr. Juxon, she was not in the habit of talking as she talked with him. He
was therefore inwardly pleased, so soon as his passing annoyance had
subsided, to feel that she made a difference between him and others.

It was quite true that she made a distinction, though she did so almost
unconsciously. It was perfectly natural, too. She was young in heart, in
spite of her thirty years and her troubles; she had an elastic
temperament; to a physiognomist her face would have shown a delicate
sensitiveness to impressions rather than any inborn tendency to sadness.
In spite of everything she was still young, and for two years and a half
she had been in the society of persons much older than herself, persons
she respected and regarded as friends, but persons in whom her youth
found no sympathy. It was natural, therefore, that when time to some
extent had healed the wound she had suffered and she suddenly found
herself in the society of a young and enthusiastic man, something of the
enforced soberness of her manner should unbend, showing her character in
a new light. She herself enjoyed the change, hardly knowing why; she
enjoyed a little passage of arms with John, and it amused her more than
she could have expected to be young again, to annoy him, to break the
peace and heal it again in five minutes. But what happened entirely
failed to amuse the squire, who did not regard such diversions as
harmless; and moreover she was far from expecting the effect which her
treatment of John Short produced upon his scholarly but enthusiastic
temper.




CHAPTER IX.


The squire had remarked that John Short seemed to have a peculiar temper,
and Mrs. Goddard had observed the same thing. What has gone before
sufficiently explains the change in John's manner, and the difference in
his behaviour was plainly apparent even to Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose. The
vicar indeed was wise enough to see that John was very much attracted by
Mrs. Goddard, but he was also wise enough to say nothing about it. His
wife, however, who had witnessed no love-making for nearly thirty years,
except the courtship of the young physician who had married her daughter,
attributed John's demeanour to no such disturbing cause. He was
overworked, she said; he was therefore irritable; he had of course never
taken that excellent homoeopathic remedy, highly diluted aconite, since
he had left the vicarage; the consequence was that he was subject to
nervous headache--she only hoped he would not be taken ill on the eve of
the examination for honours. She hoped, too, that he would prolong his
holiday to the very last moment, for the country air and the rest he
enjoyed were sure to do him so much good. With regard, to the extension
of John's visit, the vicar thought differently, although he held his
peace. There were many reasons why John should not become attached to
Mrs. Goddard both for her sake and his own, and if he staid long, the
vicar felt quite sure that he would fall in love with her. She was
dangerously pretty, she was much older than John--which in the case of
very young men constitutes an additional probability--she evidently took
an innocent pleasure in his society, and altogether such a complication
as was likely to ensue was highly undesirable. Therefore, when Mrs.
Ambrose pressed John to stay longer than he had intended, the vicar not
only gave him no encouragement, but spoke gravely of the near approach of
the contest for honours, of the necessity of concentrating every force
for the coming struggle, and expressed at the same time the firm
conviction that, if John did his best, he ought to be the senior classic
in the year.

Even Mrs. Goddard urged him to go. Of course he asked her advice. He
would not have lost that opportunity of making her speak of himself, nor
of gauging the exact extent of the interest he hoped she felt in him.

It was two or three days after the long conversation he had enjoyed with
her. In that time they had met often and John's admiration for her,
strengthened by his own romantic desire to be really in love, had begun
to assume proportions which startled Mrs. Goddard and annoyed Mr. Juxon.
The latter felt that the boy was in his way; whenever he wanted to see
Mrs. Goddard, John was at her side, talking eagerly and contesting his
position against the squire with a fierceness which in an older and wiser
man would have been in the worst possible taste. Even as it was, Mr.
Juxon looked considerably annoyed as he stood by, smoothing his smooth
hair from time to time with his large white hand and feeling that even at
his age, and with his experience, a man might sometimes cut a poor
figure.

On the particular occasion when the relations between John and the squire
became an object of comment to Mrs. Ambrose, the whole party were
assembled at Mrs. Goddard's cottage. She had invited everybody to tea, a
meal which in her little household represented a compromise between her
appetite and Nellie's. She had felt that in the small festivities of the
Billingsfield Christmas season she was called upon to do her share with
the rest and, being a simple woman, she took her part simply, and did not
dignify the entertainment of her four friends by calling it a dinner. The
occasion was none the less hospitable, for she gave both time and thought
to her preparations. Especially she had considered the question of
precedence; it was doubtful, she thought, whether the squire or the vicar
should sit upon her right hand. The squire, as being lord of the manor,
represented the powers temporal, the vicar on the other hand represented
the church, which on ordinary occasions takes precedence of the lay
faculty. She had at last privately consulted Mr. Juxon, in whom she had
the greatest confidence, asking him frankly which she should do, and Mr.
Juxon had unhesitatingly yielded the post of honour to the vicar, adding
to enforce his opinion the very plausible argument that if he, the
squire, took Mrs. Goddard in to tea, the vicar would have to give his arm
either to little Nellie or to his own wife. Mrs. Goddard was convinced
and the affair was a complete success.

John felt that he could not complain of his position, but as he was
separated from the object of his admiration during the whole meal, he
resolved to indemnify himself for his sufferings by monopolising her
conversation during the rest of the evening. The squire on the other
hand, who had been obliged to talk to Mrs. Ambrose during most of the
time while they were at table, and who, moreover, was beginning to feel
that he had seen almost enough of John Short, determined to give the
young man a lesson in the art of interesting women in general and Mrs.
Goddard in particular. She, indeed, would not have been a woman at all
had she not understood the two men and their intentions. After tea the
party congregated round the fire in the little drawing-room, standing in
a circle, of which their hostess formed the centre. Mr. Juxon and John,
anticipating that Mrs. Goddard must ultimately sit upon one side or other
of the fireplace had at first chosen opposite sides, each hoping that she
would take the chair nearest to himself. But Mrs. Goddard remained
standing an unreasonably long time, for the very reason that she did not
choose to sit beside either of them. Seeing this the squire, who had
perhaps a greater experience than his adversary in this kind of strategic
warfare, left his place and put himself on the same side as John. He
argued that Mrs. Goddard would probably then choose the opposite side,
whereas John who was younger would think she would come towards the two
where they stood; John would consequently lose time, Mr. Juxon would
cross again and install himself by her side while his enemy was
hesitating.

While these moves and counter-moves were proceeding, the conversation was
general. The vicar was for the hundredth time admiring the Andrea del
Sarto over the chimney-piece and his wife was explaining her general
objections to the representation of sacred subjects upon canvas, while
Mrs. Goddard answered each in turn and endeavoured to disagree with
neither. What the squire had foreseen when he made his last move,
however, actually took place at last. Mrs. Goddard established herself
upon the side opposite the two men. Mr. Juxon crossed rapidly to where
she was seated, and Mrs. Ambrose, who had turned with the intention of
speaking to the squire, found herself confronted by John. He saw that he
had been worsted by his foe and immediately lost his temper; but being
brought face to face with Mrs. Ambrose was obliged to control it as he
might. That excellent lady beamed upon him with a maternal smile of the
kind which is peculiarly irritating to young men. He struggled to get
away however, glancing over Mrs. Ambrose's shoulder at the squire and
longing to be "at him" as he would have expressed it. But the squire was
not to be got at so easily, for the vicar's wife was of a fine presence
and covered much ground. John involuntarily thought of the dyke before
Troy, of Hector and his heroes attempting to storm it and of the Ajaces
and Sarpedon defending it and glaring down from above. He could
appreciate Hector's feelings--Mrs. Ambrose was very like the dyke.

The squire smiled serenely and smoothed his hair as he talked to Mrs.
Goddard and she herself looked by no means discontented, thereby adding,
as it were, an insult to the injury done to John.

"I shall always envy you the cottage," the squire was saying. "I have not
a single room in the Hall that is half so cheery in the evening."

"I shall never forget my terror when we first met," answered Mrs.
Goddard, "do you remember? You frightened me by saying you would like to
live here. I thought you meant it."

"You must have thought I was the most unmannerly of barbarians."

"Instead of being the best of landlords," added Mrs. Goddard with a
grateful smile.

"I hardly know whether I am that," said Mr. Juxon, settling himself in
his chair. "But I believe I am by nature an exceedingly comfortable man,
and I never fail to consult the interests of my comfort."

"And of mine. Think of all you have done to improve this place. I can
never thank you enough. I suppose one always feels particularly grateful
at Christmas time--does not one?"

"One has more to be grateful for, it seems to me--in our climate, too.
People in southern countries never really know what comfort means,
because nature never makes them thoroughly uncomfortable. Only a man who
is freezing can appreciate a good fire."

"I suppose you have been a good deal in such places," suggested Mrs.
Goddard, vaguely.

"Oh yes--everywhere," answered the squire with equal indefiniteness. "By
the bye, talking of travelling, when is our young friend going away?"
There was not a shade of ill-humour in the question.

"The day after New Year's--I believe."

"He has had a very pleasant visit."

"Yes," replied Mrs. Goddard, "I hope it will do him a great deal of
good."

"Why? Was he ill? Ah--I remember, they said he had worked too hard. It is
a great mistake to work too hard, especially when one is very young."

"He is very young, is not he?" remarked Mrs. Goddard with a faint smile,
remembering the many conversations she had had with him.

"Very. Did it ever strike you that--well, that he was losing his head a
little?"

"No," answered his companion innocently. "What about?"

"Oh, nothing. Only he has rather a peculiar temper. He is perpetually
getting very angry with no ostensible reason--and then he glares at one
like an angry cat."

"Take care," said Mrs. Goddard, "he might hear you."

"Do him good," said the squire cheerfully.

"Oh, no! It would hurt his feelings dreadfully. How can you be so
unkind?"

"He is a very good boy, you know. Really, I believe he is. Only he is
inclined to be rather too unreasonable; I should think he might be
satisfied."

"Satisfied with what?" inquired Mrs. Goddard, who did not wish to
understand.

"With the way you have treated him," returned the squire bluntly. "You
have been wonderfully good to him."

"Have I?" The faint colour rose to her cheek. "I don't know--poor fellow!
I daresay his life at Cambridge is very dull."

"Yes. Entirely devoid of that species of amusement which he has enjoyed
so abundantly in Billingsfield. It is not every undergraduate who has a
chance to talk to you for a week at a time."

Mr. Juxon made the remark very calmly, without seeming to be in the least
annoyed. He was much too wise a man to appear to be displeased at Mrs.
Goddard's treatment of John. Moreover, he felt that on the present
occasion, at least, John had been summarily worsted; it was his turn to
be magnanimous.

"If you are going to make compliments, I will go away," said Mrs.
Goddard.

"I? I never made a compliment in my life," replied the squire
complacently. "Do you think it is a compliment to tell you that Mr. Short
probably enjoys your conversation much more than the study of Greek
roots?"

"Well--not exactly--"

"Besides, in general," continued the squire, "compliments are mere waste
of breath. If a woman has any vanity she knows her own good points much
better than any man who attempts to explain them to her; and if she has
no vanity, no amount of explanation of her merits will make her see them
in a proper light."

"That is very true," answered Mrs. Goddard, thoughtfully. "It never
struck me before. I wonder whether that is the reason women always like
men who never make any compliments at all?"

The squire's face assumed an amusing expression of inquiry and surprise.

"Is that personal?" he asked.

"Oh--of course not," answered Mrs. Goddard in some confusion. She blushed
and turning towards the fire took up the poker and pretended to stir the
coals. Women always delight in knocking a good fire to pieces, out of
pure absence of mind. John Short saw the movement and, escaping suddenly
from the maternal conversation of Mrs. Ambrose, threw himself upon his
knee on the hearth-rug and tried to take the poker from his hostess's
hand.

"Oh, Mrs. Goddard, don't! Let me do it--please!" he exclaimed.

"But I can do it very well myself," said she protesting and not relaxing
her hold upon the poker. But John was obstinate in his determination to
save her trouble, and rudely tried to get the instrument away.

"Please don't--you hurt me," said Mrs. Goddard petulantly.

"Oh--I beg your pardon--I wanted to help you," said John leaving his
hold. "I did not really hurt you--did I?" he asked, almost tenderly.

"Dreadfully," replied Mrs. Goddard, half angry and half amused at his
impatience and subsequent contrition. The squire sat complacently in his
chair, watching the little scene. John hated him more than ever, and grew
very red. Mrs. Goddard saw the boy's embarrassment and presently
relented.

"I daresay you will do it better than I," she said, handing him the
poker, which John seized with alacrity. "That big coal--there," she
added, pointing to a smouldering block in the corner of the grate.

"I did not mean to be rude," said John. "I only wanted to help you." He
knelt by her side poking the fire industriously. "I only wanted to get a
chance to talk to you," he added, in a low voice, barely audible to Mrs.
Goddard as she leaned forward.

"I am afraid you cannot do that just now," she said, not unkindly, but
with the least shade of severity in her tone. "You will get dreadfully
hot if you stay there, so near the fire."

"I don't mind the heat in the least," said John heroically. Nevertheless
as she did not give him any further encouragement he was presently
obliged to retire, greatly discomfited. He could not spend the evening on
his knees with the poker in his hand.

"Bad failure," remarked the squire in an undertone as soon as John had
rejoined Mrs. Ambrose, who had not quite finished her lecture on
homoeopathy.

Mrs. Goddard leaned back in her chair and looked at Mr. Juxon rather
coolly. She did not want him to laugh at John, though she was not willing
to encourage John herself.

"You should not be unkind," she said. "He is such a nice boy--why should
you wish him to be uncomfortable?"

"Oh, I don't in the least. I could not help being amused a little. I am
sure I don't want to be unkind."

Indeed the squire had not shown himself to be so, on the whole, and he
did not refer to the matter again during the evening. He kept his place
for some time by Mrs. Goddard's side and then, judging that he had
sufficiently asserted his superiority, rose and talked to Mrs. Ambrose.
But John, being now in a thoroughly bad humour, could not take his vacant
seat with a good grace. He stood aloof and took up a book that lay upon
the table and avoided looking at Mrs. Goddard. By and by, when the party
broke up, he said good-night in such a particularly cold and formal tone
of voice that she stared at him in surprise. But he took no notice of her
look and went away after the Ambroses, in that state of mind which boys
call a huff.

But on the following day John repented of his behaviour. All day long he
wandered about the garden of the vicarage, excusing himself from joining
the daily skating which formed the staple of amusement during the
Christmas week, by saying that he had an idea for a copy of verses and
must needs work it out. But he inwardly hoped that Mrs. Goddard would
come to the vicarage late in the afternoon, without the inevitable Mr.
Juxon, and that he might then get a chance of talking to her. He was not
quite sure what he should say. He would find words on the spur of the
moment; it would at all events be much easier than to meet her on the ice
at the Hall with all the rest of them and to see Mr. Juxon pushing her
about in that detestable chair, with the unruffled air of superiority
which John so hated to see upon his face. The vicar suspected more than
ever that there was something wrong; he had seen some of the by-play on
the previous evening, and had noticed John's ill-concealed disappointment
at being unable to dislodge the sturdy squire from his seat. But Mrs.
Ambrose seemed to be very obtuse, and the vicar would have been the last
to have spoken of his suspicions, even to the wife of his bosom. It was
his duty to induce John to go back to his work at the end of the week; it
was not his duty to put imputations upon him which Mrs. Ambrose would
naturally exaggerate and which would drive her excellent heart into a
terrible state of nervous anxiety.

But Mrs. Goddard did not come back to the vicarage on that day, and John
went to dinner with a sad heart. It did not seem like a day at all if he
had not seen her and talked with her. He had now no doubt whatever that
he was seriously in love, and he set himself to consider his position.
The more he considered it, the more irreconcilable it seemed to be with
the passion which beset him. A child could see that for several years, at
least, he would not be in a position to marry. With Mr. Juxon at hand
from year's end to year's end, the owner of the Hall, of the
Billingsfield property and according to all appearances of other
resources besides,--with such a man constantly devoted to her, could Mrs.
Goddard be expected to wait for poor John three years, even two years,
from the time of the examination for the classical Tripos? Nothing was
more improbable, he was forced to admit. And yet, the idea of life if he
did not marry Mrs. Goddard was dismal beyond all expression; he would
probably not survive it. He did not know what he should do. He shrank
from the thought of declaring his love to her at once. He remembered with
pain that she had a terrible way of laughing at him when he grew
confidential or too complimentary, and he dreaded lest at the supreme
moment of his life he should appear ridiculous in her eyes--he, a mere
undergraduate. If he came out at the head of the Tripos it would be
different; and yet that seemed so long to wait, especially while Mr.
Juxon lived at the Hall and Mrs. Goddard lived at the park gates.
Suddenly a thought struck him which filled him with delight; it was just
possible that Mr. Juxon had no intention of marrying Mrs. Goddard. If he
had any such views he would probably have declared them before now, for
he had met her every day during more than half a year. John longed to ask
some one the question. Perhaps Mr. Ambrose, who might be supposed to know
everything connected with Mrs. Goddard, could tell him. He felt very
nervous at the idea of speaking to the vicar on the subject, and yet it
seemed to him that no one else could set his mind at rest. If he were
quite certain that Mr. Juxon had no intention of offering himself to the
charming tenant of the cottage, he might return to his work with some
sense of security in the future. Otherwise he saw only the desperate
alternative of throwing himself at her feet and declaring that he loved
her, or of going back to Cambridge with the dreadful anticipation of
hearing any day that she had married the squire. To be laughed at would
be bad, but to feel that he had lost her irrevocably, without a struggle,
would be awful. No one but the vicar could and would tell him the truth;
it would be bitter to ask such a question, but it must be done. Having at
last come to this formidable resolution, towards the conclusion of
dinner, his spirits rose a little. He took another glass of the vicar's
mild ale and felt that he could face his fate.

"May I speak to you a moment in the study, Mr. Ambrose?" he said as they
rose from table.

"Certainly," replied the vicar; and having conducted his wife to the
drawing-room, he returned to find John. There was a low, smouldering fire
in the study grate, and John had lit a solitary candle. The room looked
very dark and dismal and John was seated in one of the black leather
chairs, waiting.

"Anything about those verses you were speaking of to-day?" asked the
vicar cheerfully, in anticipation of a pleasant classical chat.

"No," said John, gloomily. "The fact is--" he cleared his throat, "the
fact is, I want to ask you rather a delicate question, sir."

The vicar's heavy eyebrows contracted; the lines of his face all turned
downwards, and his long, clean-shaved upper lip closed sharply upon its
fellow, like a steel trap. He turned his grey eyes upon John's averted
face with a searching look.

"Have you got into any trouble at Trinity, John?" he asked severely.

"Oh no--no indeed," said John. Nothing was further from his thoughts than
his college at that moment. "I want to ask you a question, which no one
else can answer. Is--do you think that--that Mr. Juxon has any idea of
marrying Mrs. Goddard?"

The vicar started in astonishment and laid both hands upon the arms of
his chair.

"What--in the world--put that--into your head?" he asked very slowly,
emphasising every word of his question. John was prepared to see his old
tutor astonished but was rather taken aback at the vicar's tone.

"Do you think it is likely, sir?" he insisted.

"Certainly not," answered the vicar, still eyeing him suspiciously.
"Certainly not. I have positive reasons to prove the contrary. But, my
dear John, why, in the name of all that is sensible, do you ask me such a
question? You don't seriously think of proposing--"

"I don't see why I should not," said John doggedly, seeing that he was
found out.

"You don't see why you should not? Why the thing is perfectly absurd, not
to say utterly impossible! John, you are certainly mad."

"I don't see why," repeated John. "I am a grown man. I have good
prospects--"

"Good prospects!" ejaculated the vicar in horror. "Good prospects! Why,
you are only an undergraduate at Cambridge."

"I may be senior classic in a few months," objected John. "That is not
such a bad prospect, it seems to me."

"It means that you may get a fellowship, probably will--in the course of
a few years. But you lose it if you marry. Besides--do you know that Mrs.
Goddard is ten years older than you, and more?"

"Impossible," said John in a tone of conviction.

"I know that she is. She will be two and thirty on her next birthday, and
you are not yet one and twenty."

"I shall be next month," argued John, who was somewhat taken aback,
however, by the alarming news of Mrs. Goddard's age. "Besides, I can go
into the church, before I get a fellowship--"

"No, you can't," said the vicar energetically. "You won't be able to
manage it. If you do, you will have to put up with a poor living."

"That would not matter. Mrs. Goddard has something--"

"An honourable prospect!" exclaimed Mr. Ambrose, growing more and more
excited. "To marry a woman ten years older than yourself because she has
a little money of her own! You! I would not have thought it of you,
John--indeed I would not!"

Indeed no one was more surprised than John Short himself, when he found
himself arguing the possibilities of his marriage with his old tutor. But
he was an obstinate young fellow enough and was not inclined to give up
the fight easily.

"Really," he objected, "I cannot see anything so very terrible in the
idea. I shall certainly make my way in the world. You know that it is not
for the sake of her money. Many men have married women ten years older
than themselves, and not half so beautiful and charming, I am sure."

"I don't believe it," said the vicar, "and if they have, why it has been
very different, that is all. Besides, you have not known Mrs. Goddard a
week--positively not more than five days--why, it is madness! Do you mean
to tell me that at the end of five days you believe you are seriously
attached to a lady you never saw in your life before?"

"I saw her once," said John. "That day when I waked Muggins--"

"Once! Nearly three years ago! I have no patience with you, John! That a
young fellow of your capabilities should give way to such a boyish fancy!
It is absolutely amazing! I thought you were growing to like her society
very much, but I did not believe it would, come to this!"

"It is nothing to be ashamed of," said John stoutly.

"It is something to be afraid of," answered the vicar.

"Oh, do not be alarmed," retorted John. "I will do nothing rash. You have
set my mind at rest in assuring me that she will not marry Mr. Juxon. I
shall not think of offering myself to Mrs. Goddard until after the
Tripos."

"Offering myself"--how deliciously important the expression sounded to
John's own ears! It conveyed such a delightful sense of the possibilities
of life when at last he should feel that he was in a position to offer
himself to any woman, especially to Mrs. Goddard.

"I have a great mind not to ask you to come down, even if you do turn out
senior classic," said the vicar, still fuming with excitement. "But if
you put off your rash action until then, you will probably have changed
your mind."

"I will never change my mind," said John confidently. It was evident,
nevertheless, that if the romance of his life were left to the tender
mercies of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose, it was likely to come to an
abrupt termination. When the two returned to the society of Mrs. Ambrose,
the vicar was still very much agitated and John was plunged in a gloomy
melancholy.




CHAPTER X.


The vicar's suspicions were more than realized and he passed an
uncomfortable day after his interview with John, in debating what he
ought to do, whether he ought to do anything at all, or whether he should
merely hasten his old pupil's departure and leave matters to take care of
themselves. He was a very conscientious man, and he felt that he was
responsible for John's conduct towards Mrs. Goddard, seeing that she had
put herself under his protection, and that John was almost like one of
his family. His first impulse was to ask counsel of his wife, but he
rejected the plan, reflecting with great justice that she was very fond
of John and had at first not been sure of liking Mrs. Goddard; she would
be capable of thinking that the latter had "led Short on," as she would
probably say. The vicar did not believe this, and was therefore loath
that any one else should. He felt that circumstances had made him Mrs.
Goddard's protector, and he was moreover personally attached to her; he
would not therefore do or say anything whereby she was likely to
appear to any one else in an unfavourable light. It was incredible that
she should have given John any real encouragement. Mr. Ambrose wondered
whether he ought to warn her of his pupil's madness. But when he thought
about that, it seemed unnecessary. It was unlikely that John would betray
himself during his present visit, since the vicar had solemnly assured
him that there was no possibility of a marriage so far as Mr. Juxon was
concerned. It was undoubtedly a very uncomfortable situation but there
was evidently nothing to be done; Mr. Ambrose felt that to speak to Mrs.
Goddard would be to precipitate matters in a way which could not but
cause much humiliation to John Short and much annoyance to herself. He
accordingly held his peace, but his upper lip set itself stiffly and his
eyes had a combative expression which told his wife that there was
something the matter.

After breakfast John went out, on pretence of walking in the garden, and
Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose were left alone. The latter, as usual after the
morning meal, busied herself about the room, searching out those secret
corners which she suspected Susan of having forgotten to dust. The vicar
stood looking out of the window. The weather was grey and it seemed
likely that there would be a thaw which would spoil the skating.

"I think," said Mrs. Ambrose, "that John is far from well."

"What makes you say that?" inquired the vicar, who was thinking of him at
that very moment.

"Anybody might see it. He has no appetite--he ate nothing at breakfast
this morning. He looks pale. My dear, that boy will certainly break
down."

"I don't believe it," answered Mr. Ambrose still looking out of the
window. His hands were in his pockets, thrusting the skirts of his
clerical coat to right and left; he slowly raised himself upon his toes
and let himself down again, repeating the operation as though it helped
him to think.

"That is the way you spoil all your coats, Augustin," said his wife
looking at him from behind. "I assure you, my dear, that boy is not well.
Poor fellow, all alone at college with nobody to look after him--"

"We have all had to go through that. I do not think it hurts him a bit,"
said the vicar, slowly removing his hands from his pockets in deference
to his wife's suggestion.

"Then what is it, I would like to know? There is certainly something the
matter. Now I ask you whether he looks like himself?"

"Perhaps he does look a little tired."

"Tired! There is something on his mind, Augustin. I am positively certain
there is something on his mind. Why won't you tell me?"

"My dear--" began the vicar, and then stopped short. He was a very
truthful man, and as he knew very well what was the matter with John he
was embarrassed to find an answer. "My dear," he repeated, "I do not
think he is ill."

"Then I am right," retorted Mrs. Ambrose, triumphantly. "It is just as I
thought, there is something on his mind. Don't deny it, Augustin; there
is something on his mind."

Mr. Ambrose was silent; he glared fiercely at the window panes.

"Why don't you tell me?" insisted his better half. "I am quite sure you
know all about it. Augustin, do you know, or do you not?"

Thus directly questioned the vicar turned sharply round, sweeping the
window with his coat tails.

"My dear," he said, shortly, "I do know. Can you not imagine that it may
be a matter which John does not care to have mentioned?"

Mrs. Ambrose grew red with annoyance. She had set her heart on finding
out what had disturbed John, and the vicar had apparently made up his
mind that she should not succeed. Such occurrences were very rare between
that happy couple.

"I cannot believe he has done anything wrong," said Mrs. Ambrose.
"Anything which need be concealed from me--the interest I have always
taken--"

"He has not done anything wrong," said the vicar impatiently. "I do wish
you would drop the subject--"

"Then why should it be concealed from me?" objected his wife with
admirable logic. "If it is anything good he need not hide his light under
a bushel, I should think."

"There are plenty of things which are neither bad nor good," argued the
vicar, who felt that if he could draw Mrs. Ambrose into a Socratic
discussion he was safe.

"That is a distinct prevarication, Augustin," said she severely. "I am
surprised at you."

"Not at all," retorted the vicar. "What has occurred to John is not owing
to any fault of his." In his own mind the good man excused himself by
saying that John could not have helped falling in love with Mrs. Goddard.
But his wife turned quickly upon him.

"That does not prevent what has occurred to him, as you call it, from
being good, or more likely bad, to judge from his looks."

"My dear," said Mr. Ambrose, driven to bay, "I entirely decline to
discuss the point."

"I thought you trusted me, Augustin."

"So I do--certainly--and I always consult you about my own affairs."

"I think I have as much right to know about John as you have," retorted
his wife, who seemed deeply hurt.

"That is a point then which you ought to settle with John," said the
vicar. "I cannot betray his confidence, even to you."

"Oh--then he has been making confidences to you?"

"How in the world should I know about his affairs unless he told me?"

"One may see a great many things without being told about them, you
know," answered Mrs. Ambrose, assuming a prim expression as she examined
a small spot in the tablecloth. The vicar was walking up and down the
room. Her speech, which was made quite at random, startled him. She, too,
might easily have observed John's manner when he was with Mrs. Goddard;
she might have guessed the secret, and have put her own interpretation on
John's sudden melancholy.

"What may one see?" asked the vicar quickly.

"I did not say one could see anything," answered his wife. "But from your
manner I infer that there really is something to see. Wait a minute--what
can it be?"

"Nothing--my dear, nothing," said the vicar desperately.

"Oh, Augustin, I know you so well," said the implacable Mrs. Ambrose. "I
am quite sure now, that it is something I have seen. Deny it, my dear."

The vicar was silent and bit his long upper lip as he marched up and down
the room.

"Of course--you cannot deny it," she continued. "It is perfectly clear.
The very first day he arrived--when you came down from the Hall, in the
evening--Augustin, I have got it! It is Mrs. Goddard--now don't tell me
it is not. I am quite sure it is Mrs. Goddard. How stupid of me! Is it
not Mrs. Goddard?"

"If you are so positive," said the vicar, resorting to a form of defence
generally learned in the nursery, "why do you ask me?"

"I insist upon knowing, Augustin, is it, or is it not, Mrs. Goddard?"

"My dear, I positively refuse to answer any more questions," said the
vicar with tardy firmness.

"Oh, it is no matter," retorted Mrs. Ambrose in complete triumph, "if it
were not Mrs. Goddard of course you would say so at once."

A form of argument so unanswerable, that the vicar hastily left the room
feeling that he had basely betrayed John's confidence, and muttering
something about intolerable curiosity. Mrs. Ambrose had vanquished her
husband, as she usually did on those rare occasions when anything
approaching to a dispute arose between them. Having come to the
conclusion that "it" was Mrs. Goddard, the remainder of the secret needed
no discovery. It was plain that John must be in love with the tenant of
the cottage, and it seemed likely that it would devolve upon Mrs. Ambrose
to clear up the matter. She was very fond of John and her first
impression was that Mrs. Goddard, whom she now again suspected of having
foreign blood, had "led him on"--an impression which the vicar had
anticipated when he rashly resolved not to tell his wife John's secret.
She knew very well that the vicar must have told John his mind in regard
to such an attachment, and she easily concluded that he must have done so
on the previous evening when John called him into the study. But she had
just won a victory over her husband, and she consequently felt that he
was weak, probably too weak to save the situation, and it was borne in
upon her that she ought to do something immediately. Unhappily she did
not see quite clearly what was to be done. She might go straight to Mrs.
Goddard and accuse her of having engaged John's affections; but the more
she thought of that, the more diffident she grew in regard to the result
of such an interview. Curiosity had led her to a certain point, but
caution prevented her from going any further. Mrs. Ambrose was very
cautious. The habit of living in a small place, feeling that all her
actions were watched by the villagers and duly commented upon by them,
had made her even more careful than she was by nature. It would be very
unwise to bring about a scene with Mrs. Goddard unless she were very sure
of the result. Mrs. Goddard was hardly a friend. In Mrs. Ambrose's
opinion an acquaintance of two years and a half standing involving almost
daily meetings and the constant exchange of civilities did not constitute
friendship. Nevertheless the vicar's wife would have been ashamed to own
that after such long continued intercourse she was wholly ignorant of
Mrs. Goddard's real character; especially as the latter had requested the
vicar to tell Mrs. Ambrose her story when she first appeared at
Billingsfield. Moreover, as her excitement at the victory she had gained
over her husband began to subside, she found herself reviewing mentally
the events of the last few days. She remembered distinctly that John had
perpetually pursued Mrs. Goddard, and that although the latter seemed to
find him agreeable enough, she had never to Mrs. Ambrose's knowledge
given him any of those open encouragements in the way of smiles and
signals, which in the good lady's mind were classified under the term
"flirting." Mrs. Ambrose's ideas of flirtation may have been antiquated;
thirty years of Billingsfield in the society of the Reverend Augustin had
not contributed to their extension; but, on the whole, they were just.
Mrs. Goddard had not flirted with John. It is worthy of notice that in
proportion as the difficulties she would enter upon by demanding an
explanation from Mrs. Goddard seemed to grow in magnitude, she gradually
arrived at the conclusion that it was John's fault. Half an hour ago, in
the flush of triumph she had indignantly denied that anything could be
John's fault. She now resolved to behave to him with great austerity.
Such an occurrence as his falling in love could not be passed over with
indifference. It seemed best that he should leave Billingsfield very
soon.

John thought so too. Existence would not be pleasant now that the vicar
knew his secret, and he cursed the folly and curiosity which had led him
to betray himself in order to find out whether Mr. Juxon thought of
marrying Mrs. Goddard. He had now resolved to return to Cambridge at once
and to work his hardest until the Tripos was over. He would then come
back to Billingsfield and, with his honours fresh upon him and the
prospect of immediate success before him, he would throw himself at Mrs.
Goddard's feet. But of course he must have one farewell interview. Oh,
those farewell interviews! Those leave-takings, wherein often so much is
taken without leave!

Accordingly at luncheon he solemnly announced his intention of leaving
the vicarage on the morrow. Mrs. Ambrose received the news with an
equanimity which made John suspicious, for she had heretofore constantly
pressed him to extend his holiday, expressing the greatest solicitude for
his health. She now sat stony as a statue and said very coldly that she
was sorry he had to go so soon, but that, of course, it could not be
helped. The vicar was moved by his wife's apparent indifference. John, he
said, might at least have stayed till the end of the promised week; but
at this suggestion Mrs. Ambrose darted at her husband a look so full of
fierce meaning, that the vicar relapsed into silence, returning to the
consideration of bread and cheese and a salad of mustard and cress. John
saw the look and was puzzled; he did not believe the vicar capable of
going straight to Mrs. Ambrose with the story of the last night's
interview. But he was already so much disturbed that he did not attempt
to explain to himself what was happening.

But when lunch was over, and he realised that he had declared his
intention of leaving Billingsfield on the next day, he saw that if he
meant to see Mrs. Goddard before he left he must go to her at once. He
therefore waited until he heard Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose talking together in
the sitting-room and then slipped quietly out by the garden to the road.

He had no idea what he should say when he met Mrs. Goddard. He meant, of
course, to let her understand, or at least suppose, that he was leaving
suddenly on her account, but he did not know in the least how to
accomplish it. He trusted that the words necessary to him would come into
his head spontaneously. His heart beat fast and he was conscious that he
blushed as he rang the bell of the cottage. Almost before he knew where
he was, he found himself ushered into the little drawing-room and in the
presence of the woman he now felt sure that he loved. But to his great
annoyance she was not alone; Nellie was with her. Mrs. Goddard sat near
the fire, reading a review; Nellie was curled up in a corner of the deep
sofa with a book, her thick brown curls falling all over her face and
hands as she read. Mrs. Goddard extended her hand, without rising.

"How do you do, Mr. Short?" she said. The young man stood hat in hand in
the middle of the room, feeling very nervous. It was strange that he
should experience any embarrassment now, considering how many hours he
had spent in her company during the last few days. He blushed and
stammered.

"How do you do? I, in fact--I have come to say good-bye," he blurted out.

"So soon?" said Mrs. Goddard calmly. "Pray sit down."

"Are you really going away, Mr. Short?" asked Nellie. "We are so sorry to
lose you." The child had caught the phrase from a book she had been
reading, and thought it very appropriate. Her mother smiled.

"Yes--as Nellie says--we are sorry to lose you," she said. "I thought you
were to stay until Monday?"

"So I was--but--very urgent business--not exactly business of course, but
work--calls me away sooner." Having delivered himself of this masterpiece
of explanation John looked nervously at Nellie and then at his hat and
then, with an imploring glance, at Mrs. Goddard.

"But we shall hear of you, Mr. Short--after the examinations, shall we
not?"

"Oh yes," said John eagerly. "I will come down as soon as the lists are
out."

"You have my best wishes, you know," said Mrs. Goddard kindly. "I feel
quite sure that you will really be senior classic."

"Mamma is always saying that--it is quite true," explained Nellie.

John blushed again and looked gratefully at Mrs. Goddard. He wished
Nellie would go away, but there was not the least chance of that.

"Yes," said Mrs. Goddard, "I often say it. We all take a great interest
in your success here."

"You are very kind," murmured John. "Of course I shall come down at once
and tell you all about it, if I succeed. I do not really expect to be
first, of course. I shall be satisfied if I get a place in the first ten.
But I mean to do my best."

"No one can do more," said Mrs. Goddard, leaning back in her chair and
looking into the fire. Her face was quiet, but not sad as it sometimes
was. There was a long silence which John did not know how to break.
Nellie sat upon a carved chair by the side of the fireplace dangling her
legs and looking at her toes, turning them alternately in and out. She
wished John would go for she wanted to get back to her book, but had been
told it was not good manners to read when there were visitors. John
looked at Mrs. Goddard's face and was about to speak, and then changed
his mind and grew red and said nothing. Had she noticed his shyness she
would have made an effort at conversation, but she was absent-minded
to-day, and was thinking of something else. Suddenly she started and
laughed a little.

"I beg your pardon," she said. "What were you saying, Mr. Short?" Had
John been saying anything he would have repeated it, but being thus
interrogated he grew doubly embarrassed.

"I--I have not much to say--except good-bye," he answered.

"Oh, don't go yet," said Mrs. Goddard. "You are not going this afternoon?
It is always so unpleasant to say good-bye, is it not?"

"Dreadfully," answered John. "I would rather say anything else in the
world. No; I am going early to-morrow morning. There is no help for it,"
he added desperately. "I must go, you know."

"The next time you come, you will be able to stay much longer," said Mrs.
Goddard in an encouraging way. "You will have no more terms, then."

"No indeed--nothing but to take my degree."

"And what will you do then? You said the other day that you thought
seriously of going into the church."

"Oh mamma," interrupted Nellie suddenly looking up, "fancy Mr. Short in a
black gown, preaching like Mr. Ambrose! How perfectly ridiculous he would
look!"

"Nellie--Nellie!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard, "do not talk nonsense. It is
very rude to say Mr. Short would look ridiculous."

"I didn't mean to be rude, mamma," returned Nellie, blushing scarlet and
pouting her lips, "only it would be very funny, wouldn't it?"

"I daresay it would," said John, relieved by the interruption. "I wish
you would advise me what to do, Mrs. Goddard," he added in a confidential
tone.

"I?" she exclaimed, and then laughed. "How should I be able to advise
you?"

"I am sure you could," said John, insisting. "You have such wonderfully
good judgment--"

"Have I? I did not know it. But, tell me, if you come out very high are
you not sure of getting a fellowship?"

"It is likely," answered John indifferently. "But I should have to give
it up if I married--"

"Surely, Mr. Short," cried Mrs. Goddard, with a laugh that cut him to the
quick, "you do not think of marrying for many years to come?"

"Oh--I don't know," he said, blushing violently, "why should not I?"

"In the first place, a man should never marry until he is at least five
and twenty years old," said Mrs. Goddard, calmly.

"Well--I may be as old as that before I get the fellowship."

"Yes, I daresay. But even then, why should you want to resign a handsome
independence as soon as you have got it? Is there anything else so good
within your reach?"

"There is the church, of course," said John. "But Miss Nellie seems to
think that ridiculous--"

"Never mind Nellie," answered Mrs. Goddard. "Seriously, Mr. Short, do you
approve of entering the church merely as a profession, a means of earning
money?"

"Well--no--I did not put it in that way. But many people do."

"That does not prove that it is either wise or decent," said Mrs.
Goddard. "If you felt impelled to take orders from other motives, it
would be different. As I understand you, you are choosing a profession
for the sake of becoming independent."

"Certainly," said John.

"Well, then, there is nothing better for you to do than to get a
fellowship and hold it as long as you can, and during that time you can
make up your mind." She spoke with conviction, and the plan seemed good.
"But I cannot imagine," she continued, "why you should ask my advice."

"And not to marry?" inquired John nervously.

"There is plenty of time to think of that when you are thirty--even five
and thirty is not too late."

"Dear me!" exclaimed John, "I think that is much too old!"

"Do you call me old?" asked Mrs. Goddard serenely. "I was thirty-one on
my last birthday."

For the twentieth time, John felt himself growing uncomfortably hot. Not
only had he said an unconscionably stupid thing, but Mrs. Goddard, after
advising him not to marry for ten years, had almost hinted that she might
meanwhile be married herself. What else could she mean by the remark? But
John was hardly a responsible being on that day. His views of life and
his understanding were equally disturbed.

"No indeed," he protested on hearing her confession of age. "No
indeed--why, you are the youngest person I ever saw, of course. But with
men--it is quite different."

"Is it? I always thought women were supposed to grow old faster than men.
That is the reason why women always marry men so much older than
themselves."

"Oh--in that case--I have nothing more to say," replied John in very
indistinct tones. The perspiration was standing upon his forehead; the
room swam with him and he felt a terrible, prickly sensation all over his
body.

"Mamma, shan't I open the door? Mr. Short is so very hot," said Nellie
looking at him in some astonishment. At that moment John felt as though
he could have eaten little Nellie, long legs, ringlets and all, with
infinite satisfaction. He rose suddenly to his feet.

"The fact is--it is late--I must really be saying good-bye," he
stammered.

"Must you?" said Mrs. Goddard, suspecting that something was the matter.
"Well, I am very sorry to say good-bye. But you will be coming back soon,
will you not?"

"Yes--I don't know--perhaps I shall not come back at all. Good-bye--Mrs.
Goddard--good-bye, Miss Nellie."

"Good-bye, Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard, looking at him with some
anxiety. "You are not ill? What is the matter?"

"Oh dear no, nothing," answered John with an unnatural laugh. "No thank
you--good-bye."

He managed to get out of the door and rushed down to the road. The cold
air steadied his nerves. He felt better. With a sudden revulsion of
feeling, he began to utter inward imprecations against his folly, against
the house he had just left, against everybody and everything in general,
not forgetting poor little Nellie.

"If ever I cross that threshold again--" he muttered with tragic
emphasis. His face was still red, and he swung his stick ferociously
as he strode towards the vicarage. Several little boys in ragged
smock-frocks saw him and thought he had had some beer, even as their own
fathers, and made vulgar gestures when his back was turned.

So poor John packed his portmanteau and left the vicarage early on the
following morning. He sent an excuse to Mr. Juxon explaining that the
urgency of his work called him back sooner than he had expected, and when
the train moved fairly off towards Cambridge he felt that in being spared
the ordeal of shaking hands with his rival he had at least escaped some
of the bitterness of his fate; as he rolled along he thought very sadly
of all that had happened in that short time which was to have been so gay
and which had come to such a miserable end.

Reflecting calmly upon his last interview with Mrs. Goddard, he was
surprised to find that his memory failed him. He could not recall
anything which could satisfactorily account for the terrible
disappointment and distress he had felt. She had only said that she was
thirty-one years old, precisely as the vicar had stated on the previous
evening, and she had advised him not to marry for some years to come. But
she had laughed, and his feelings had been deeply wounded--he could not
tell precisely at what point in the conversation, but he was quite
certain that she had laughed, and oh! that terrible Nellie! It was very
bitter, and John felt that the best part of his life was lived out. He
went back to his books with a dark and melancholy tenacity of purpose,
flavoured by a hope that he might come to some sudden and awful end in
the course of the next fortnight, thereby causing untold grief and
consternation to the hard-hearted woman he had loved. But before the
fortnight had expired he found to his surprise that he was intensely
interested in his work, and once or twice he caught himself wondering how
Mrs. Goddard would look when he went back to Billingsfield and told her
he had come out at the head of the classical Tripos--though, of course,
he had no intention of going there, nor of ever seeing her again.




CHAPTER XI.


Mr. Juxon was relieved to hear that John Short had suddenly gone back to
Cambridge. He had indeed meant to like him from the first and had
behaved towards him with kindness and hospitality; but while ready to
admire his good qualities and to take a proper amount of interest in his
approaching contest for honours, he had found him a troublesome person to
deal with and, in his own words, a nuisance. Matters had come to a climax
after the tea at the cottage, when the squire had so completely
vanquished him, but since that evening the two had not met.

The opposition which John brought to bear against Mr. Juxon was not,
however, without its effect. The squire was in that state of mind in
which a little additional pressure sufficed to sway his resolutions.
It has been seen that he had for some time regarded Mrs. Goddard's
society as an indispensable element in his daily life; he had been so
much astonished at discovering this that he had absented himself for
several days and had finally returned ready to submit to his fate, in so
far as his fate required that he should see Mrs. Goddard every day.
Shortly afterwards John had appeared and by his persistent attempts to
monopolise Mrs. Goddard's conversation had again caused an interruption
in the squire's habits, which the latter had resented with characteristic
firmness. The very fact of having resisted John had strengthened and
given a new tone to Mr. Juxon's feelings towards his tenant. He began to
watch the hands of the clock with more impatience than formerly when,
after breakfast, he sat reading the papers before the library fire,
waiting for the hour when he was accustomed to go down to the cottage.
His interest in the papers decreased as his interest in the time of day
grew stronger, and for the first time in his life he found to his great
surprise that after reading the news of the day with the greatest care,
he was often quite unable to remember a word of what he had read. Then,
at first, he would be angry with himself and would impose upon himself
the task of reading the paper again before going to the cottage. But very
soon he found that he had to read it twice almost every day, and this
seemed such an unreasonable waste of time that he gave it up, and fell
into very unsystematic habits.

For some days, as though by mutual consent, neither Mrs. Goddard nor the
squire spoke of John Short. The squire was glad he was gone and hoped
that he would not come back, but was too kind-hearted to say so; Mrs.
Goddard instinctively understood Mr. Juxon's state of mind and did not
disturb his equanimity by broaching an unpleasant subject. Several days
passed by after John had gone and he would certainly not have been
flattered had he known that during that time two, out of the four persons
he had met so often in his short holiday, had never so much as mentioned
him.

One afternoon in January the squire found himself alone with Mrs.
Goddard. It was a great exception, and she herself doubted whether she
were wise to receive him when she had not Nellie with her. Nellie had
gone to the vicarage to help Mrs. Ambrose with some work she had in hand
for her poor people, but Mrs. Goddard had a slight headache and had
stayed at home in consequence. The weather was very bad; heavy clouds
were driving overhead and the north-east wind howled and screamed through
the leafless oaks of the park, driving a fine sleet against the cottage
windows and making the dead creepers rattle against the wall. It was a
bitter January day, and Mrs. Goddard felt how pleasant a thing it was to
stay at home with a book beside her blazing fire. She was all alone, and
Nellie would not be back before four o'clock. Suddenly a well-known step
echoed upon the slate flags without and there was a ring at the bell.
Mrs. Goddard had hardly time to think what she should do, as she laid her
book upon her knee and looked nervously over her shoulder towards the
door. It was awkward, she thought, but it could not be helped. In such
weather it seemed absurd to send the squire away because her little girl
was not with her. He had come all the way down from the Hall to spend
this dreary afternoon at the cottage--she could not send him away. There
were sounds in the passage as of some one depositing a waterproof coat
and an umbrella, the door opened and Mr. Juxon appeared upon the
threshold.

"Come in," said Mrs. Goddard, banishing her scruples as soon as she saw
him. "I am all alone," she added rather apologetically. The squire, who
was a simple man in many ways, understood the remark and felt slightly
embarrassed.

"Is Miss Nellie out?" he asked, coming forward and taking Mrs. Goddard's
hand. He had not yet reached the point of calling the child plain
"Nellie;" he would have thought it an undue familiarity.

"She is gone to the vicarage," answered Mrs. Goddard. "What a dreadful
day! You must be nearly frozen. Will you have a cup of tea?"

"No thanks--no, you are very kind. I have had a good walk; I am not
cold--never am. As you say, in such weather I could not resist the
temptation to come in. This is a capital day to test that India-rubber
tubing we have put round your windows. Excuse me--I will just look and
see if the air comes through."

Mr. Juxon carefully examined the windows of the sitting-room and then
returned to his seat.

"It is quite air-tight, I think," he said with some satisfaction, as he
smoothed his hair with his hand.

"Oh, quite," said Mrs. Goddard. "It was so very good of you."

"Not a bit of it," returned the squire cheerily. "A landlord's chief
pre-occupation ought to be the comfort of his tenants and his next
thought should be to keep his houses in repair. I never owned any
houses before, so I have determined to start with good principles."

"I am sure you succeed. You walked down?"

"Always walk, in any weather. It is much less trouble and much cheaper.
Besides, I like it."

"The best of all reasons. Then you will not have any tea? I almost wish
you would, because I want some myself."

"Oh of course--in that case I shall be delighted. Shall I ring?"

He rang and Martha brought the tea. Some time was consumed in the
preparations which Mr. Juxon watched with interest as though he had never
seen tea made before. Everything that Mrs. Goddard did interested him.

"I do not know why it is," she said at last, "but weather like this is
delightful when one is safe at home. I suppose it is the contrast--"

"Yes indeed. It is like the watch below in dirty-weather."

"Excuse me--I don't quite understand--"

"At sea," explained the squire. "There is no luxury like being below when
the decks are wet and there is heavy weather about."

"I should think so," said Mrs. Goddard. "Have you been at sea much, Mr.
Juxon?"

"Thirty years," returned the squire laconically. Mrs. Goddard looked at
him in astonishment.

"You don't mean to say you have been a sailor all your life?"

"Does that surprise you? I have been a sailor since I was twelve years
old. But I got very tired of it. It is a hard life."

"Were you in the navy, Mr. Juxon?" asked Mrs. Goddard eagerly, feeling
that she was at last upon the track of some information in regard to his
past life.

"Yes--I was in the navy," answered the squire, slowly. "And then I was at
college, and then in the navy again. At last I entered the merchant
service and commanded my own ships for nearly twenty years."

"How very extraordinary! Why then, you must have been everywhere."

"Very nearly. But I would much rather be in Billingsfield."

"You never told me," said Mrs. Goddard almost reproachfully. "What a
change it must have been for you, from the sea to the life of a country
gentleman!"

"It is what I always wanted."

"But you do not seem at all like the sea captains one hears about--"

"Well, perhaps not," replied the squire thoughtfully. "There are a great
many different classes of sea captains. I always had a taste for books. A
man can read a great deal on a long voyage. I have sometimes been at sea
for more than two years at a time. Besides, I had a fairly good education
and--well, I suppose it was because I was a gentleman to begin with and
was more than ten years in the Royal Navy. All that makes a great
difference. Have you ever made a long voyage, Mrs. Goddard?"

"I have crossed the channel," said she. "But I wish you would tell me
something more about your life."

"Oh no--it is very dull, all that. You always make me talk about myself,"
said the squire in a tone of protestation.

"It is very interesting."

"But--could we not vary the conversation by talking about you a little?"
suggested Mr. Juxon.

"Oh no! Please--" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard rather nervously. She grew pale
and busied herself again with the tea. "Do tell me more about your
voyages. I suppose that was the way you collected so many beautiful
things, was it not?"

"Yes, I suppose so," answered the squire, looking at her curiously. "In
fact of course it was. I was a great deal in China and South America and
India, and in all sorts of places where one picks up things."

"And in Turkey, too, where you got Stamboul?"

"Yes. He was so wet that I left him outside to day. Did not want to spoil
your carpet."

The squire had a way of turning the subject when he seemed upon the point
of talking about himself which was very annoying to Mrs. Goddard. But she
had not entirely recovered her equanimity and for the moment had lost
control of the squire. Besides she had a headache that day.

"Stamboul does not get the benefit of the contrast we were talking about
at first," she remarked, in order to say something.

"I could not possibly bring him in," returned the squire looking at her
again. "Excuse me, Mrs. Goddard--I don't mean to be inquisitive you know,
but--I always want to be of any use."

She looked at him inquiringly.

"I mean, to be frank, I am afraid that something is giving you trouble. I
have noticed it for some time. You know, if I can be of any use, if I can
help you in any way--you have only to say the word."

Again she looked at him. She did not know why it was so, but the
genuinely friendly tone in which he made the offer touched her. She was
surprised, however; she could not understand why he should think she was
in trouble, and indeed she was in no greater distress than she had
suffered during the greater part of the last three years.

"You are very kind, Mr. Juxon. But there is nothing the matter--I have a
headache."

"Oh," said the squire, "I beg your pardon." He looked away and seemed
embarrassed.

"You have done too much already," said Mrs. Goddard, fearing that she had
not sufficiently acknowledged his offer of assistance.

"I cannot do too much. That is impossible," he said in a tone of
conviction. "I have very few friends, Mrs. Goddard, and I like to think
that you are one of the best of them."

"I am sure--I don't know what to say, Mr. Juxon," she answered, somewhat
startled by the directness of his speech. "I am sure you have always been
most kind, and I hope you do not think me ungrateful."

"I? You? No--dear me, please never mention it! The fact is, Mrs.
Goddard--" he stopped and smoothed Ms hair. "What particularly
disagreeable weather," he remarked irrelevantly, looking out of the
window at the driving sleet.

Mrs. Goddard looked down and slowly stirred her tea. She was pale and her
hand trembled a little, but no one could have guessed that she was
suffering any strong emotion. Mr. Juxon looked towards the window, and
the grey light of the winter's afternoon fell coldly upon his square
sunburned face and carefully trimmed beard. He was silent for a moment,
and then, still looking away from his companion, he continued in a less
hesitating tone.

"The fact is, I have been thinking a great deal of late," he said, "and
it has struck me that your friendship has grown to be the most important
thing in my life." He paused again and turned his hat round upon his
knee. Still Mrs. Goddard said nothing, and as he did not look at her he
did not perceive that she was unnaturally agitated.

"I have told you what my life has been," he continued presently. "I have
been a sailor. I made a little money. I finally inherited my uncle's
estate here. I will tell you anything else you would like to ask--I don't
think I ever did anything to conceal. I am forty-two years old. I have
about five thousand a year and I am naturally economical. I would like to
make you a proposal--a very respectful proposal, Mrs. Goddard--"

Mrs. Goddard uttered a faint exclamation of surprise and fell back in her
chair, staring with wide eyes at the squire, her cheeks very pale and her
lips white. He was too much absorbed in what he was saying to notice the
short smothered ejaculation, and he was too much embarrassed to look at
her.

"Mrs. Goddard," he said, his voice trembling slightly, "will you marry
me?"

He was not prepared for the result of his speech. He had pondered it for
some time and had come to the conclusion that it was best to say as
little as possible and to say it plainly. It was an honourable proposal
of marriage from a man in middle life to a lady he had known and
respected for many months; there was very little romance about it; he did
not intend that there should be any. As soon as he had spoken he turned
his head and looked to her for his answer. Mrs. Goddard had clasped her
small white hands over her face and had turned her head away from him
against the cushion of the high backed chair. The squire felt very
uncomfortable in the dead silence, broken only by the sleet driving
against the window panes with a hissing, rattling sound, and by the
singing of the tea-kettle. For some seconds, which to Juxon seemed like
an eternity, Mrs. Goddard did not move. At last she suddenly dropped
her hands and looked into the squire's eyes. He was startled by the ashen
hue of her face.

"It is impossible," she said, shortly, in broken tones. But the squire
was prepared for some difficulties.

"I do not see the impossibility," he said quite calmly. "Of course,
I would not press you for an answer, my dear Mrs. Goddard. I am afraid
I have been very abrupt, but I will go away, I will leave you to
consider--"

"Oh no, no!" cried the poor lady in great distress. "It is quite
impossible--I assure you it is quite, quite impossible!"

"I don't know," said Mr. Juxon, who saw that she was deeply moved, but
was loath to abandon the field without a further struggle. "I am not a
very young man, it is true--but I am not a very old one either. You, my
dear Mrs. Goddard, have been a widow for some years--"

"I?" cried Mrs. Goddard with a wild hysterical laugh. "I! Oh God of
mercy! I wish I were." Again she buried her face in the cushion. Her
bosom heaved violently.

The squire started as though he had been struck, and the blood rushed to
his brown face so that the great veins on his temples stood out like
cords.

"Did I--did I understand you to say that--your husband is living?" he
asked in a strong, loud voice, ringing with emotion.

Mrs. Goddard moved a little and seemed to make a great effort to speak.

"Yes," she said very faintly. The squire rose to his feet and paced the
room in terrible agitation.

"But where?" he asked, stopping suddenly in his walk. "Mrs. Goddard, I
think I have a right to ask where he is--why you have never spoken of
him?"

By a supreme effort the unfortunate lady raised herself from her seat
supporting herself upon one hand, and faced the squire with wildly
staring eyes.

"You have a right to know," she said. "He is in Portland--sentenced to
twelve years hard labour for forgery."

She said it all, to the end, and then fell back into her chair. But she
did not hide her face this time. The fair pathetic features were quite
motionless and white, without any expression, and her hands lay with the
palms turned upwards on her knees.

Charles James Juxon was a man of few words, not given to using strong
language on any occasion. But he was completely overcome by the horror of
the thing. He turned icy cold as he stood still, rooted to the spot, and
he uttered aloud one strong and solemn ejaculation, more an invocation
than an oath, as though he called on heaven to witness the misery he
looked upon. He gazed at the colourless, inanimate face of the poor lady
and walked slowly to the window. There he stood for fully five minutes,
motionless, staring out at the driving sleet.

Mrs. Goddard had fainted away, but it did not occur to the squire to
attempt to recall her to her senses. It seemed merciful that she should
have lost consciousness even for a moment. Indeed she needed no help, for
in a few minutes she slowly opened her eyes and closed them, then opened
them again and saw Mr. Juxon's figure darkening the window against the
grey light.

"Mr. Juxon," she said faintly, "come here, please."

The squire started and turned. Then he came and sat down beside her. His
face was very stern and grave, and he said nothing.

"Mr. Juxon," said Mrs. Goddard, speaking in a low voice, but with far
more calm than he could have expected, "you have a right to know my
story. You have been very kind to me, you have made an honourable offer
to me, you have said you were my friend. I ought to have told you before.
If I had had any idea of what was passing in your mind, I would have told
you, cost what it might."

Mr. Juxon gravely bowed his head. She was quite right, he thought. He had
a right to know all. With all his kind-heartedness he was a stern man by
nature.

"Yes," continued Mrs. Goddard, "you have every right to know. My
husband," her voice trembled, "was the head of an important firm in
London. I was the only child of his partner. Not long after my father's
death I married Mr. Goddard. He was an extravagant man of brilliant
tastes. I had a small fortune of my own which my father had settled upon
me, independent of his share in the firm. My guardians, of whom my
husband was one, advised me to leave my father's fortune in the concern.
When I came of age, a year after my marriage, I agreed to do it. My
husband--I never knew it till long afterwards--was very rash. He
speculated on the Exchange and tampered with the deposits placed in his
hands. We lived in great luxury. I knew nothing of his affairs. Three
years ago, after we had been married nearly ten years, the firm failed.
It was a fraudulent bankruptcy. My husband fled but was captured and
brought back. It appeared that at the last moment, in the hope of
retrieving his position and saving the firm, he had forged the name of
one of his own clients for a large amount. We had a country place at
Putney which he had given to me. I sold it, with all my jewels and most
of my possessions. I would have given up everything I possessed, but I
thought of Nellie--poor little Nellie. The lawyers assured me that I
ought to keep my own little fortune. I kept about five hundred a year. It
is more than I need, but it seemed very little then. The lawyer who
conducted the defence, such as it was, advised me to go abroad, but I
would not. Then he spoke of Mr. Ambrose, who had educated his son, and
gave me a note to him. I came here and I told Mr. Ambrose my whole story.
I only wanted to be alone--I thought I did right--"

Her courage had sustained her so far, but it had been a great effort. Her
voice trembled and broke and at last the tears began to glisten in her
eyes.

"Does Nellie know?" asked the squire, who had sat very gravely by her
side, but who was in reality deeply moved.

"No--she thinks he--that he is dead," faltered Mrs. Goddard. Then she
fairly burst into tears and sobbed passionately, covering her face and
rocking herself from side to side.

"My dear friend," said Mr. Juxon very kindly and laying one hand upon her
arm, "pray try and calm yourself. Forgive me--I beg you to forgive me for
having caused you so much pain--"

"Do you still call me a friend?" sobbed the poor lady.

"Indeed I do," quoth the squire stoutly. And he meant it. Mrs. Goddard
dropped her hands and stared into the fire through her falling tears.

"I think you behaved very honourably--very generously," continued Mr.
Juxon, who did not know precisely how to console her, and indeed stood
much in need of consolation himself. "Perhaps I had better leave you--you
are very much agitated--you must need rest--would you not rather that I
should go?"

"Yes--it is better," said she, still staring at the fire. "You know all
about me now," she added in a tone of pathetic regret. The squire rose to
his feet.

"I hope," he said with some hesitation, "that this--this very unfortunate
day will not prevent our being friends--better friends than before?"

Mrs. Goddard looked up gratefully through her tears.

"How good you are!" she said softly.

"Not at all--I am not at all good--I only want to be your friend.
Good-bye--G--God bless you!" He seized her hand and squeezed it and then
hurried out of the room. A moment later he was crossing the road with
Stamboul, who was very tired of waiting, bounding before him.

The squire was not a romantic character. He was a strong plain man, who
had seen the world and was used to most forms of danger and to a good
many forms of suffering. He was kind-hearted and generous, capable of
feeling sincere sympathy for others, and under certain circumstances of
being deeply wounded himself. He had indeed a far more refined nature
than he himself suspected and on this memorable day he had experienced
more emotions than he remembered to have felt in the course of many
years.

After long debate and after much searching inquiry into his own motives
he had determined to offer himself to Mrs. Goddard, and he had
accordingly done so in his own straightforward manner. It had seemed
a very important action in his life, a very solemn step, but he was not
prepared for the acute sense of disappointment which he felt when Mrs.
Goddard first said it was impossible for her to accept him, still less
had he anticipated the extraordinary story which she had told him, in
explanation of her refusal. His ideas were completely upset. That Mrs.
Goddard was not a widow after all, was almost as astounding as that she
should prove to be the wife of a felon. But Mr. Juxon was no less
persuaded that she herself was a perfectly good and noble woman, than he
had been before. He felt that he would like to cut the throat of the
villain himself; but he resolved that he would more than ever try to be a
good friend to Mrs. Goddard.

He walked slowly through the storm towards his house, his broad figure
facing the wind and sleet with as much ease as a steamer forging against
a head sea. He was perfectly indifferent to the weather; but Stamboul
slunk along at his heels, shielding himself from the driving wet snow
behind his master's sturdy legs. The squire was very much disturbed. The
sight of his own solemn butler affected him strangely. He stared about
the library in a vacant way, as though he had never seen the place
before. The realisation of his own calm and luxurious life seemed
unnatural, and his thoughts went back to the poor weeping woman he had
just left. She, too, had enjoyed all this, and more also. She had
probably been richer than he. And now she was living on five hundred a
year in one of his own cottages, hiding her shame in desolate
Billingsfield, the shame of her husband, the forger.

It was such a hopeless position, the squire thought. No one could help
her, no one could do anything for her. For many weeks, revolving the
situation in his mind, he had amused himself by thinking how she would
look when she should be mistress of the Hall, and wondering whether
little Nellie would call him "father," or merely "Mr. Juxon." And now,
she turned out to be the wife of a forger, sentenced to hard labour in a
convict prison, for twelve years. For twelve years--nearly three must
have elapsed already. In nine years more Goddard would be out again.
Would he claim his wife? Of course--he would come back to her for
support. And poor little Nellie thought he was dead! It would be a
terrible day when she had to be told. If he only would die in
prison!--but men sentenced to hard labour rarely die. They are well cared
for. It is a healthy life. He would certainly live through it and come
back to claim his wife. Poor Mrs. Goddard! her troubles were not ended
yet, though the State had provided her with a respite of twelve years.

The squire sat long in his easy-chair in the great library, and forgot to
dress for dinner--he always dressed, even though he was quite alone. But
the solemn face of his butler betrayed neither emotion nor surprise when
the master of the Hall walked into the dining-room in his knickerbockers.




CHAPTER XII.


When Nellie came home from the vicarage she found her mother looking very
ill. There were dark rings under her eyes, and her features were drawn
and tear-stained, while the beautiful waves of her brown hair had lost
their habitual neatness and symmetry. The child noticed these things,
with a child's quickness, but explained them on the ground that her
mother's headache was probably much worse. Mrs. Goddard accepted the
explanation and on the following day Nellie had forgotten all about it;
but her mother remembered it long, and it was many days before she
recovered entirely from the shock of her interview with the squire. The
latter did not come to see her as usual, but on the morning after his
visit he sent her down a package of books and some orchids from his
hothouses. He thought it best to leave her to herself for a little while;
the very sight of him, he argued, would be painful to her, and any
meeting with her would be painful to himself. He did not go out of the
house, but spent the whole day in his library among his books, not indeed
reading, but pretending to himself that he was very busy. Being a strong
and sensible man he did not waste time in bemoaning his sorrows, but he
thought about them long and earnestly. The more he thought, the more it
appeared to him that Mrs. Goddard was the person who deserved pity rather
than he himself. His mind dwelt on the terrors of her position in case
her husband should return and claim his wife and daughter when the twelve
years were over, and he thought with horror of Nellie's humiliation, if
at the age of twenty she should discover that her father during all these
years had not been honourably dead and buried, but had been suffering the
punishment of a felon in Portland. That the only attempt he had ever made
to enter the matrimonial state should have been so singularly unfortunate
was indeed a matter which caused him sincere sorrow; he had thought too
often of being married to Mary Goddard to be able to give up the idea
without a sigh. But it is due to him to say that in the midst of his own
disappointment he thought much more of her sorrows than of his own, a
state of mind most probably due to his temperament.

He saw also how impossible it was to console Mrs. Goddard or even to
alleviate the distress of mind which she must constantly feel. Her
destiny was accomplished in part, and the remainder seemed absolutely
inevitable. No one could prevent her husband from leaving his prison when
his crime was expiated; and no one could then prevent him from joining
his wife and ending his life under her roof. At least so it seemed.
Endless complications would follow. Mrs. Goddard would certainly have to
leave Billingsfield--no one could expect the Ambroses or the squire
himself to associate with a convict forger. Mr. Juxon vaguely wondered
whether he should live another nine years to see the end of all this, and
he inwardly determined to go to sea again rather than to witness such
misery. He could not see, no one could see how things could possibly turn
out in any other way. It would have been some comfort to have gone to the
vicar, and to have discussed with him the possibilities of Mrs. Goddard's
future. The vicar was a man after his own heart, honest, reliable,
charitable and brave; but Mr. Juxon thought that it would not be quite
loyal towards Mrs. Goddard if he let any one else know that he was
acquainted with her story.

For two days he stayed at home and then he went to see her. To his
surprise she received him very quietly, much as she usually did, without
betraying any emotion; whereupon he wished that he had not allowed two
days to pass without making his usual visit. Mrs. Goddard almost wished
so too. She had been so much accustomed to regard the squire as a friend,
and she had so long been used to the thought that Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose
knew of her past trouble, that the fact of the squire becoming acquainted
with her history seemed to her less important, now that it was
accomplished, than it seemed to the squire himself. She had long thought
of telling him all; she had seriously contemplated doing so when he first
came to Billingsfield, and now at last the thing was done. She was glad
of it. She was no longer in a false position; he could never again think
of marrying her; they could henceforth meet as friends, since he was so
magnanimous as to allow their friendship to exist. Her pride had suffered
so terribly in the beginning that it was past suffering now. She felt
that she was in the position of a suppliant asking only for a quiet
resting-place for herself and her daughter, and she was grateful to the
people who gave her what she asked, feeling that she had fallen among
good Samaritans, whereas in merry England it would have been easy for her
to have fallen among priests and Pharisees.

So it came about that in a few days her relations with Mr. Juxon were
re-established upon a new basis, but more firmly and satisfactorily than
before, seeing that now there was no possibility of mistake. And for a
long time it seemed as though matters would go on as before. Neither Mrs.
Goddard nor the squire ever referred to the interview on that memorable
stormy afternoon, and so far as the squire could judge his life and hers
might go on with perfect tranquillity until it should please the powers
that be and the governor of Portland to set Mr. Walter Goddard at
liberty. Heaven only knew what would happen then, but it was provided
that there should be plenty of time to prepare for anything which might
ensue. The point upon which Mrs. Goddard had not spoken plainly was that
which concerned her probable treatment of her husband after his
liberation. She had passed that question over in silence. She had
probably never dared to decide. Most probably she would at the last
minute seek some safer retreat than Billingsfield and make tip her mind
to hide for the rest of her life. But Mr. Juxon had heard of women who
had carried charity as far as to receive back their husbands under even
worse circumstances; women were soft-hearted creatures, reflected the
squire, and capable of anything.

Few people in such a situation could have acted consistently as though
nothing had happened. But Mr. Juxon's extremely reticent nature found it
easy to bury other people's important secrets at least as deeply as he
buried the harmless details of his own honest life. Not a hair of his
smooth head was ruffled, not a line of his square manly face was
disturbed. He looked and acted precisely as he had looked and acted
before. His butler remarked that he ate a little less heartily of late,
and that on one evening, as has been recorded, the squire forgot to
dress for dinner. But the butler in his day had seen greater
eccentricities than these; he had the greatest admiration for Mr. Juxon
and was not inclined to cavil at small things. A real gentleman, of the
good sort, who dressed for dinner when he was alone, who never took too
much wine, who never bullied the servants nor quarrelled unjustly with
the bills, was, as the butler expressed it, "not to be sneezed at, on
no account." The place was a little dull, but the functionary was well
stricken in years and did not like hard work. Mr. Juxon seemed to be
conscious that as he never had visitors at the Hall and as there were
consequently no "tips," his staff was entitled to an occasional fee,
which he presented always with great regularity, and which had the
desired effect. He was a generous man as well as a just.

The traffic in roses and orchids and new books continued as usual between
the Hall and the cottage, and for many weeks nothing extraordinary
occurred. Mrs. Ambrose and Mrs. Goddard met frequently, and the only
difference to be observed in the manner of the former was that she
mentioned John Short very often, and every time she mentioned him she
fixed her grey eyes sternly upon Mrs. Goddard, who however did not notice
the scrutiny, or, if she did, was not in the least disturbed by it. For a
long time Mrs. Ambrose entertained a feeble intention of addressing Mrs.
Goddard directly upon the subject of John's affections, but the longer
she put off doing so, the harder it seemed to do it. Mrs. Ambrose had
great faith in the sternness of her eye under certain circumstances, and
seeing that Mrs. Goddard never winced, she gradually fell into the belief
that John had been the more to blame, if there was any blame in the
matter. She had indeed succeeded in the first instance, by methods of her
own which have been heretofore detailed, in extracting a sort of
reluctant admission from her husband; but since that day he had proved
obdurate to all entreaty. Once only he had said with considerable
impatience that John was a very silly boy, and was much better engaged
with his books at college than in running after Mrs. Goddard. That was
all, and gradually as the regular and methodical life at the vicarage
effaced the memory of the doings at Christmas time, the good Mrs.
Ambrose forgot that anything unpleasant had ever occurred. There was no
disturbance of the existing relations and everything went on as before
for many weeks. The February thaw set in early and the March winds began
to blow before February was fairly out. Nat Barker the octogenarian
cripple, who had the reputation of being a weather prophet, was
understood to have said that the spring was "loike to be forrard t'year,"
and the minds of the younger inhabitants were considerably relieved. Not
that Nat Barker's prophecies were usually fulfilled; no one ever
remembered them at the time when they might have been verified. But they
were always made at the season when people had nothing to do but to talk
about them. Mr. Thomas Reid, the conservative sexton, turned up his nose
at them, and said he "wished Nat Barker had to dig a parish depth grave
in three hours without a drop of nothin' to wet his pipe with, and if he
didden fine that groun' oncommon owdacious Thomas Reid he didden know.
They didden know nothin', sir, them parish cripples." Wherewith the
worthy sexton took his way with a battered tin can to get his "fours"
at the Feathers. He did not patronise the Duke's Head. It was too
new-fangled for him, and he suspected his arch enemy, Mr. Abraham Boosey,
of putting a rat or two into the old beer to make it "draw," which
accounted for its being so "hard." But Mr. Abraham Boosey was the
undertaker, and he, Thomas Reid, was the sexton, and it did not do to
express these views too loudly, lest perchance Mr. Boosey should, just in
his play, construct a coffin or two just too big for the regulation
grave, and thereby leave Mr. Reid in the lurch. For the undertaker and
the gravedigger are as necessary to each other, as Mr. Reid maintained,
as a pair of blackbirds in a hedge.

But the spring was "forrard t'year" and the weather was consequently even
more detestable than usual at that season. The roads were heavy. The rain
seemed never weary of pouring down and the wind never tired of blowing.
The wet and leafless creepers beat against the walls of the cottage, and
the chimneys smoked both there and at the vicarage. The rooms were
pervaded with a disagreeable smell of damp coal smoke, and the fires
struggled desperately to burn against the overwhelming odds of rain and
wind which came down the chimneys. Mrs. Goddard never remembered to have
been so uncomfortable during the two previous winters she had spent in
Billingsfield, and even Nellie grew impatient and petulant. The only
bright spot in those long days seemed to be made by the regular visits of
Mr. Juxon, by the equally regular bi-weekly appearance of the Ambroses
when they came to tea, and by the little dinners at the vicarage. The
weather had grown so wet and the roads so bad that on these latter
occasions the vicar sent his dogcart with Reynolds and the old mare,
Strawberry, to fetch his two guests. Even Mr. Juxon, who always walked
when he could, had got into the habit of driving down to the cottage
in a strange-looking gig which he had imported from America, and which,
among all the many possessions of the squire, alone attracted the
unfavourable comment of his butler. He would have preferred to see a good
English dogcart, high in the seat and wheels, at the door of the Hall,
instead of that outlandish vehicle; but Joseph Ruggles, the groom,
explained to him that it was easier to clean than a dogcart, and that
when it rained he sat inside with the squire.

On a certain evening in February, towards the end of the month, Mr. and
Mrs. Ambrose and Mr. Juxon came to have tea with Mrs. Goddard. Mr. Juxon
had at first not been regularly invited to these entertainments. They
were perhaps not thought worthy of his grandeur; at all events both the
vicar's wife and Mrs. Goddard had asked him very rarely. But as time went
on and Mr. Juxon's character developed under the eyes of the little
Billingsfield society, it had become apparent to every one that he was a
very simple man, making no pretensions whatever to any superiority on
account of his station. They grew more and more fond of him, and ended by
asking him to their small sociable evenings. On these occasions it
generally occurred that the squire and the vicar fell into conversation
about classical and literary subjects while the two ladies talked of the
little incidents of Billingsfield life, of Tom Judd's wife and of Joe
Staines, the choir boy, who was losing his voice, and of similar topics
of interest in the very small world in which they lived.

The present evening had not been at all a remarkable one so far as the
talk was concerned. The drenching rain, the tendency of the fire to
smoke, the general wetness and condensed depravity of the atmosphere had
affected the spirits of the little party. They were not gay, and they
broke up early. It was not nine o'clock when all had gone, and Mrs.
Goddard and little Eleanor were left alone by the side of their
drawing-room fire. The child sat upon a footstool and leaned her head
against her mother's knee. Mrs. Goddard herself was thoughtful and
sad, without precisely knowing why. She generally looked forward with
pleasure to meeting the Ambroses, but this evening she had been rather
disappointed. The conversation had dragged, and the excellent Mrs.
Ambrose had been more than usually prosy. Nellie had complained of a
headache and leaned wearily against her mother's knee.

"Tell me a story, mamma--won't you? Like the ones you used to tell me
when I was quite a little girl."

"Dear child," said her mother, who was not thinking of story-telling, "I
am afraid I have forgotten all the ones I ever knew. Besides, darling, it
is time for you to go to bed."

"I don't want to go to bed, mamma. It is such a horrid night. The wind
keeps me awake."

"You will not sleep at all if I tell you a story," objected Mrs. Goddard.

"Mr. Juxon tells me such nice stories," said Nellie, reproachfully.

"What are they about, dear?"

"Oh, his stories are beautiful. They are always about ships and the blue
sea and wonderful desert islands where he has been. What a wonderful man
he is, mamma, is not he?"

"Yes, dear, he talks very interestingly." Mrs. Goddard stroked Nellie's
brown curls and looked into the fire.

"He told me that once, ever so many years ago--he must be very old,
mamma--" Nellie paused and looked up inquiringly.

"Well, darling--not so very, very old. I think he is over forty."

"Over forty--four times eleven--he is not four times as old as I am.
Almost, though. All his stories are ever so many years ago. He said he
was sailing away ever so far, in a perfectly new ship, and the name of
the ship was--let me see, what was the name? I think it was--"

Mrs. Goddard started suddenly and laid her hand on the child's shoulder.

"Did you hear anything, Nellie?" she asked quickly. Nellie looked up in
some surprise.

"No, mamma. When? Just now? It must have been the wind. It is such a
horrid night. The name of the ship was the 'Zephyr'--I remember, now."
She looked up again to see if her mother was listening to the story. Mrs.
Goddard looked pale and glanced uneasily towards the closed window. She
had probably been mistaken.

"And where did the ship sail to, Nellie dear?" she asked, smoothing the
child's curls again and forcing herself to smile.

"Oh--the ship was a perfectly new ship and it was the most beautiful
weather in the world. They were sailing away ever so far, towards the
straits of Magellan. I was so glad because I knew where the straits of
Magellan were--and Mr. Juxon was immensely astonished. But I had been
learning about the Terra del Fuego, and the people who were frozen
there, in my geography that very morning--was not it lucky? So I knew all
about it--mamma, how nervous you are! It is nothing but the wind. I wish
you would listen to my story--"

"I am listening, darling," said Mrs. Goddard, making a strong effort to
overcome her agitation and drawing the child closer to her. "Go on,
sweetheart--you were in the straits of Magellan, you said, sailing
away--"

"Mr. Juxon was, mamma," said Nellie correcting her mother with the
asperity of a child who does not receive all the attention it expects.

"Of course, dear, Mr. Juxon, and the ship was the 'Zephyr.'"

"Yes--the 'Zephyr,'" repeated Nellie, who was easily pacified. "It was at
Christmas time he said--but that is summer in the southern hemisphere,"
she added, proud of her knowledge. "So it was very fine weather. And Mr.
Juxon was walking up and down the deck in the afternoon, smoking a
cigar--"

"He never smokes, dear," interrupted Mrs. Goddard, glad to show Nellie
that she was listening.

"Well, but he did then, because he said so," returned Nellie unmoved.
"And as he walked and looked out--sailors always look out, you know--he
saw the most wonderful thing, close to the ship--the most wonderful thing
he ever saw," added Nellie with some redundance of expression.

"Was it a whale, child?" asked her mother, staring into the fire and
trying to pay attention.

"A whale, mamma!" repeated Nellie contemptuously. "As if there were
anything remarkable about a whale! Mr. Juxon has seen billions of whales,
I am sure."

"Well, what was it, dear?"

"It was the most awfully tremendous thing with green and blue scales, a
thousand times as big as the ship--oh mamma! What was that?"

Nellie started up from her stool and knelt beside her mother, looking
towards the window. Mrs. Goddard was deathly pale and grasped the arm of
her chair.

"Somebody knocked at the window, mamma," said Nellie breathlessly. "And
then somebody said 'Mary'--quite loud. Oh mamma, what can it be?"

"Mary?" repeated Mrs. Goddard as though she were in a dream.

"Yes--quite loud. Oh mamma! it must be Mary's young man--he does
sometimes come in the evening."

"Mary's young man, child?" Mrs. Goddard's heart leaped. Her cook's name
was Mary, as well as her own. Nellie naturally never associated the name
with her mother, as she never heard anybody call her by it.

"Yes mamma. Don't you know? The postman--the man with the piebald horse."
The explanation was necessary, as Mrs. Goddard rarely received any
letters and probably did not know the postman by sight.

"At this time of night!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard. "It is too bad. Mary is
gone to bed."

"Perhaps he thinks you are gone to the vicarage and that Mary is sitting
up for you in the drawing-room," suggested Nellie with much good sense.
"Well, he can't come in, can he, mamma?"

"Certainly not," said her mother. "But I think you had much better go to
bed, my dear. It is half-past nine." She spoke indistinctly, almost
thickly, and seemed to be making a violent effort to control herself. But
Nellie had settled down upon her stool again, and did not notice her
mother.

"Oh not yet," said she. "I have not nearly finished about the
sea-serpent. Mr. Juxon said it was not like anything in the world. Do
listen, mamma! It is the most wonderful story you ever heard. It was
all covered with blue and green scales, and it rolled, and rolled, and
rolled, and rolled, till at last it rolled up against the side of the
ship with such a tremendous bump that Mr. Juxon fell right down on his
back."

"Yes dear," said Mrs. Goddard mechanically, as the child paused.

"You don't seem to mind at all!" cried Nellie, who felt that her efforts
to amuse her mother were not properly appreciated. "He fell right down on
his back and hurt himself awfully."

"That was very sad," said Mrs. Goddard. "Did he catch the sea-serpent
afterwards ?"

"Catch the sea-serpent! Why mamma, don't you know that nobody has ever
caught the sea-serpent? Why, hardly anybody has ever seen him, even!"

"Yes dear, but I thought Mr. Juxon--"

"Of course, Mr. Juxon is the most wonderful man--but he could not catch
the sea-serpent. Just fancy! When he got up from his fall, he looked and
he saw him quite half a mile away. He must have gone awfully fast, should
not you think so? Because, you know, it was only a minute."

"Yes, my child; and it is a beautiful story, and you told it so nicely.
It is very interesting and you must tell me another to-morrow. But now,
dear, you must really go to bed, because I am going to bed, too. That man
startled me so," she said, passing her small white hand over her pale
forehead and then staring into the fire.

"Well, I don't wonder," answered Nellie in a patronising tone. "Such a
dreadful night too! Of course, it would startle anybody. But he won't try
again, and you can scold Mary to-morrow and then she can scold her young
man."

The child spoke so naturally that all doubts vanished from Mrs. Goddard's
mind. She reflected that children are much more apt to see things as they
are, than grown people whose nerves are out of order. Nellie's
conclusions were perfectly logical, and it seemed folly to doubt them.
She determined that Mary should certainly be scolded on the morrow and
she unconsciously resolved in her mind the words she should use; for she
was rather a timid woman and stood a little in awe of her stalwart
Berkshire cook, with her mighty arms and her red face, and her uncommonly
plain language.

"Yes dear," she said more quietly than she had been able to speak for
some time, "I have no doubt you are quite right. I thought I heard his
footsteps just now, going down the path. So he will not trouble us any
more to-night. And now darling, kneel down and say your prayers, and then
we will go to bed."

So Nellie, reassured by the news that her mother was going to bed, too,
knelt down as she had done every night during the eleven years of her
life, and clasped her hands together, beneath her mother's. Then she
cleared her throat, then she glanced at the clock, then she looked for
one moment into the sweet serious violet eyes that looked down on her so
lovingly, and then at last she bent her lovely little head and began to
say her prayers, there, by the fire, at her mother's knees, while angry
storm howled fiercely without and shook the closed panes and shutters
and occasional drops of rain, falling down the short chimney, sputtered
in the smouldering coal fire.

"Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be Thy Name, Thy Kingdom
come--"

Nellie gave a loud scream and springing up from her knees flung her arms
around her mother's neck, in uttermost, wildest terror.

"Mamma, mamma!" she cried looking, and yet hardly daring to look, back
towards the closed window. "It called 'MARY GODDARD'! It is you, mamma!
Oh!"

There was no mistaking it this time. While Nellie was saying her prayer
there had come three sharp and distinct raps upon the wooden shutter, and
a voice, not loud but clear, penetrating into the room in spite of wind
and storm and rain.

"Mary Goddard! Mary Goddard!" it said.

Mrs. Goddard started to her feet, lifting Nellie bodily from the ground
in her agony of terror; staring round the room wildly as though in search
of some possible escape.

"I must come in! I will come in!" said the voice again.

"Oh don't let him in! Mamma! Don't let him in!" moaned the terrified
child upon her breast, clinging to her and weighing her down, and
grasping her neck and arm with convulsive strength.

But in moments of great agitation timid people, or people who are thought
timid, not uncommonly do brave things. Mrs. Goddard unclasped Nellie's
hold and forced the terror-struck child into a deep chair.

"Stay there, darling," she said with unnatural calmness. "Do not be
afraid. I will go and open the door."

Nellie was now too much frightened to resist. Mrs. Goddard went out into
the little passage which was dimly lighted by a hanging lamp, and closed
the door of the drawing-room behind her. She could hear Nellie's
occasional convulsive sobs distinctly. For one moment she paused, her
right hand on the lock of the front door, her left hand pressed to her
side, leaning against the wall of the passage. Then she turned the key
and the handle and drew the door in towards her. A violent gust of wind,
full of cold and drenching rain, whirled into the passage and almost
blinded her. The lamp flickered in the lantern overhead. But she looked
boldly out, facing the wind and weather.

"Come in!" she called in a low voice.

Immediately there was a sound as of footsteps coming from the direction
of the drawing-room window, across the wet slate flags which surrounded
the cottage, and a moment afterwards, peering through the darkness, Mrs.
Goddard saw a man with a ghastly face standing before her in the rain.




CHAPTER XIII.


Mrs. Goddard's heart stood still as she looked at the wretched man, and
tried to discover her husband's face, even a resemblance to him, in the
haggard features she saw close before her. But he gave her small time for
reflection; so soon as he had recognised her he sprang past her into the
passage and pulling her after him closed the door.

"Mary--don't you know me?" he said, in low tones. "You must save me--they
are after me--" He stood close beside her in the narrow way, beneath
the small lamp; he tried to put his arm around her and he bent down and
brought his ghastly face close to hers. But she drew back as from a
contamination. She was horrified, and it was a natural movement. She knew
his voice even better than his features, now that he spoke. He pressed
nearer to her and she thrust him back with her hands. Then suddenly a
thought struck her; she took him by the sleeve and led him into the
dining-room. There was no light there; she pushed him in.

"Stay there one minute--"

"No--no, you won't call--"

"I will save you--there is--there is somebody in the drawing-room."
Before he could answer her she was gone, leaving him alone in the dark.
He listened intently, not venturing to leave the spot where she had
placed him; he thought he heard voices and footsteps, but no one came out
into the passage. It seemed an eternity to wait. At last she came,
bearing a lighted candle in her hand. She carefully shut the door of the
dining-room behind her and put the light upon the table. She moved like a
person in a dream.

"Sit down," she said, pointing to a chair. "Are you hungry?" His sunken
eyes sparkled. She brought food and ale and set them before him. He ate
and drank voraciously in silence. She sat at the opposite side of the
table--the solitary candle between them, and shading her eyes with one
hand she gazed at his face.

Walter Goddard was a man at least forty years of age. He had been thought
very handsome once. He had light blue eyes and a fair skin with flaxen
hair--now cropped short and close to his head. There was nearly a
fortnight's growth of beard upon his face, but it was not yet sufficient
to hide his mouth and chin. He had formerly worn a heavy moustache and
it was chiefly the absence of it which now made it hard for his wife to
recognise him. A battered hat, drenched and dripping with rain, shaded
his brows. Possibly he was ashamed to remove it. His mouth was small and
weak and his jaw was pointed. His whole expression was singularly
disagreeable--his hands were filthy, and his face was not clean. About
his neck was twisted a ragged woollen comforter, and he wore a
smock-frock which was now soaked with water and clung to his thin figure.
He devoured the food his wife had brought him, shivering from time to
time as though he were still cold.

Mrs. Goddard watched him in silence. She had done mechanically according
to her first instinct, had led him in and had given him food. But she had
not recovered herself sufficiently from her first horror and astonishment
to realise her situation. At last she spoke.

"How did you escape?" she asked. He bent lower than before, over his
plate and would not look at her.

"Don't ask me," he answered shortly.

"Why did you do it?" she inquired again. Goddard laughed harshly; his
voice was hoarse and cracked.

"Why did I do it!" he repeated. "Did you ever hear of any one who would
not escape from prison if he had the chance? Don't look at me like that,
Mary--"

"I am sorry for you," she said.

"You don't seem very glad to see me," he answered roughly. "I might have
known it."

"Yes, you might have known it."

It seemed a very hard and cruel thing to say, and Mary Goddard was very
far from being a cruel woman by nature; but she was stunned by fear and
disgust and horrified by the possibilities of harm suddenly brought
before her.

Goddard pushed his plate away and leaned his elbows upon the table
supporting his chin in his hands. He scowled at her defiantly.

"You have given me a warm reception, after nearly three years
of--separation." There was a bitter sneer in the word.

"I am horrified to see you here," she said simply. "You know very well
that I cannot conceal you--"

"Oh, I don't expect miracles," said Goddard contemptuously. "I don't know
that, when I came here, I expected to cause you any particularly
agreeable sensation. I confess, when a woman has not seen her beloved
husband for three years, one might expect her to show a little feeling--"

"I will do what I can for you, Walter," said his wife, whose unnatural
calm was fast yielding to an overpowering agitation.

"Then give me fifty pounds and tell me the nearest way east," answered
the convict savagely.

"I have not got fifty pounds in the house," protested Mary Goddard, in
some alarm. "I never keep much money--I can get it for you--"

"I have a great mind to look," returned her husband suspiciously. "How
soon can you get it?"

"To-morrow night--the time to get a cheque cashed--"

"So you keep a banker's account?"

"Of course. But a cheque would be of no use to you--I wish it were!"

"Naturally you do. You would get rid of me at once." Suddenly his voice
changed. "Oh, Mary--you used to love me!" cried the wretched man, burying
his face in his hands.

"I was very wrong," answered his wife, looking away from him. "You did
not deserve it--you never did."

"Because I was unfortunate!"

"Unfortunate!" repeated Mary Goddard with rising scorn.
"Unfortunate--when you were deceiving me every day of your life. I could
have forgiven a great deal--Walter--but not that, not that!"

"What? About the money?" he asked with sudden fierceness.

"The money--no. Even though you were disgraced and convicted, Walter, I
would have forgiven that, I would have tried to see you, to comfort you.
I should have been sorry for you; I would have done what I could to help
you. But I could not forgive you the rest; I never can."

"Bah! I never cared for her," said the convict. But under his livid skin
there rose a faint blush of shame.

"You never cared for me--that is the reason I--am not glad to see you--"

"I did, Mary. Upon my soul I did. I love you still!" He rose and came
near to his wife, and again he would have put his arm around her. But she
sprang to her feet with an angry light in her eyes.

"If you dare to touch me, I will give you up!" she cried. Goddard shrank
back to his chair, very pale and trembling violently.

"You would not do that, Mary," he almost whined. But she remained
standing, looking at him very menacingly.

"Indeed I would--you don't know me," she said, between her teeth.

"You are as hard as a stone," he answered, sullenly, and for some minutes
there was silence between them.

"I suppose you are going to turn me out into the rain again?" asked the
convict.

"You cannot stay here--you are not safe for a minute. You will have to
go. You must come back to-morrow and I will give you the money. You had
better go now--"

"Oh, Mary, I would not have thought it of you," moaned Goddard.

"Why--what else can I do? I cannot let you sleep in the house--I have no
barn. If any one saw you here it would be all over. People know about
it--"

"What people?"

"The vicar and his wife and Mr. Juxon at the Hall."

"Mr. Juxon? What is he like? Would he give me up if he knew?"

"I think he would," said Mary Goddard, thoughtfully. "I am almost sure he
would. He is the justice of the peace here--he would be bound to."

"Do you know him?" Goddard thought he detected a slight nervousness in
his wife's manner.

"Very well. This house belongs to him."

"Oh!" ejaculated the convict. "I begin to see."

"Yes--you see you had better go," said his wife innocently. "How can you
manage to come here tomorrow? You cannot go on without the money--"

"No--and I don't mean to," he answered roughly. Money was indeed an
absolute necessity to him. "Give me what you have got in the house,
anyhow. You may think better of it to-morrow. I don't trust people of
your stamp."

Mary Goddard rose without a word and left the room. When she was gone the
convict set himself to finish the jug of ale she had brought, and looked
about him. He saw objects that reminded him of his former home. He
examined the fork with which he had eaten and remembered the pattern and
the engraved initials as he turned it over in his hand. The very table
itself had belonged to his house--the carpet beneath his feet, the chair
upon which he sat. It all seemed too unnatural to be true. That very
night, that very hour, he must go forth again into the wild February
weather and hide himself, leaving all these things behind him; leaving
behind too his wife, the woman he had so bitterly injured, but who was
still his wife. It seemed impossible. Surely he might stay if he pleased;
it was not true that detectives were on his track--it was all a dream,
since that dreadful day when he had written that name, which was not his,
upon a piece of paper. He had waked up and was again at home. But he
started as he heard a footstep in the passage, being now accustomed to
start at sounds which suggested pursuit; he started and he felt the wet
smock-frock, which was his disguise, clinging to him as he moved, and the
reality of the present returned to him with awful force. His wife again
entered the room.

"There are over nine pounds," she said. "It is all I have." She laid the
money upon the table before him and remained standing. "You shall have
the rest to-morrow," she added.

"Can't I see Nellie?" he asked suddenly. It was the first time he had
spoken of his child. Mrs. Goddard hesitated.

"No," she said at last. "You cannot see her now. She must not be told;
she thinks you are dead. You may catch a glimpse of her to-morrow--"

"Well--it is better she should not know, I suppose. You could not
explain."

"No, Walter, I could not--explain. Come later to-morrow night--to the
same window. I will undo the shutters and give you the money." Mary
Goddard was almost overcome with exhaustion. It was a terrible struggle
to maintain her composure under such circumstances; but necessity does
wonders. "Where will you sleep to-night?" she asked presently. She pitied
the wretch from her heart, though she longed to see him leave her house.

"I will get into the stables of some public-house. I pass for a tramp."
There was a terrible earnestness in the simple statement, which did more
to make Mary Goddard realise her husband's position than anything else
could have done. To people who live in the country the word "tramp" means
so much.

"Poor Walter!" said Mrs. Goddard softly, and for the first time since she
had seen him the tears stood in her eyes.

"Don't waste your pity on me," he answered. "Let me be off."

There was half a loaf and some cheese left upon the table. Mrs. Goddard
put them together and offered them to him.

"You had better take it," she said. He took the food readily enough and
hid it under his frock. He knew the value of it. Then he got upon his
feet. He moved painfully, for the cold and the wet had stiffened his
limbs already weakened with hunger and exhaustion.

"Let me be off," he said again, and moved towards the door. His wife
followed him in silence. In the passage he paused again.

"Well, Mary," he said, "I suppose I ought to be grateful to you for not
giving me up to the police."

"You know very well," answered Mrs. Goddard, "that what I can do to save
you, I will do. You know that."

"Then do it, and don't forget the money. It's hanging this time if I'm
caught."

Mrs. Goddard uttered a low cry and leaned against the wall.

"What?" she faltered. "You have not--"

"I believe I killed somebody in getting away," answered the felon with a
grim laugh. Then, without her assistance, he opened the door and went out
into the pouring rain. The door shut behind him and Mary Goddard heard
his retreating footsteps on the path outside. When he was fairly gone she
suddenly broke down, and falling upon her knees in the passage beat her
forehead against the wall in an agony of despair.

Murderer--thief, forger and murderer, too! It was more than she could
bear. Even now he was within a stone's throw of her house; a moment ago
he had been here, beside her--there beyond, too, in the dining-room,
sitting opposite to her at her own table as he had sat in his days of
innocence and honour for many a long year before his crime. In the sudden
necessity of acting, in the unutterable surprise of finding herself again
face to face with him, she had been calm; now that he was gone she felt
as though she must go mad. She asked herself if this filthy tramp, this
branded villain, was the husband she had loved and cherished for years,
whose beauty she had admired, whose hand she had held so often, whose
lips she had kissed--if this was the father of her lovely child. It was
all over now. There was blood upon his hands as well as other guilt. If
he were caught he must die, or at the very least be imprisoned for life.
He could never again be free to come forth after the expiation of his
crimes and to claim her and his child. If he escaped now, it must be to
live in a distant country under a perpetual disguise. If he were caught,
the news of his capture would be in all the papers, the news of his trial
for murder, the very details of his execution. The Ambroses would know
and the squire, even the country folk, would perhaps at last know the
truth about her. Life even in the quiet spot she had chosen would become
intolerable, and she would be obliged to go forth again into a more
distant exile. She bitterly repented having written to her husband in his
prison to tell him where she was settled. It would have been sufficient
to acquaint the governor with the fact, so that Goddard might know where
she was when his term expired. She had never written but once, and he had
perhaps not been allowed to answer the letter. His appearance at her door
proved that he had received it. Would to God he had not, she thought.

There were other things besides his crime of forgery which had acted far
more powerfully upon Mary Goddard's mind, and which had broken for ever
all ties of affection; circumstances which had appeared during his trial
and which had shown that he had not only been unfaithful to those who
trusted him, but had been unfaithful to the wife who loved him. That was
what she could not forgive; it was the memory of that which rose like an
impassable wall between her and him, worse than his frauds, his forgery,
worse almost than his murder. He had done that which even a loving woman
could not pardon, that which was past all forgiveness. That was why his
sudden appearance roused no tender memories, elicited seemingly so little
sympathy from her. She was too good a woman to say it, but she knew in
her heart that she wished him dead, the very possibility of ever seeing
him again gone from her life for ever, no matter how.

But she must see him again, nevertheless, and to-morrow. To-morrow, too,
she would have to meet the squire, and appear to act and talk as though
nothing had happened in this terrible night. That would be the hardest of
all, perhaps; even harder than meeting her husband for a brief moment in
order to give him the means of escape. She felt that in helping him she
was participating in his crimes, and yet, she asked herself, what woman
would have acted differently? What woman, even though she might hate her
husband with her whole soul, and justly, would yet be so hard-hearted as
to refuse him assistance when he was flying for his life? It would be
impossible. She must help him at any cost; but it was hard to feel that
she must see the squire and behave with indifference, while her husband
was lurking in the neighbourhood, when a detective might at any moment
come to the door, and demand to search the house.

These thoughts passed very quickly through her overwrought brain, as she
knelt in the passage; kneeling because she felt she could no longer
stand, the passionate tears streaming down her face, her small hands
pressing her temples. Then she struggled to her feet and dried her eyes,
steadying herself against the wall for a moment. She had almost forgotten
little Nellie whom she had left in the drawing-room. She had told the
child, when she went back to her, leaving Goddard alone in the dark, that
the man was a poor starving tramp, but that she did not want Nellie to
see him, because he looked so miserable. She would give him something to
eat and send him away, she said, and meanwhile Nellie should sit by the
drawing-room fire and wait for her. The child trusted her mother
implicitly and was completely reassured. Mrs. Goddard dried her eyes,
and re-entered the room. Nellie was curled up in a big chair with a book;
she looked up quickly.

"Why, mamma," she said, "you have been crying!"

"Have I, darling? I daresay it was the sight of that poor man. He was
very wretched."

"Is he gone?" asked the child.

It was unusually late and Nellie was beginning to be sleepy, so that she
was more easily quieted than she could have been in ordinary
circumstances. It might have struck her as strange that a wandering tramp
should know her mother's Christian name, as still more inexplicable that
her mother should have been willing to admit such a man at so late an
hour. She had been badly frightened, but trusting her mother as she did,
her terror had quickly disappeared and had been quickly followed by
sleepiness.

But Mrs. Goddard. did not sleep that night. She felt as though she could
never sleep again, and for many hours she lay thinking of the new element
of fear which had so suddenly come into her life at the very time when
she believed herself to be safe for many years to come. She longed to
know where her wretched husband was; whether he had found shelter for the
night, whether he was still free or whether he had even then fallen into
the hands of his pursuers. She knew that she could not have concealed him
in the house and that she had done all that lay in her power for him. But
she started at every sound, as the rain rattled against the shutters and
the wind howled down the chimney.

Walter Goddard, however, was safe for the present and was even
luxuriously lodged, considering his circumstances, for he was comfortably
installed amongst the hay in the barn of the "Feathers" inn. He had been
in Billingsfield since early in the afternoon and had considered
carefully the question of his quarters for the night. He had observed
from a distance the landlord of the said inn, and had boldly offered to
do a "day's work for a night's lodging." He said he was "tramping" his
way back from London to his home in Yorkshire; he knew enough of the
sound of the rough Yorkshire dialect to pass for a native of that county
amongst ignorant labourers who had never heard the real tongue. The
landlord of the Feathers consented to the bargain and Goddard was told
that he might sleep in the barn if he liked, and should take a turn at
cutting chaff the next day to pay for the convenience. The convict slept
soundly; he was past lying awake in useless fits of remorse, and he was
exhausted with his day's journey. Moreover he had now the immediate
prospect of obtaining sufficient money to carry him safely out of the
country, and once abroad he felt sure of baffling pursuit. He was an
accomplished man and spoke French with a fluency unusual in Englishmen;
he determined to get across the channel in some fishing craft; he would
then make his way to Paris and enlist in the Foreign Legion. It would be
safer than trying to go to America, where people were invariably caught
as they landed. It was a race for life and death, and he knew it. Had he
been able to obtain clothes, money and a disguise in London he would have
travelled by rail. But that had been impossible and it now seemed a wiser
plan to "tramp" it. His beard was growing rapidly and would soon make a
complete disguise. Village constables are generally simple people, easily
imposed upon, very different from London detectives; and hitherto he felt
sure that he had baffled pursuit by the mere simplicity of his
proceedings. The intelligent officials of Scotland Yard were used to
forgers and swindlers who travelled by express trains and crossed to
America by fashionable steamers. It did not strike them as very likely
that a man of Walter Goddard's previous tastes and habits could get
through the country in the guise of a tramp. If he had been possessed at
the time of his escape of the money he so much desired he would probably
have been caught; as it was, he got away without difficulty, and at the
very time when every railway station and every port in the kingdom were
being watched for him, he was lurking in the purlieus of Whitechapel, and
then tramping his way east in comparative safety, half starved, it is
true, but unmolested.

That he was disappointed at the reception his wife had given him did not
prevent him from sleeping peacefully that night. One thing alone
disturbed him, and that was her mention of Mr. Juxon, in whose house, as
she had told him, she lived. It seems incredible that a man in Walter
Goddard's position, lost to every sense of honour, a criminal of the
worst type, who had deceived his wife before he was indicted for forgery,
who had certainly cared very little for her at any time, should now, in a
moment of supreme danger, feel a pang of jealousy on hearing that his
wife lived in the vicinity of the squire and occupied a house belonging
to him. But he was too bad himself not to suspect others, especially
those whom he had wronged, and the feeling was mingled with a strong
curiosity to know whether this woman, who now treated him so haughtily
and drew back from him as from some monstrous horror, was as good as she
pretended to be. He said to himself that on the next day at dawn he would
slip out of the barn and try whether he could not find some hiding-place
within easy reach of the cottage, so as to be able to watch her dwelling
at his ease throughout the day. The plan seemed a good one. Since he was
obliged to wait twenty-four hours in order to get the money he wanted, he
might as well employ the time profitably in observing his wife's habits.
It would be long, he said to himself with a bitter sneer, before he
troubled her again--he would just like to see.

Having come to this decision he drew some of the hay over his body and in
spite of cold and wet was soon peacefully asleep. But at early dawn he
awoke with the alacrity of a man who constantly expects pursuit, and
slipped down from the hayloft into the barn. There was no one stirring
and he got over the fence at the back of the yard and skirted the fields
in the direction of the church, finally climbing another stile and
entering what he supposed to be the park. On this side the back of the
church ran out into a broad meadow, where the larger portion of the
ancient abbey had once stood. Goddard walked along close by the church
walls. He knew from his observation on the previous afternoon that he
could thus come out into the road in the vicinity of the cottage, unless
his way through the park were interrupted by impassable wire fences. The
ground was very heavy and he was sure not to meet anybody in the meadows
in such weather.

Suddenly he stopped and looked at a buttress that jutted out from the
church and for the existence of which there seemed to be no ostensible
reason. He examined it and found that it was not a buttress but
apparently a half ruined chamber, which at some former period had been
built upon the side of the abbey. Low down by the ground there was a
hole, where a few stones seemed to have been removed and not replaced.
Goddard knelt down in the long wet grass and put in his head; then he
crept in on his hands and knees and presently disappeared.

He found himself in a room about ten feet square, dimly lighted by a
small window at the top, and surrounded by long horizontal niches. The
floor, which was badly broken in some places, was of stone. Goddard
examined the place carefully. It was evidently an old vault of the kind
formerly built above ground for the lords of the manor; but the coffins,
if there had ever been any, had been removed elsewhere. Goddard laughed
to himself.

"I might stay here for a year, if I could get anything to eat," he said
to himself.




CHAPTER XIV.


The squire had grown used to the position in which he found himself after
Mary Goddard had told him her story. He continued his visits as formerly,
and it could hardly be said that there was any change in his manner
towards her; there was no need of any change, for even at the time when
he contemplated making her his wife there had been nothing lover-like
in his behaviour. He had been a friend and had treated her with all the
respect due to a lonely lady who was his tenant, and even with a certain
formality which had sometimes seemed unnecessary. But though there was no
apparent alteration in his mode of talking, in his habit of bringing her
flowers and books and of looking after the condition of the cottage, both
she and he were perfectly conscious of the fact that they understood each
other much better than before. They were united by the common bond of a
common secret which very closely concerned one of them. Things were not
as they had formerly been. Mrs. Goddard no longer felt that she had
anything to hide; the squire knew that he no longer had anything to hope.
If he had been a selfish man, if she had been a less sensible woman,
their friendship might have ended then and there. But Mr. Juxon was not
selfish, and Mary Goddard did not lack good sense. Having ascertained
that in the ordinary course of events there was no possibility of ever
marrying her, the squire did not at once give her over and go elsewhere;
on the contrary he showed himself more desirous than ever of assisting
her and amusing her. He was a patient man; his day might come yet, if
Goddard died. It did not follow that if he could not marry Mrs. Goddard
he must needs marry some one else; for it was not a wife that he sought,
but the companionship of this particular woman as his wife. If he could
not marry he could still enjoy at least a portion of that companionship,
by visiting her daily and talking with her, and making himself a part of
her life. He judged things very coldly and lost himself in no lofty
flights of imagination. It was better that he should enjoy what fell in
his way in at least seeing Mrs. Goddard and possessing her friendship,
than that he should go out of his course in order to marry merely for the
sake of marrying. He had seen so much of the active side of life that he
was well prepared to revel in the peace which had fallen to his lot. He
cared little whether he left an heir to the park; there were others of
the name, and since the park had furnished matter for litigation during
forty years before he came into possession of it, it might supply the
lawyers with fees for forty years more after his death, for all he cared.
It would have been very desirable to marry Mrs. Goddard if it had been
possible, but since the thing could not be done at present it was best to
submit with a good grace. Since the day when his suit had suddenly come
to grief in the discovery of her real position, Mr. Juxon had
philosophically said to himself that he had perhaps been premature in
making his proposal, and that it was as well that it could not have been
accepted; perhaps she would not have made him a good wife; perhaps he had
deceived himself in thinking that because he liked her and desired her
friendship he really wished to marry her; perhaps all was for the best in
the best of all possible worlds, after all and in spite of all.

But these reflections, which tended to soothe the squire's annoyance at
the failure of a scheme which he had contemplated with so much delight,
did not prevent him from feeling the most sincere sympathy for Mrs.
Goddard, nor from constantly wishing that he could devise some plan for
helping her. She seemed never to have thought of divorcing herself from
her husband. The squire was not sure whether such a thing were possible;
he doubted it, and promised himself that he would get a lawyer's opinion
upon the matter. He believed that English law did not grant divorces on
account of the husband's being sentenced to any limited period of penal
servitude. But in any case it would be a very delicate subject to
approach, and Mr. Juxon amused himself by constructing conversations in
his mind which should lead up to this point without wounding poor Mrs.
Goddard's sensibilities. He was the kindest of men; he would not for
worlds have said a word which should recall to her that memorable day
when she had told him her story. And yet it would be quite impossible to
broach such a scheme without going at once into all the details of the
chief cause of her sorrows. The consequence was that in the windings of
his imagination the squire found himself perpetually turning in a vicious
circle; but since the exercise concerned Mrs. Goddard and her welfare it
was not uncongenial. He founded all his vague hopes upon one expression
she had used. When in making his proposal he had spoken of her as being a
widow, she had said, "Would to God that I were!" She had said it with
such vehemence that he had felt sure that if she had indeed been a widow
her answer to himself would have been favourable. Men easily retain such
impressions received in moments of great excitement, and found hopes upon
them.

So the days had gone by and the squire had thought much but had come to
no conclusion. On the morning when Walter Goddard crept into the disused
vault at the back of the church, the squire awoke from his sleep at his
usual early hour. He was not in a very good humour, if so equable a man
could be said to be subject to such weaknesses as humours. The weather
was very depressing--day after day brought only more rain, more wind,
more mud, more of everything disagreeable. The previous evening had been
unusually dull. He was never weary of being with Mary Goddard, but
occasionally, when the Ambroses were present, the conversation became
oppressive. Mr. Juxon almost wished that John Short would come back and
cause a diversion. His views concerning John had undergone some change
since he had discovered that nobody could marry Mrs. Goddard because she
was married already. He believed he could watch John's efforts to attract
her attention with indifference now, or if without indifference with a
charitable forbearance. John at least would help to make conversation,
and the conversation on the previous evening had been intolerably
wearisome. Almost unconsciously, since the chief interest and hope of his
daily life had been removed the squire began to long for a change; he
had been a wanderer by profession during thirty years of his life and he
was perhaps not yet old enough to settle into that absolute indifference
to novelty which seems to characterise retired sailors.

But as he brushed his smooth hair and combed his beard that morning,
neither change nor excitement were very far from him. He looked over his
dressing-glass at the leafless oaks of the park, at the grey sky and the
driving rain and he wished something would happen. He wished somebody
might die and leave a great library to be sold, that he might indulge
his favourite passion; he wished he had somebody stopping in the Hall--he
almost decided to send and ask the vicar to come to lunch and have a day
among the books. As he entered the breakfast-room at precisely half-past
eight o'clock, according to his wont, the butler informed him that Mr.
Gall, the village constable, was below and wanted to see him after
breakfast. He received the news in silence and sat down to eat his
breakfast and read the morning paper. Gall had probably come about some
petty summons, or to ask what he should do about the small boys who threw
stones at the rooks and broke the church windows. After finishing his
meal and his paper in the leisurely manner peculiar to country gentlemen
who have nothing to do, the squire rang the bell, sent for the policeman
and went into his study, a small room adjoining the library.

Thomas Gall, constable, was a tall fair man with a mild eye and a
cheerful face. Goodwill towards men and plentiful good living had done
their work in eradicating from the good man all that stern element which
might have been most useful to him in his career, not to say useful to
the State. Each rolling year was pricked in his leathern belt with a new
hole as his heart grew more peaceful and his body throve. He had a goodly
girth and weighed full fifteen stone in his uniform; his mild blue eye
had inspired confidence in a maiden of Billingsfield parish and Mrs. Gall
was now rearing a numerous family of little Galls, all perhaps destined
to become mild-eyed and portly village constables in their turn.

The squire, who was not destitute of a sense of humour, never thought of
Mr. Gall without a smile, so much out of keeping did the man's occupation
seem with his jovial humour. Mr. Gall, he said, was the kind of policeman
who would bribe a refractory tramp to move on by the present of a pint of
beer. But Gall had a good point. He was very proud of his profession, and
in the exercise of it he showed a discretion which, if it was the better
part of his valour, argued unlimited natural courage. It was a secret
profession, he was wont to say, and a man who could not keep a secret
would never do for a constable. He shrouded his ways in an amiable
mystery and walked a solitary beat on fine nights; when the nights were
not fine there was nobody to see whether he walked his beat or not.
Probably, he faithfully fulfilled his obligations; but his constitution
seemed to bear exposure to the weather wonderfully well. Whether he ever
saw anything worth mentioning upon those lonely walks of his, is
uncertain; at all events he never mentioned anything he saw, unless it
was in the secrecy of the reports he was supposed to transmit from time
to time to his superiors.

On the present occasion as he entered the study, the squire observed with
surprise that he looked grave. He had never witnessed such a phenomenon
before and argued that it was just possible that something of real
importance might have occurred.

"Good morning, sir," said Mr. Gall, approaching the squire respectfully,
after carefully closing the door behind him.

"Good morning, Gall. Nothing wrong, I hope?"

"Not yet, sir. I hope not, sir. Only a little matter of business, Mr.
Juxon. In point of fact, sir, I wished to consult you."

"Yes," said the squire who was used to the constable's method of
circumlocution. "Yes--what is it?"

"Well, sir--it's this," said the policeman, running his thumb round the
inside of his belt as though to test the pressure, and clearing his
throat. "There has been a general order sent down to be on the lookout,
sir. So I thought it would be best to take your opinion."

"My opinion," said the squire with great gravity, "is that if you are
directed to be on the look-out, you should be on the look-out; by all
means. What are you to be on the look-out for?"

"In point of fact, sir," said the constable, lowering his voice, "we are
informed that a criminal has escaped from Portland. I never heard of a
convict getting out of that strong'old o' the law, sir, and I would like
to have your opinion upon it."

"But if you are informed that some one has escaped," remarked the squire,
"you had better take it for granted that it is true."

"Juss so, sir. But the circumstances wasn't communicated to us, sir; so
we don't know."

Mr. Gall paused, and the squire smoothed his hair a little.

"Well, Gall," said Mr. Juxon, "have you any reason for believing that
this escaped convict is likely to come this way?"

"Well sir, there is some evidence," answered the policeman, mysteriously.
"Leastways what seems like evidence to me, sir."

"Of what kind?" the squire fixed his quiet eyes on Mr. Gall's face.

"His name, sir. The name of the convict. There is a party of that name
residin' here."

The squire suddenly guessed what was coming, or at least a possibility of
it crossed his mind. If Mr. Gall had been a more observant man he would
have seen that Mr. Juxon grew a shade paler and changed one leg over the
other as he sat. But in that moment he had time to nerve himself for the
worst.

"And what is the name, if you please?" he asked calmly.

"The name in the general orders is Goddard, sir--Walter Goddard. He was
convicted of forgery three years ago, sir, a regular bad lot. But
discretion is recommended in the orders, sir, as the business is not
wanted to get into the papers."

The squire was ready. If Gall did not know that Mary Goddard was the wife
of the convict Walter, he should certainly not find it out. In any other
country of Europe that would have been the first fact communicated to the
local police. Very likely, thought Mr. Juxon, nobody knew it.

"I do not see," he said very slowly, "that the fact of there being a Mrs.
Goddard residing here in the least proves that she is any relation to
this criminal. The name is not so uncommon as that, you know."

"Nor I either, sir. In point of fact, sir, I was only thinking. It's what
you may call a striking coincidence, that's all."

"It would have been a still more striking coincidence if his name had
been Juxon like mine, or Ambrose like the vicar's," said the squire
calmly. "There are other people of the name in England, and the local
policemen will be warned to be on the lookout. If this fellow was called
Juxon instead of Goddard, Gall, would you be inclined to think he was a
relation of mine?"

"Oh no, sir. Ha! ha! Very good sir! Very good indeed! No indeed, sir, and
she such a real lady too!"

"Well then, I do not see that you can do anything more than keep a sharp
look-out. I suppose they sent you some kind of description?"

"Well, yes. There was a kind of a description as you say, sir, but I'm
not anyways sure of recognising the party by it. In point of fact, sir,
the description says the convict is a fair man."

"Is that all?"

"Neither particular tall, nor yet particular short, sir. Not a very big
'un nor a very little 'un, sir. In point of fact, sir, a fair man. Clean
shaved and close cropped he is, sir, being a criminal."

"I hope you may recognise him by that account," said the squire,
suppressing a smile. "I don't believe I should."

"Well, sir, it does say as he's a fair man," remarked the constable.

"Supposing he blacked his face and passed for a chimney-sweep?" suggested
the squire. The idea seemed to unsettle Gall's views.

"In that case, sir, I don't know as I should know him, for certain," he
answered.

"Probably not--probably not, Gall. And judging from the account they have
sent you I don't think you would be to blame."

"Leastways it can't be said as I've failed to carry out superior
instructions," replied Mr. Gall, proudly. "Then it's your opinion, sir,
that I'd better keep a sharp look-out? Did I understand you to say so,
sir?"

"Quite so," returned the squire with great calmness. "By all means keep a
sharp look-out, and be careful to be discreet, as the orders instruct
you."

"You may trust me for that, sir," said the policeman, who dearly loved
the idea of mysterious importance. "Then I wish you good morning, sir."
He prepared to go.

"Good morning, Gall--good morning. The butler will give you some ale."

Again Mr. Gall passed his thumb round the inside of his belt, testing the
local pressure in anticipation of a pint. He made a sort of half-military
salute at the door and went out. When the squire was alone he rose from
his chair and paced the room, giving way to the agitation he had
concealed in the presence of the constable. He was very much disturbed at
the news of Goddard's escape, as well he might be. Not that he was aware
that the convict knew of his wife's whereabouts; he did not even suppose
that Goddard could ascertain for some time where she was living, still
less that he would boldly present himself in Billingsfield. But it was
bad enough to know that the man was again at large. So long as he was
safely lodged in prison, Mrs. Goddard was herself safe; but if once he
regained his liberty and baffled the police he would certainly end by
finding out Mary's address and there was no telling to what annoyance,
to what danger, to what sufferings she might be exposed. Here was a new
interest, indeed, and one which promised to afford the squire occupation
until the fellow was caught.

Mr. Juxon knew that he was right in putting the policeman off the track
in regard to Mrs. Goddard. He himself was a better detective than Gall,
for he went daily to the cottage and if anything was wrong there, was
quite sure to discover it. If Goddard ever made his way to Billingsfield
it could only be for the purpose of seeing his wife, and if he succeeded
in this, Mrs. Goddard could not conceal it from the squire. She was a
nervous woman who could not hide her emotions; she would find herself in
a terrible difficulty and she would perhaps turn to her friend for
assistance. If Mr. Juxon could lay his hands on Goddard, he flattered
himself he was much more able to arrest a desperate man than mild-eyed
Policeman Gall. He had not been at sea for thirty years in vain, and in
his time he had handled many a rough customer. He debated however upon
the course he should pursue. As in his opinion it was unlikely that
Goddard would find out his wife for some time, and improbable that he
would waste such precious time in looking for her, it seemed far from
advisable to warn her that the felon had escaped. On the other hand he
mistrusted his own judgment; if she were not prepared it was just
possible that the man should come upon her unawares, and the shock of
seeing him might be very much worse than the shock of being told that he
was at large. He might consult the vicar.

At first, the old feeling that it would be disloyal to Mrs. Goddard even
to hint to Mr. Ambrose that he was acquainted with her story withheld him
from pursuing such a course. But as he turned the matter over in his mind
it seemed to him that since it was directly for her good, he would now be
justified in speaking. He liked the vicar and he trusted him. He knew
that the vicar had been a good friend to Mrs. Goddard and that he would
stand by her in any difficulty so far as he might be able. The real
question was how to make sure that the vicar should not tell his wife. If
Mrs. Ambrose had the least suspicion that anything unusual was occurring,
she would naturally try and extract information from her husband, and she
would probably be successful; women, the squire thought, very generally
succeed in operations of that kind. But if once Mr. Ambrose could be
consulted without arousing his wife's suspicions, he was a man to be
trusted. Thereupon Mr. Juxon wrote a note to the vicar, saying that he
had something of great interest to show him, and begging that, if not
otherwise engaged, he would come up to the Hall to lunch. When he had
despatched his messenger, being a man of his word, he went into the
library to hunt for some rare volume or manuscript which the vicar had
not yet seen, and which might account in a spirit of rigid veracity for
the excuse he had given. Meanwhile, as he turned over his rare and
curious folios he debated further upon his conduct; but having once made
up his mind to consult Mr. Ambrose, he determined to tell him boldly what
had occurred, after receiving from him a promise of secrecy. The
messenger brought back word that the vicar would be delighted to come,
and at the hour named the sound of wheels upon the gravel announced the
arrival of Strawberry, the old mare, drawing behind her the vicar and his
aged henchman, Reynolds, in the traditional vicarage dogcart. A moment
later the vicar entered the library.

"I am very glad to see you, Mr. Ambrose," said the squire inhospitable
tones. "I have something to show you and I have something to say to you."
The two shook hands heartily. Independently of kindred scholarly tastes,
they were sympathetic to each other and were always glad to meet.

"It is just the weather for bookworms," answered the vicar in cheerful
tones. "Dear me, I never come here without envying you and wishing that
life were one long rainy afternoon."

"You know I am inclined to think I am rather an enviable person," said
Mr. Juxon, slowly passing his hand over his glossy hair and leading his
guest towards a large table near the fire. Several volumes lay together
upon the polished mahogany. The squire laid his hand on one of them.

"I have not deceived you," he said. "That is a very interesting volume.
It is the black letter Paracelsus I once spoke of. I have succeeded in
getting it at last."

"Dear me! What a piece of fortune!" said Mr. Ambrose bending down until
his formidable nose almost touched the ancient page.

"Yes," said the squire, "uncommonly lucky as usual. Now, excuse my
abruptness in changing the subject--I want to consult you upon an
important matter."

The vicar looked up quickly with that vague, faraway expression which
comes into the eyes of a student when he is suddenly called away from
contemplating some object of absorbing interest.

"Certainly," he said, "certainly--a--by all means."

"It is about Mrs. Goddard," said the squire, looking hard at his visitor.
"Of course it is between ourselves," he added.

The vicar's long upper lip descended upon its fellow and he bent his
rough grey eyebrows, returning Mr. Juxon's sharp look with interest. He
could not imagine what the squire could have to say about Mrs. Goddard,
unless, like poor John, he had fallen in love with her and wanted to
marry her; which appeared improbable.

"What is it?" he said sharply.

"I daresay you do not know that I am acquainted with her story," began
Mr. Juxon. "Do not be surprised. She saw fit to tell it me herself."

"Indeed?" exclaimed the vicar in considerable astonishment. In that case,
he argued quickly, Mr. Juxon was not thinking of marrying her.

"Yes--it is not necessary to go into that," said Mr. Juxon quickly. "The
thing I want to tell you is this--Goddard the forger has escaped--"

"Escaped?" echoed the vicar in real alarm. "You don't mean to say so!"

"Gall the constable came here this morning," continued Mr. Juxon. "He
told me that there were general orders out for his arrest."

"How in the world did he get out?" cried the vicar. "I thought nobody was
ever known to escape from Portland!"

"So did I. But this fellow has--somehow. Gall did not know. Now, the
question is, what is to be done?"

"I am sure I don't know," returned the vicar, thrusting his hands into
his pockets and marching to the window, the wide skirts of his coat
seeming to wave with agitation as he walked.

Mr. Juxon also put his hands into his pockets, but he stood still upon
the hearth-rug and looked at the ceiling, softly whistling a little tune,
a habit he had in moments of great anxiety. For three or four minutes
neither of the two spoke.

"Would you tell Mrs. Goddard--or not?" asked Mr. Juxon at last.

"I don't know," said the vicar. "I am amazed beyond measure." He turned
and slowly came back to the table.

"I don't know either," replied the squire. "That is precisely the point
upon which I think we ought to decide. I have known about the story for
some time, but I did not anticipate that it would take this turn."

"I think," said Mr. Ambrose after another pause, "I think that if there
is any likelihood of the fellow finding her out, we ought to tell her. If
not I think we had better wait until he is caught. He is sure to be
caught, of course."

"I entirely agree with you," returned Mr. Juxon. "Only--how on earth are
we to find out whether he is likely to come here or not? If any one knows
where he is, he is as good as caught already. If nobody knows, we can
certainly have no means of telling."

The argument was unanswerable. Again there was a long silence. The vicar
walked about the room in great perplexity.

"Dear me! Dear me! What a terrible business!" he repeated, over and over
again.

"Do you think we are called upon to do anything?" he asked at last,
stopping in his walk immediately in front of Mr. Juxon.

"If we can do anything to save Mrs. Goddard from annoyance or further
trouble, we are undoubtedly called upon to do it," replied the squire.
"If that wretch finds her out, he will try to break into the cottage at
night and force her to give him money."

"Do you really think so? Dear me! I hope he will do no such thing!"

"So do I, I am sure," said Mr. Juxon, with a grim smile. "But if he finds
her out, he will. I almost think it would be better to tell her in any
case."

"But think of the anxiety she will be in until he is caught!" cried the
vicar. "She will be expecting him every day--every night. Well--I suppose
we might tell Gall to watch the house."

"That will not do," said Mr. Juxon firmly. "It would be a great injustice
to allow Gall or any of the people in the village to know anything about
her. She might be subjected to all kinds of insult. You know what these
people are. A 'real lady,' who is at the same time the wife of a convict,
is a thing they can hardly understand. I am sure both you and I secretly
flatter ourselves that we have shown an unusual amount of good sense and
generosity in understanding her position as we do."

"I daresay we do," said the vicar with a smile. He was too honest to deny
it. "Indeed it took me some time to get used to the idea myself."

"Precisely. The village people would never get used to it. Of all things
to do, we should certainly not tell Gall, who is an old woman and a great
chatterbox. I wish you could have heard his statement this morning--it
filled me with admiration for the local police, I assure you. But--I
think it would be better to tell her. I did not think so before you came,
I believe. But talking always brings the truth out."

The vicar hesitated, rising and falling upon his toes and heels in
profound thought, after his manner.

"I daresay you are right," he said at last. "Will you do it? Or shall I?"

"I would rather not," said the squire, thoughtfully. "You know her
better, you have known her much longer than I."

"But she will ask me where I heard of it," objected the vicar. "I shall
be obliged to say that you told me. That will be as bad as though you
told her yourself."

"You need not say you heard it from me. You can say that Gall has
received instructions to look out for Goddard. She will not question you
any further, I am sure."

"I would much rather that you told her, Mr. Juxon," said the vicar.

"I would much rather that you told her, Mr. Ambrose," said the squire,
almost in the same breath. Both laughed a little.

"Not that I would not do it at once, if necessary," added Mr. Juxon.

"Or I, in a moment," said Mr. Ambrose.

"Of course," returned Mr. Juxon. "Only it is such a very delicate matter,
you see."

"Dear me, yes," murmured the vicar, "a most delicate matter. Poor lady!"

"Poor lady!" echoed the squire. "But I suppose it must be done."

"Oh yes--we cannot do otherwise," answered Mr. Ambrose, still hoping that
his companion would volunteer to perform the disagreeable office.

"Well then, will you--will you do it?" asked Mr. Juxon, anxious to have
the matter decided.

"Why not go together?" suggested the vicar.

"No," said Mr. Juxon firmly. "It would be an intolerable ordeal for the
poor woman. I think I see your objection. Perhaps you think that Mrs.
Ambrose--"

"Exactly, Mrs. Ambrose," echoed the vicar with a grim smile.

"Oh precisely--then I will do it," said the squire. And he forthwith did,
and was very much surprised at the result.




CHAPTER XV.


It was late in the afternoon when Mr. Juxon walked down towards the
cottage, accompanied by the vicar. In spite of their mutual anxiety to be
of service to Mrs. Goddard, when they had once decided how to act they
had easily fallen into conversation about other matters, the black letter
Paracelsus had received its full share of attention and many another rare
volume had been brought out and examined. Neither the vicar nor his host
believed that there was any hurry; if Goddard ever succeeded in getting
to Billingsfield it would not be to-day, nor to-morrow either.

The weather had suddenly changed; the east was already clear and over the
west, where the sun was setting in a fiery mist, the huge clouds were
banked up against the bright sky, fringed with red and purple, but no
longer threatening rain or snow. The air was sharp and the plentiful mud
in the roads was already crusted with a brittle casing of ice.

The squire took leave of Mr. Ambrose at the turning where the road led
into the village and then walked back to the cottage. Even his solid
nerves were a little unsettled at the prospect of the interview
before him; but he kept a stout heart and asked for Mrs. Goddard in his
usual quiet voice. Martha told him that Mrs. Goddard had a bad headache,
but on inquiry found that she would see the squire. He entered the
drawing-room softly and went forward to greet her; she was sitting in a
deep chair propped by cushions.

Mary Goddard had spent a miserable day. The grey morning light seemed to
reveal her troubles and fears in a new and more terrible aspect. During
the long hours of darkness it seemed as though those things were
mercifully hidden which the strong glare of day must inevitably reveal,
and when the night was fairly past she thought all the world must surely
know that Walter Goddard had escaped and that his wife had seen him.
Hourly she expected a ringing at the bell, announcing the visit of a
party of detectives on his track; every sound startled her and her nerves
were strung to such a pitch that she heard with supernatural acuteness.
She had indeed two separate causes for fear. The one was due to her
anxiety for Goddard's safety; the other to her apprehensions for Nellie.
She had long determined that at all hazards the child must be kept from
the knowledge of her father's disgrace, by being made to believe in his
death. It was a falsehood indeed, but such a falsehood as may surely be
forgiven to a woman as unhappy as Mary Goddard. It seemed monstrous that
the innocent child, who seemed not even to have inherited her father's
looks or temper, should be brought up with the perpetual sense of her
disgrace before her, should be forced to listen to explanations of her
father's crimes and tutored to the comprehension of an inherited shame.
From the first Mary Goddard had concealed the whole matter from the
little girl, and when Walter was at last convicted, she had told her that
her father was dead. Dead he might be, she thought, before twelve years
were out, and Nellie would be none the wiser. In twelve years from the
time of his conviction Nellie would be in her twenty-first year; if it
were ever necessary to tell her, it would be time enough then, for the
girl would have at least enjoyed her youth, free of care and of the
horrible consciousness of a great crime hanging over her head. No child
could grow up in such a state as that implied. No mind could develop
healthily under the perpetual pressure of so hideous a secret; from her
earliest childhood her impressions would be warped, her imagination
darkened and her mental growth stunted. It would be a great cruelty to
tell her the truth; it was a great mercy to tell her the falsehood. It
was no selfish timidity which had prompted Mary Goddard, but a carefully
weighed consideration for the welfare of her child.

If now, within these twenty-four hours, Nellie should discover who the
poor tramp was, who had frightened her so much on the previous evening,
all this would be at an end. The child's life would be made desolate for
ever. She would never recover from the shock, and to injure lovely Nellie
so bitterly would be worse to Mary Goddard than to be obliged to bear the
sharpest suffering herself. For, from the day when she had waked to a
comprehension of her husband's baseness, the love for her child had taken
in her breast the place of the love for Walter.

She did not think connectedly; she did not realise her fears; she was
almost wholly unstrung. But she had procured the fifty pounds her husband
required and she waited for the night with a dull hope that all might yet
be well--as well as anything so horrible could be. If only her husband
were not caught in Billingsfield it would not be so bad, perhaps. And yet
it may be that her wisest course would have been to betray him that very
night. Many just men would have said so; but there are few women who
would do it. There are few indeed, so stonyhearted as to betray a man
once loved in such a case; and Mary Goddard in her wildest fear never
dreamed of giving up the fugitive. She sat all day in her chair, wishing
that the day were over, praying that she might be spared any further
suffering or that at least it might be spared to her child whom she so
loved. She had sent Nellie down to the vicarage with Martha. Mrs. Ambrose
loved Nellie better than she loved Nellie's mother, and there was a
standing invitation for her to spend the afternoons at the vicarage.
Nellie said her mother had a terrible headache and wanted to be alone.

But when the squire came Mrs. Goddard thought it wiser to see him. She
had, of course, no intention of confiding to him an account of the events
of the previous night, but she felt that if she could talk to him for
half an hour she would be stronger. He was himself so strong and honest
that he inspired her with courage. She knew, also, that if she were
driven to the extremity of confiding in any one she would choose Mr.
Juxon rather than Mr. Ambrose. The vicar had been her first friend and
she owed him much; but the squire had won her confidence by his noble
generosity after she had told him her story. She said to herself that he
was more of a man than the vicar. And now he had come to her at the time
of her greatest distress, and she was glad to see him.

Mr. Juxon entered the room softly, feeling that he was in the presence of
a sick person. Mrs. Goddard turned her pathetic face towards him and held
out her hand.

"I am so glad to see you," she said, trying to seem cheerful.

"I fear you are ill, Mrs. Goddard," answered the squire, looking at her
anxiously and then seating himself by her side. "Martha told me you had a
headache--I hope it is not serious."

"Oh no--not serious. Only a headache," she said with a smile so unlike
her own that Mr. Juxon began to feel nervous. His resolution to tell her
his errand began to waver; it seemed cruel, he thought, to disturb a
person who was evidently so ill with a matter so serious. He remembered
that she had almost fainted on a previous occasion when she had spoken to
him of her husband. She had not been ill then; there was no knowing what
the effect of a shock to her nerves might be at present. He sat still in
silence for some moments, twisting his hat upon his knee.

"Do not be disturbed about me," said Mrs. Goddard presently. "It will
pass very quickly. I shall be quite well to-morrow--I hope," she added
with a shudder.

"I am very much disturbed about you," returned Mr. Juxon in an unusually
grave tone. Mrs. Goddard looked at him quickly, and was surprised when
she saw the expression on his face. He looked sad, and at the same time
perplexed.

"Oh, pray don't be!" she exclaimed as though deprecating further remark
upon her ill health.

"I wish I knew," said the squire with some hesitation, "whether--whether
you are really very ill. I mean, of course, I know you have a bad
headache, a very bad headache, as I can see. But--indeed, Mrs. Goddard, I
have something of importance to say."

"Something of importance?" she repeated, staring hard at him.

"Yes--but it will keep till to-morrow, if you would rather not hear it
now," he replied, looking at her doubtfully.

"I would rather hear it now," she answered after some seconds of silence.
Her heart beat fast.

"You were good enough some time ago to tell me about--Mr. Goddard," began
Mr. Juxon in woeful trepidation.

"Yes," answered his companion under her breath. Her hands were clasped
tightly together upon her knees and her eyes sought the squire's
anxiously and then looked away again in fear.

"Well, it is about him," continued Mr. Juxon in a gentle voice. "Would
you rather put it off? It is--well, rather startling."

Mrs. Goddard closed her eyes, like a person expecting to suffer some
terrible pain. She thought Mr. Juxon was going to tell her that Walter
had been captured in the village.

"Mr. Goddard has escaped," said the squire, making a bold plunge with the
whole truth. The sick lady trembled violently, and unclasping her hands
laid them upon the arms of her chair as though to steady herself to bear
the worse shock to come. But Mr. Juxon was silent. He had told her all he
knew.

"Yes," she said faintly. "Is there anything--anything more?" Her voice
was barely audible in the still and dusky room.

"No--except that, of course, there are orders out for his arrest, all
over the country."

"He has not been arrested yet?" asked Mrs. Goddard. She had expected to
hear that he was caught; she thought the squire was trying to break the
shock of the news. Her courage rose a little now.

"No, he is not arrested--but I have no doubt he soon will be," added Mr.
Juxon in a tone intended to convey encouragement.

"How did you hear this?"

"Gall the policeman, told me this morning. I--I am afraid I have
something else to confess to you, Mrs. Goddard, I trust you will not--"

"What?" she asked so suddenly as to startle him. Walter might have been
heard of in the neighbourhood, perhaps.

"I think I was right," continued Mr. Juxon. "I hope you will forgive me.
It does not seem quite loyal, but I did not know what to do. I consulted
the vicar as to whether we should tell you."

"The vicar? What did he say?" Again Mrs. Goddard felt relieved.

"He quite agreed with me," answered the squire. "You see we feared that
Mr. Goddard might find his way here and come upon you suddenly. We
thought you would be terribly pained and startled."

Mrs. Goddard could almost have laughed at that moment. The excellent man
had taken all this trouble in order to save her from the very thing which
had already occurred on the previous night. There was a bitter humour in
the situation, in the squire's kind-hearted way of breaking to her that
news which she already knew so well, in his willingness to put off
telling her until the morrow. What would Mr. Juxon say, could he guess
that she had herself already spoken with her husband and had promised to
see him again that very night! Forgetting that his last words required an
answer, she leaned back in her chair and again folded her hands before
her. Her eyes were half closed and from beneath the drooping lids she
gazed through the gathering gloom at the squire's anxious face.

"I hope you think I did right," said the latter in considerable doubt.

"Quite right. I think you were both very kind to think of me as you did,"
said she.

"I am sure, I always think of you," answered Mr. Juxon simply. "I hope
that this thing will have no further consequences. Of course, until we
know of Mr. Goddard's whereabouts we shall feel very anxious. It seems
probable that if he can get here unobserved he will do so. He will
probably ask you for some money."

"Do you really think he could get here at all?" asked Mrs. Goddard. She
wanted to hear what he would say, for she thought she might judge from
his words whether her husband ran any great risk.

"Oh no," replied the squire. "I think it is very improbable. I fear this
news has sadly disturbed you, Mrs. Goddard, but let us hope all may turn
out for the best." Indeed he thought she showed very little surprise,
though she had evidently been much moved. Perhaps she had been accustomed
to expect that her husband might one day escape. She was ill, too, and
her nerves were unstrung, he supposed.

She had really passed through a very violent emotion, but it had not been
caused by her surprise, but by her momentary fear for the fugitive,
instantly allayed by Mr. Juxon's explanation. She felt that for to-day at
least Walter was safe, and by to-morrow he would be safe out of the
neighbourhood. But she reflected that it was necessary to say something;
that if she appeared to receive the news too indifferently the squire's
suspicions might be aroused with fatal results.

"It is a terrible thing," she said presently. "You see I am not at all
myself."

It was not easy for her to act a part. The words were commonplace.

"No," said Mr. Juxon, "I see you are not." He on his part, instead of
looking for a stronger expression of fear or astonishment, was now only
too glad that she should be so calm.

"Would you advise me to do anything?" she asked presently.

"There is nothing to be done," he answered quickly, glad of a chance to
relieve the embarrassment of the situation. "Of course we might put you
under the protection of the police but--what is the matter, Mrs.
Goddard?" She had started as though in pain.

"Only this dreadful headache," she said. "Go on please."

"Well, we might set Gall the policeman to watch your house; but that
would be very unpleasant for you. It would be like telling him and all
the village people of your situation--"

"Oh don't! Please don't!"

"No, certainly not. I think it very unwise. Besides--" he stopped short.
He was about to say that he felt much better able to watch over Mrs.
Goddard himself than Gall the constable could possibly be; but he checked
himself in time.

"Besides--what?" she asked.

"Nothing--Gall is not much of a policeman, that is all. I do not believe
you would be any the safer for his protection. But you must promise me,
my dear Mrs. Goddard, that if anything occurs you will let me know. I may
be of some assistance."

"Thank you, so much," said she. "You are always so kind!"

"Not at all. I am very glad if you think I was right to tell you about
it."

"Oh, quite right," she answered. "And now, Mr. Juxon, I am really not at
all well. All this has quite unnerved me--"

"You want me to go?" said the squire smiling kindly as he rose. "Yes, I
understand. Well, good-bye, my dear friend--I hope everything will
clear up."

"Good-bye. Thank you again. You always do understand me," she answered
giving him her small cold hand. "Don't think me ungrateful," she added,
looking up into his eyes.

"No indeed--not that there is anything to be grateful for."

In a moment more he was gone, feeling that he had done his duty like a
man, and that it had not been so hard after all. He was glad it was done,
however, and he felt that he could face the vicar with a bold front at
their next meeting. He went quickly down the path and crossed the road to
his own gate with a light step. As he entered the park he was not aware
of a wretched-looking tramp who slouched along the quickset hedge and
watched his retreating figure far up the avenue, till he was out of sight
among the leafless trees. If Stamboul had been with the squire the tramp
would certainly not have passed unnoticed; but for some days the roads
had been so muddy that Stamboul had been left behind when Mr. Juxon made
his visits to the cottage, lest the great hound should track the mud into
the spotless precincts of the passage. The tramp stood still and looked
after the squire so long as he could see him, and then slunk off across
the wet meadows, where the standing water was now skimmed with ice.

Walter Goddard had spent the day in watching for the squire and he had
seen him at last. He had seen him go down the road with the vicar till
they were both out of sight, and he had seen him come back and enter the
cottage. This proceeding, he argued, betrayed that the squire did not
wish to be seen going into Mary's house by the vicar. The tortuous
intelligences of bad men easily impute to others courses which they
themselves would naturally pursue. Three words on the previous evening
had sufficed to rouse the convict's jealousy. What he saw to-day
confirmed his suspicions. The gentleman in knickerbockers could be no
other than the squire himself, of course. He was evidently in the habit
of visiting Mary Goddard and he did not wish his visits to be observed by
the clergyman, who was of course the vicar or rector of the parish. That
proved conclusively in the fugitive's mind that there was something
wrong. He ground his teeth together and said to himself that it would be
worth while to run some risk in order to stop that little game, as he
expressed it. He had, as he himself had confessed to his wife, murdered
one man in escaping; a man, he reflected, could only hang once, and if he
had not been taken in the streets of London he was not likely to be
caught in the high street of Billingsfield, Essex. It would be a great
satisfaction to knock the squire on the head before he went any farther.
Moreover he had found a wonderfully safe retreat in the disused vault at
the back of the church. He discovered loose stones inside the place which
he could pile up against the low hole which served for an entrance.
Probably no one knew that there was any entrance at all--the very
existence of the vault was most likely forgotten. It was not a cheerful
place, but Goddard's nerves were excited to a pitch far beyond the reach
of supernatural fears. Whatever he might be condemned to feel in the
future, his conscience troubled him very little in the present. The vault
was comparatively dry and was in every way preferable, as a resting-place
for one night, to the interior of a mouldy haystack in the open fields.
He did not dare show himself again at the "Feathers" inn, lest he should
be held to do the day's work he had promised in payment for his night in
the barn. All that morning and afternoon he had lain hidden in the
quickset hedge near the park gate, within sight of the cottage, and he
had been rewarded. The food he had taken with him the night before had
sufficed him and he had quenched his thirst with rain-water from the
ditch. Having seen that the squire went back towards the Hall, Goddard
slunk away to his hiding-place to wait for the night. He lay down as best
he might, and listened for the hours and half-hours as the church clock
tolled them out from the lofty tower above.

Mary Goddard had told him to come later than before, and it was after
half-past ten when he tapped upon the shutter of the little drawing-room.
All was dark within, and he held his breath as he stood among the wet
creepers, listening intently for the sound of his wife's coming.
Presently the glass window inside was opened.

"Is that you?" asked Mary's voice in a tremulous whisper.

"Yes," he answered. "Let me in." Then the shutter was cautiously
unfastened and opened a little and in the dim starlight Goddard
recognised his wife's pale face. Her hand went out to him, with something
in it.

"There is the money," she whispered. "Go as quickly as you can. They are
looking for you--there are orders out to arrest you."

Goddard seized her fingers and took the money. She would have withdrawn
her hand but he held it firmly.

"Who told you that they were after me?" he asked in a fierce whisper.

"Mr. Juxon--let me go."

"Mr. Juxon!" The convict uttered a rough oath. "Your friend Mr. Juxon,
eh? He is after me, is he? Tell him--"

"Hush, hush!" she whispered. "He has no idea you are here--"

"I should think not," muttered Walter. "He would not be sneaking in here
on the sly to see you if he knew I were about!"

"What do you mean?" asked Mary. "Oh, Walter, let me go--you hurt me so!"
He held her fingers as in a vice.

"Hurt you! I wish I could strangle you and him too! Ha, you thought I was
not looking this afternoon when he came! He went to the corner of the
road with the parson, and when the parson was out of sight he came back!
I saw you!"

"You saw nothing!" answered his wife desperately. "How can you say so! If
you knew how kind he has been, what a loyal gentleman he is, you would
not dare to say such things."

"You used to say I was a loyal gentleman, Mary," retorted the convict. "I
daresay he is of the same stamp as I. Look here, Mary, if I catch this
loyal gentleman coming here any more I will cut his throat--so look out!"

"You do not mean to say you are going to remain here any longer, in
danger of your life?" said Mary in great alarm.

"Well--a man can only hang once. Give me some more of that bread and
cheese, Mary. It was exceedingly good."

"Then let me go," said his wife, trembling with horror at the threat she
had just heard.

"Oh yes. I will let you go. But I will just hold the window open in case
you don't come back soon enough. Look sharp!"

There was no need to hurry the unfortunate woman. In less than three
minutes she returned, bringing a "quartern" loaf and a large piece of
cheese. She thrust them out upon the window-sill and withdrew her hand
before he could catch it. But he held the window open.

"Now go!" she said. "I cannot do more for you--for God's sake go!"

"You seem very anxious to see the last of me," he whispered. "I daresay
if I am hanged you will get a ticket to see me turned off. Yes--we
mention those things rather freely up in town. Don't be alarmed. I will
come back to-morrow night--you had better listen. If you had shown a
little more heart, I would have been satisfied, but you are so stony that
I think I would like another fifty pounds to-morrow night. Those notes
are so deliciously crisp--"

"Listen, Walter!" said Mary. "Unless you promise to go I will raise an
alarm at once. I can face shame again well enough. I will have you--hush!
For God's sake--hush! There is somebody coming!"

The convict's quick ear had caught the sound. Instantly he knelt and then
lay down at full length upon the ground below the window. It was a fine
night and the conscientious Mr. Gall was walking his beat. The steady
tramp of his heavy shoes had something ominous in it which struck terror
into the heart of the wretched fugitive. With measured tread he came from
the direction of the village. Reaching the cottage he paused and dimly in
the starlight Mrs. Goddard could distinguish his glazed hat--the
provincial constabulary still wore hats in those days. Mr. Gall stood not
fifteen yards from the cottage, failed to observe that a window was
open on the lower floor, nodded to himself as though satisfied with his
inspection and walked on. Little by little the sound of his steps grew
fainter in the distance. Walter slowly raised himself again from the
ground, and put his head in at the window.

"You see it would not be hard to have you caught," whispered his wife,
still breathless with the passing excitement. "That was the policeman. If
I had called him, it would have been all over with you. I tell you if you
try to come again I will give you up."

"Oh, that's the way you treat me, is it?" said the convict with another
oath. "Then you had better look out for your dear Mr. Juxon, that's all."

Without another word, Goddard glided away from the window, let himself
out by the wicket gate and disappeared across the road.

Mary Goddard was in that moment less horrified by her husband's threat
than by his base ingratitude to herself and by the accusation he seemed
to make against her. Worn out with the emotions of fear and anxiety, she
had barely the strength to close and fasten the window. Then she sank
into the first chair she could find in the dark and stared into the
blackness around her. It seemed indeed more than she could bear. She was
placed in the terrible position of being obliged to betray her fugitive
husband, or of living in constant fear lest he should murder the best
friend she had in the world.




CHAPTER XVI.


On the morning after the events last described Mr. Ambrose sat at
breakfast opposite his wife. The early post had just arrived, bringing
the usual newspaper and two letters.

"Any news, my dear?" inquired Mrs. Ambrose with great suavity, as she
rinsed her teacup in the bowl preparatory to repeating the dose. "Is not
it time that we should hear from John?"

"There is a letter from him, strange to say. Wait a minute--my dear, the
Tripos is over and he wants to know if he may stop here--"

"The Tripos over already! How has he done? Do tell me, Augustin!"

"He does not know," returned the vicar, quickly looking over the
contents of the letter. "The lists are not out--he thinks he has done
very well--he has had a hint that he is high up--wants to know whether he
may stop on his way to London--he is going to see his father--"

"Of course he shall come," said Mrs. Ambrose with enthusiasm. "He must
stop here till the lists are published and then we shall know--anything
else?"

"The other is a note from a tutor of his side--my old friend Brown--he is
very enthusiastic; says it is an open secret that John will be at the
head of the list--begins to congratulate. Well, my dear, this is very
satisfactory, very flattering."

"One might say very delightful, Augustin."

"Delightful, yes quite delightful," replied the vicar, burying his long
nose in his teacup.

"I only hope it may be true. I was afraid that perhaps John had done
himself harm by coming here at Christmas. Young men are so very
light-headed, are they not, Augustin?" added Mrs. Ambrose with a prim
smile. On rare occasions she had alluded to John's unfortunate passion
for Mrs. Goddard, and when she spoke of the subject she had a tendency to
assume something of the stiffness she affected towards strangers. As has
been seen she had ceased to blame Mrs. Goddard. Generally speaking the
absent are in the wrong in such matters; she could not refer to John's
conduct without a touch of severity. But the Reverend Augustin bent his
shaggy brows; John was now successful, probably senior classic--it was
evidently no time to censure his behaviour.

"You must be charitable, my dear," he said, looking sharply at his wife.
"We have all been young once you know."

"Augustin, I am surprised at you!" said Mrs. Ambrose sternly.

"For saying that I once was young?" inquired her husband. "Strange and
paradoxical as such a statement must appear, I was once a baby."

"I think your merriment very unseemly," objected Mrs. Ambrose in a tone
of censure. "Because you were once a baby it does not follow that you
ever acted in such a very foolish way about a--"

"My dear," interrupted the vicar, handing his cup across the table, "I
wish you would leave John alone, and give me another cup of tea. John
will be here to-morrow. Let us receive him as we should. He has done us
credit."

"He will never be received otherwise in this house, Augustin," replied
Mrs. Ambrose, "whether you allow me to speak my mind or not. I am aware
that Short has done us credit, as you express it. I only hope he always
may do us credit in the future. I am sure, I was like a mother to him. He
ought never to forget it. Why, my dear, cannot you remember how I always
had his buttons looked to and gave him globules when he wanted them? I
think he might show some gratitude."

"I do not think he has failed to show it," retorted the vicar.

"Oh, well, Augustin, if you are going to talk like that it is not
possible to argue with you; but he shall be welcome, if he comes. I hope,
however, that he will not go to the cottage--"

"My dear, I have a funeral this morning. I wish you would not disturb my
mind with these trifles."

"Trifles! Who is dead? You did not tell me."

"Poor Judd's baby, of course. We have spoken of it often enough, I am
sure."

"Oh yes, of course. Poor Tom Judd!" exclaimed Mrs. Ambrose with genuine
sympathy. "It seems to me you are always burying his babies, Augustin!
It is very sad."

"Not always, my dear. Frequently," said the vicar correcting her. "It is
very sad, as you say. Very sad. You took so much trouble to help them
this time, too."

"Trouble!" Mrs. Ambrose cast up her eyes. "You don't know how much
trouble. But I am quite sure it was the fault of that brazen-faced
doctor. I cannot bear the sight of him! That comes of answering
advertisements in the newspapers."

The present doctor had bought the practice abandoned by Mrs. Ambrose's
son-in-law. He had paid well for it, but his religious principles had not
formed a part of the bargain.

"It is of no use to cry over spilt milk, my dear."

"I do not mean to. No, I never do. But it is very unpleasant to have such
people about. I really hope Tom Judd will not lose his next baby. When
is John coming?"

"To-morrow. My dear, if I forget it this morning, will you remember to
speak to Reynolds about the calf?"

"Certainly, Augustin," said his wife. Therewith the good vicar left her
and went to bury Tom Judd's baby, divided in his mind between rejoicing
over his favourite pupil's success and lamenting, as he sincerely did,
the misfortunes which befell his parishioners. When he left the
churchyard an hour later he was met by Martha, who came from the cottage
with a message begging that the vicar would come to Mrs. Goddard as soon
as possible. Martha believed her mistress was ill, she wanted to see Mr.
Ambrose at once. Without returning to the vicarage he turned to the left
towards the cottage.

Mrs. Goddard had slept that night, being exhausted and almost broken down
with fatigue. But she woke only to a sense of the utmost pain and
distress, realising that to-day's anxiety was harder to bear than
yesterday's, and that to-morrow might bring forth even worse disasters
than those which had gone before. Her position was one of extreme doubt
and peril. To tell any one that her husband was in the neighbourhood
seemed to be equivalent to rooting out the very last remnant of
consideration for him which remained in her heart, the very last trace of
what had once been the chief joy and delight of her life. She hesitated
long. There is perhaps nothing in human nature more enduring than the
love of man and wife; or perhaps one should rather say than the love of a
woman for her husband. There appear to be some men capable of being so
completely estranged from their wives that there positively does not
remain in them even the faintest recollection of what they have once
felt, nor the possibility of feeling the least pity for what the women
they once loved so well may suffer. There is no woman, I believe, who
having once loved her husband truly, could see him in pain or distress,
or in danger of his life, without earnestly endeavouring to help him. A
woman may cease to love her husband; in some cases she is right in
forgetting her love, but it would be hard to find a case where, were he
the worst criminal alive, had he deceived her a thousand times, she would
not at least help him to escape from his pursuers or give him a crust to
save him from starvation.

Mary Goddard had done her best for the wretch who had claimed her
assistance. She had fed him, provided him with money, refused to betray
him. But if it were to be a question of giving him up to the law, or of
allowing her best friend to be murdered by him, or even seriously
injured, she felt that pity must be at an end. It would be doubtless a
very horrible thing to give him up, and she had gathered from what he had
said that if he were taken he would pay the last penalty of the law. It
was so awful a thing that she groaned when she thought of it. But she
remembered his ghastly face in the starlight and the threat he had hissed
out against the squire; he was a desperate man, with blood already on his
hands. It was more than likely that he would do the deed he had
threatened to do. What could be easier than to watch the squire on one of
those evenings when he went up the park alone, to fall upon him and take
his life? Of late Mr. Juxon did not even take his dog with him. The
savage bloodhound would be a good protector; but even when he took
Stamboul with him by day, he never brought him at night. It was too long
for the beast to wait, he used to say, from six to nine or half past; he
was so savage that he did not care to leave him out of his sight; he
brought mud into the cottage, or into the vicarage as the case might
be--if Stamboul had been an ordinary dog it would have been different.
Those Russian bloodhounds were not to be trifled with. But the squire
must be warned of his danger before another night came on.

It was a difficult question. Mrs. Goddard at first thought of telling him
herself; but she shrank from the thought, for she was exhausted and
overwrought. A few days ago she would have been brave enough to say
anything if necessary, but now she had no longer the courage nor the
strength. It seemed so hard to face the squire with such a warning; it
seemed as though she were doing something which would make her seem
ungrateful in his eyes, though she hardly knew why it seemed so. She
turned more naturally to the vicar, to whom she had originally come in
her first great distress; she had only once consulted him, but that one
occasion seemed to establish a precedent in her mind, the precedent of a
thing familiar. It would certainly be easier. After much thought and
inward debate, she determined to send for Mr. Ambrose.

The fatigue and anxiety she had undergone during the last two days had
wrought great changes in her face. A girl of eighteen or twenty years may
gain delicacy and even beauty from the physical effects of grief, but a
woman over thirty years old gains neither. Mrs. Goddard's complexion,
naturally pale, had taken a livid hue; her lips, which were never very
red, were almost white; heavy purple shadows darkened her eyes; the two
or three lines that were hardly noticeable, but which were the natural
result of a sad expression in her face, had in two days become distinctly
visible and had almost assumed the proportions of veritable wrinkles. Her
features were drawn and pinched--she looked ten years older than she was.
Nothing remained of her beauty but her soft waving brown hair and her
deep, pathetic, violet eyes. Even her small hands seemed to have grown
thin and looked unnaturally white and transparent.

She was sitting in her favourite chair by the fire, when the vicar
arrived. She had not been willing to seem ill, in spite of what Martha
had said, and she had refused to put cushions in the chair. She was
making an effort, and even a little sense of physical discomfort helped
to make the effort seem easier. She was so much exhausted that she felt
she must not for one moment relax the tension she imposed upon herself
lest her whole remaining strength should suddenly collapse and leave her
at the mercy of events. But Mr. Ambrose was startled when he saw her and
feared that she was very ill.

"My dear Mrs. Goddard," he said, "what is the matter? Are you ill? Has
anything happened?"

As he spoke he changed the form of his question, suddenly recollecting
that Mr. Juxon had probably on the previous afternoon told her of her
husband's escape, as he had meant to do. This might be the cause of her
indisposition.

"Yes," she said in a voice that did not sound like her own, "I have asked
you to come because I am in great trouble--in desperate trouble."

"Dear me," said the vicar, "I hope not!"

"Not desperate? Perhaps not. Dear Mr. Ambrose, you have always been so
kind to me--I am sure you can help me now." Her voice trembled.

"Indeed I will do my best," said the vicar who judged from so unusual an
outburst that there must be really something wrong. "If you could tell me
what it is--" he suggested.

"That is the hardest part of it," said the unhappy woman. She paused a
moment as though to collect her strength. "You know," she began again,
"that my husband has escaped?"

"A terrible business!" exclaimed the good man, nodding, however, in
affirmation to the question she asked.

"I have seen him," said Mary Goddard very faintly, looking down at her
thin hands. The vicar started in astonishment.

"My dear friend--dear me! Dear, dear, how very painful!"

"Indeed, you do not know what I have suffered. It is most dreadful, Mr.
Ambrose. You cannot imagine what a struggle it was. I am quite worn out."

She spoke with such evident pain that the vicar was moved. He felt that
she had more to tell, but he had hardly recovered from his surprise.

"But, you know," he said, "that was the whole object of warning you. We
did not really believe that he would come here. We were so much afraid
that he would startle you. Of course Mr. Juxon told you he consulted
me--"

"Of course," answered Mrs. Goddard. "It was too late. I had seen him the
night before."

"Why, that was the very night we were here!" exclaimed Mr. Ambrose, more
and more amazed. Mrs. Goddard nodded. She seemed hardly able to speak.

"He came and knocked at that window," she said, very faintly. "He came
again last night."

"Dear me--I will send for Gall at once; he will have no difficulty in
arresting him--"

"Oh please!" interrupted Mrs. Goddard in hysterical tones. "Please,
please, dear Mr. Ambrose, don't!"

The vicar was silent. He rose unceremoniously from his chair and walked
to the window, as he generally did when in any great doubt. He realised
at once and very vividly the awful position in which the poor lady was
placed.

"Pray do not think I am very bad," said she, almost sobbing with fear and
emotion. "Of course it must seem dreadful to you that I should wish him
to escape!"

The vicar came slowly back and stood beside her leaning against the
chimney-piece. It did not take him long to make up his mind. Kind-hearted
people are generally impulsive.

"I do not, my dear lady. I assure you I fully understand your position.
The fact is, I was too much surprised and I am too anxious for your
safety not to think immediately of securing that--ahem--that unfortunate
man."

"Oh, it is not my safety! It is not only my safety--"

"I understand--yes--of course you are anxious about him. But it is
doubtless not our business to aid the law in its course, provided we do
not oppose it."

"It is something else," murmured Mrs. Goddard. "Oh! how shall I tell
you," she moaned turning her pale cheek to the back of the chair.

The vicar looked at her and began to think it was perhaps some strange
case of conscience with which he had to deal. He had very little
experience of such things save in the rude form they take among the
labouring classes. But he reflected that it was likely to be something of
the kind; in such a case Mrs. Goddard would naturally enough have sent
for him, more as her clergyman than as her friend. She looked like a
person suffering from some great mental strain. He sat down beside her
and took her passive hand. He was moved, and felt as though he might have
been her father.

"My dear," he said kindly, almost as though he were speaking to a child,
"have you anything upon your mind, anything which distresses you? Do you
wish to tell me? If so I will do my very best to help you."

Mrs. Goddard's fingers pressed his hand a little, but her face was still
turned away.

"It is Mr. Juxon," she almost whispered. If she had been watching the
vicar she would have noticed the strange air of perplexity which came
over his face when he heard the squire's name.

"Yes--Mr. Juxon," she moaned. Then the choked-down horror rose in her
throat. "Walter means to murder him!" she almost screamed. "Oh, my God,
my God, what shall I do!" she cried aloud clasping her hands suddenly
over her face and rocking herself to and fro.

The vicar was horror-struck; he could hardly believe his ears, and
believing them his senses swam. In his wildest dreams--and the good man's
dreams were rarely wild--he had never thought that such things could come
near him. Being a very good man and, moreover, a wise man when he had
plenty of time for reflection, he folded his hands quietly and bent his
head, praying fervently for the poor tortured woman who moaned and tossed
herself beside him. It was a terrible moment. Suddenly she controlled
herself and grasping one of the arms of the chair looked round at her
silent companion.

"You must save him," she said in agonised tones, "you must save them
both! Do not tell me you cannot--oh, do not tell me that!"

It was a passionate and heart-broken appeal, such a one as few men would
or could resist, coming as it did from a helpless and miserably unhappy
woman. Whether the vicar was wise in giving the answer he did, it would
be hard to say: but he was a man who honestly tried to do his best.

"I will try, my dear lady," he said, making a great resolution. Mrs.
Goddard took his hand and pressed it in both of hers, and the long
restrained tears flowed fast and softly over her worn cheeks. For some
moments neither spoke.

"If you cannot save both--you must save--Mr. Juxon," she said at last,
breathing the words rather than speaking them.

The vicar knew or guessed what it must cost her to hint that her husband
might be captured. He recognised that the only way in which he could
contribute towards the escape of the convict was by not revealing his
hiding-place, and he accordingly refrained from asking where he was
concealed. He shuddered as he thought that Goddard might be lying hidden
in the cottage itself, for all he could tell, but he was quite sure that
he ought not to know it. So long as he did not know where the forger was,
it was easy to hold his peace; but if once he knew, the vicar was not
capable of denying the knowledge. He had never told a lie in his life.

"I will try," he repeated; and growing calmer, he added, "You are
quite sure this was not an empty threat, my dear friend? Was there any
reason--a--I mean to say, had this unfortunate man ever known Mr. Juxon?"

"Oh no!" answered Mrs. Goddard, sinking back into her chair. "He never
knew him." Her tears were still flowing but she no longer sobbed aloud;
it had been a relief to her overwrought and sensitive temperament to give
way to the fit of weeping. She actually felt better, though ten minutes
earlier she would not have believed it possible.

"Then--why?" asked Mr. Ambrose, hesitating.

"My poor husband was a very jealous man," she answered. "I accidentally
told him that the cottage belonged to Mr. Juxon and yesterday--do you
remember? You walked on with Mr. Juxon beyond the turning, and then he
came back to see me--to tell me of my husband's escape. Walter saw that
and--and he thought, I suppose--that Mr. Juxon did not want you to see
him coming here."

"But Mr. Juxon had just promised me to go and see you," said the honest
vicar.

"Yes," said poor Mrs. Goddard, beginning to sob again, "but Walter--my
husband--thinks that I--I care for Mr. Juxon--he is so jealous," cried
she, again covering her face with her hands. The starting tears trickled
through her fingers and fell upon her black dress. She was ashamed, this
time, for she hated even to speak of such a possibility.

"I understand," answered Mr. Ambrose gravely. It certainly did not strike
him that it might be true, and his knowledge of such characters as Walter
Goddard was got chiefly from the newspapers. He had often noticed in
reports of trials and detailed descriptions of crimes that criminals seem
to become entirely irrational after a certain length of time, and it was
one of the arguments he best understood for demonstrating that bad men
either are originally, or ultimately become mad. To men like the vicar,
almost the only possible theory of crime is the theory of insanity. It is
positively impossible for a man who has passed thirty or forty years in a
quiet country parish to comprehend the motives or the actions of great
criminals. He naturally says they must be crazy or they would not do such
things. If Goddard were crazy enough to commit a forgery, he was crazy
enough for anything, even to the extent of suspecting that his wife loved
the squire.

"I think," said Mr. Ambrose, "that if you agree with me it will be best
to warn Mr. Juxon of his danger."

"Of course," murmured Mrs. Goddard. "You must warn him at once!"

"I will go to the Hall now," said the vicar bravely. "But--I am very
sorry to have to dwell on the subject, my dear lady, but, without wishing
in the least to know where the--your husband is, could you tell me
anything about his appearance? For instance, if you understand what I
mean, supposing that Mr. Juxon knew how he looked and should happen to
meet him, knowing that he wished to kill him--he might perhaps avoid him,
if you understand me?"

The vicar's English was a little disturbed by his extreme desire not to
hurt Mrs. Goddard's feelings. If the squire and his dog chanced to meet
Walter Goddard they would probably not avoid him as the vicar expressed
it; that was a point Mr. Ambrose was willing to leave to Mrs. Goddard's
imagination.

"Yes--must you know?" she asked anxiously.

"We must know that," returned the vicar.

"He is disguised as a poor tramp," she said sorrowfully. "He wears a
smock-frock and an old hat I think. He is pale--oh, poor, poor Walter!"
she cried again bursting into tears.

Mr. Ambrose could say nothing. There was nothing to be said. He rose and
took his hat--the old tall hat he wore to his parishioners' funerals.
They were very primitive people in Billingsfield.

"I will go at once," he said. "Believe me, you have all my sympathy--I
will do all I can."

Mary Goddard thanked him more by her looks than with any words she was
able to speak. But she was none the less truly grateful for his sympathy
and aid. She had a kind of blind reliance on him which made her feel that
since she had once confided her trouble and danger nothing more could
possibly be done. When he was gone, she sobbed with relief, as before she
had wept for fear; she was hysterical, unstrung, utterly unlike herself.

But as the vicar went up towards the Hall he felt that he had his hands
full, and he felt moreover an uneasy sensation which he could not have
explained. He was certainly no coward, but he had never been in such a
position before and he did not like it; there was an air of danger about,
an atmosphere which gave him a peculiarly unpleasant thrill from time to
time. He was not engaged upon an agreeable errand, and he had a vague
feeling, due, the scientists would have told him, to unconscious
ratiocination, which seemed to tell him that something was going to
happen. People who are very often in danger know that singular uneasiness
which warns them that all is not well; it is not like anything else that
can be felt. No one really knows its cause, unless it be true that the
mind sometimes reasons for itself without the consciousness of the body,
and communicates to the latter a spasmodic warning, the result of its
cogitations.

To say to the sturdy squire, "Beware of a man in a smock-frock, one
Goddard the forger, who means to murder you," seemed of itself simple
enough. But for the squire to distinguish this same Goddard from all
other men in smock-frocks was a less easy matter. The vicar, indeed,
could tell a strange face at a hundred yards, for he knew every man,
woman and child in his parish; but the squire's acquaintance was more
limited. Obviously, said Mr. Ambrose to himself, the squire's best course
would be to stay quietly at home until the danger was passed, and to pass
word to Policeman Gall to lay hands on any particularly seedy-looking
tramps he happened to see in the village. It was Gall's duty to do so in
any case, as he had been warned to be on the look-out. Mr. Ambrose
inwardly wondered where the man could be hiding. Billingsfield was not,
he believed, an easy place to hide in, for every ploughman knew his
fellow, and a new face was always an object of suspicion. Not a gipsy
tinker entered the village but what every one heard of it, and though
tramps came through from time to time, it would be a difficult matter for
one of them to remain two days in the place without attracting a great
deal of attention. It was possible that Walter Goddard might have been
concealed for one night in his wife's house, but even there he could not
have remained hidden for two days without being seen by Mrs. Goddard's
two women servants. The vicar walked rapidly through the park, looking
about him suspiciously as he went. Goddard might at that very moment be
lurking behind any one of those oaks; it would be most unpleasant if he
mistook the vicar for the squire. But that, the vicar reflected, was
impossible on account of his clerical dress. He reached the Hall in
safety and stood looking down among the leafless trees, waiting for the
door to be opened.




CHAPTER XVII.


Mr. Juxon received the vicar in the library as he had received him on the
previous day; but on the present occasion Mr. Ambrose had not been sent
for and the squire's face wore an expression of inquiry. He supposed his
friend had come to ask him the result of the interview with Mrs. Goddard,
and as he himself was on the point of going towards the cottage he wished
the vicar had come at a later or an earlier hour.

"I have a message to give you," said Mr. Ambrose, "a very important
message."

"Indeed?" answered the squire, observing his serious face.

"Yes. I had better tell you at once. Mrs. Goddard sent for me this
morning. She has actually seen her husband, who must be hiding in the
neighbourhood. He came to her drawing-room window last night and the
night before."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Mr. Juxon. "You don't tell me so!"

"That is not the worst of the matter," continued the vicar, looking very
grave and fixing his eyes on the squire's face. "This villainous fellow
has been threatening to take your life, Mr. Juxon."

Mr. Juxon stared at the vicar for a moment in surprise, and then broke
into a hearty laugh.

"My life!" he cried. "Upon my word, the fellow does not know what he is
talking about! Do you mean to say that this escaped convict, who can be
arrested at sight wherever he is found, imagines that he could attack me
in broad daylight without being caught?"

"Well, no, I suppose not--but you often walk home at night, Mr.
Juxon--alone through the park."

"I think that dog of mine could manage Mr. Goddard," remarked the squire
calmly. "And pray, Mr. Ambrose, now that we know that the man is in the
neighbourhood, what is to prevent us from finding him?"

"We do not know where he is," replied the vicar, thanking the inspiration
which had prevented him from asking Mrs. Goddard more questions. He had
promised to save Goddard, too, or at least not to facilitate his capture.
But though he was glad to be able to say honestly that he did not know
where he was, he began to doubt whether in the eyes of the law he was
acting rightly.

"You do not know?" asked the squire.

"No; and besides I think--perhaps--we ought to consider poor Mrs.
Goddard's position."

"Mrs. Goddard's position!" exclaimed Mr. Juxon almost angrily. "And who
should consider her position more than I, Mr. Ambrose? My dear sir, I
consider her position before all things--of course I do. But nothing
could be of greater advantage to her position than the certainty that her
husband is safely lodged in prison. I cannot imagine how he contrived
to escape--can you?"

"No, I cannot," answered Mr. Ambrose, thrusting his hands into his
pockets and biting his long upper lip.

"By the bye, did the fellow happen to say why he meant to lay violent
hands on me?" inquired Mr. Juxon.

"Since you ask--he did. It appears that he saw you going into the
cottage, and immediately became jealous--"

"Of me?" Mr. Juxon coloured a little beneath his bronzed complexion, and
grew more angry. "Well, upon my word! But if that is true I am much
obliged for your warning. Fellows of that sort never reason--he will very
likely attack me as you say. It will be quite the last time he attacks
anybody--the devil shall have his own, Mr. Ambrose, if I can help him to
it--"

"Dear me! Mr. Juxon--you surprise me," said the vicar, who had never
heard his friend use such strong language before.

"It is enough to surprise anybody," remarked the squire. "I trust we
shall surprise Mr. Goddard before night. Excuse me, but when did he
express his amiable intentions towards me?"

"Last night, I believe," replied Mr. Ambrose, reluctantly.

"And when did he see me going into the cottage?"

"Yesterday afternoon, I believe." The vicar felt as though he were
beginning to break his promise of shielding the fugitive, but he could
not refuse to answer a direct question.

"Then, when he saw me, he was either in the cottage or in the park. There
was no one in the road, I am quite sure."

"I do not know," said the vicar, delighted at being able to say so. He
was such a simple man that Mr. Juxon noticed the tone of relief in which
he denied any knowledge of Goddard's whereabouts on the previous day as
compared with his reluctance to answer upon those points of which he was
certain.

"You are not anxious that Goddard should be caught," said the squire
rather sharply.

"Frankly," returned the vicar, "I do not wish to be instrumental in his
capture--not that I am likely to be."

"That is none of my business, Mr. Ambrose. I will try and catch him
alone. But it would be better that he should be taken alive and
quietly--"

"Surely," cried the vicar in great alarm, "you would not kill him?"

"Oh no, certainly not. But my dog might, Mr. Ambrose. They are ugly dogs
when they are angry, and they have a remarkable faculty for finding
people who are lost. They used to use them in Russia for tracking
fugitive serfs and convicts who escaped from Siberia."

Mr. Ambrose shuddered. The honest squire seemed almost as bloodthirsty in
his eyes as the convict Goddard. He felt that he did not understand Mr.
Juxon. The idea of hunting people with bloodhounds seemed utterly foreign
to his English nature, and he could not understand how his English friend
could entertain such a thought; he probably forgot that a few generations
earlier the hunting of all kinds of men, papists, dissenters, covenanters
and rebels, with dogs, had been a favourite English sport.

"Really, Mr. Juxon," he said in an agitated tone, "I think you would do
much better to protect yourself with the means provided by the law.
Considerations of humanity--"

"Considerations of humanity, sir, are at an end when one man threatens
the life of another. You admit yourself that I am not safe unless Goddard
is caught, and yet you object to my method of catching him. That is
illogical."

The vicar felt that this was to some extent true; but he was not willing
to admit it. He knew also that if he could dissuade the squire from his
barbarous scheme, Goddard would have a far better chance of escape.

"I think that with the assistance of Gall and a London detective--" he
began.

"Gall is an old woman, Mr. Ambrose, and it will take twenty-four hours to
get a detective from town. In twenty-four hours this man may have
attacked me."

"He will hardly attempt to force his way into your house, Mr. Juxon."

"So then, I am to stay at home to suit his convenience? I will not do any
such thing. Besides, in twenty-four hours Goddard may have changed his
mind and may have taken himself off. For the rest of her life Mrs.
Goddard will then be exposed to the possibility of every kind of
annoyance."

"He would never come back, I am sure," objected the vicar.

"Why not? Every time he comes she will give him money. The more money she
gives him the more often he will come, unless we put an end to his coming
altogether."

"You seem to forget," urged Mr. Ambrose, "that there will be a vigorous
search made for him. Why not telegraph to the governor of Portland?"

"I thought you wanted to save Mrs. Goddard from needless scandal; did you
not?" returned the squire. "The governor of Portland would send down a
squad of police who would publish the whole affair. He would have done so
as soon as the man escaped had he known that Mrs. Goddard lived here."

"I wonder how Goddard himself knew it," remarked Mr. Ambrose.

"I don't know. Perhaps she told him she was coming here, at their last
interview. Or perhaps she wrote to him in prison and the governor
overlooked the letter. Anything like that would account for it."

"But if you catch him--alive," hesitated the vicar, "it will all be known
at once. I do not see how you can prevent that."

"If I catch him alive, I will take him out of Billingsfield without any
one's knowledge. I do not mean to hurt him. I only want to get him back
to prison. Believe me, I am much more anxious than you can possibly be to
save Mrs. Goddard from harm."

"Very well. I have done my errand," said Mr. Ambrose, with a sort of sigh
of relief. "I confess, I am in great anxiety of mind, both on your
account and on hers. I never dreamed that such things could happen in
Billingsfield."

"You are certainly not responsible for them," answered Mr. Juxon. "It is
not your fault--"

"Not altogether, perhaps. But I was perhaps wrong in letting her come
here--no, I am sure I was not," he added impulsively, as though ashamed
of having said anything so unkind.

"Certainly not. You were quite right, Mr. Ambrose, quite right, I assure
you."

"Well, I hope all may yet be for the best," said the vicar.

"Let us hope so," replied Mr. Juxon gravely. "By all means, let us hope
that all may be for the best."

Whether the squire doubted the possibility of so happy an issue to events
or not, is uncertain. He felt almost more sorry for the vicar than for
himself; the vicar was such a good man, so unused to the violent deeds of
violent people, of which the squire in his wanderings had seen more than
was necessary to convince him that all was not always for the best in
this best of all possible worlds.

Mr. Ambrose left his friend and as he retraced his steps through the park
was more disturbed than ever. That Goddard should contemplate killing the
squire was bad enough, in all conscience, but that the squire should
deliberately purpose to hunt down Goddard with his bloodhound seemed
somehow even worse. The vicar had indeed promised Mrs. Goddard that he
would not help to capture her husband, but he would have been as glad as
any one to hear that the convict was once more lodged in his prison.
There lurked in his mind, nevertheless, an impression that even a convict
should have a fair chance. The idea was not expressed, but existed in
him. Everybody, he would have said, ought to have a fair chance, and
as the law of nations forbids the use of explosive bullets in warfare,
the laws of humanity seemed to forbid the use of bloodhounds in the
pursuit of criminals. He had a very great respect for the squire's
character and principles, but the cold-blooded way in which Mr. Juxon had
spoken of catching and probably killing Walter Goddard, had shaken the
good vicar's belief in his friend. He doubted whether he were not now
bound to return to Mrs. Goddard and to warn her in his turn of her
husband's danger, whether he ought not to do something to save the
wretched convict from his fate. It seemed hideous to think that in
peaceful Billingsfield, in his own lonely parish, a human being should be
exposed to such peril. But at this point the vicar's continuity forsook
him. He had not the heart to tell the tale of his interview with Mr.
Juxon to the unhappy lady he had left that morning. It was extremely
improbable, he thought, that she should be able to communicate with her
husband during the day, and the squire's language led him to think that
the day would not pass without some attempt to discover Walter Goddard's
hiding-place. Besides, the vicar's mind was altogether more disturbed
than it had been in thirty years, and he was no longer able to account to
himself with absolute accuracy for what he did. At all events, he felt
that it was better not to tell Mrs. Goddard what the squire had said.

When he was gone, Mr. Juxon paced his library alone in the greatest
uncertainty. He had told the vicar in his anger that he would find
Goddard with the help of Stamboul. That the hound was able to accomplish
the feat in the present weather, and if Goddard had actually stood some
time at the cottage window on the previous night, he did not doubt for a
moment. The vicar had mentioned the window to him when he told him that
Mrs. Goddard had seen her husband. He had probably been at the window as
late as midnight, and the scent, renewed by his visit, would not be
twelve hours old. Stamboul could find the man, unless he had got into a
cart, which was improbable. But a new and startling consideration
presented itself to the squire's mind when the vicar was gone and his
anger had subsided; a consideration which made him hesitate what course
to pursue.

That he would be justified in using any means in his power to catch the
criminal seemed certain. It would be for the public good that he should
be delivered up to justice as soon as possible. So long as Goddard was at
large the squire's own life was not safe, and Mrs. Goddard was liable to
all kinds of annoyances at any moment. There was every reason why the
fellow should be captured. But to capture him, safe and sound, was one
thing; to expose him to the jaws of Stamboul was quite another. Mr. Juxon
had a lively recollection of the day in the Belgrade forest when the
great hound had pulled down one of his assailants, making his fangs meet
through flesh and bone. If Stamboul were set upon Goddard's track, the
convict could hardly escape with his life. In the first flush of the
squire's anger this seemed of little importance. But on mature reflection
the thing appeared in a different light.

He loved Mrs. Goddard in his own way, which was a very honourable way, if
not very passionate. He had asked her to marry him. She had expressed a
wish that she were a widow, implying perhaps that if she had been free
she would have accepted him. If the obstacle of her living husband were
removed, it was not improbable that she would look favourably upon the
squire's suit; to bring Goddard to an untimely end would undoubtedly be
to clear the way for the squire. It was not then, a legitimate desire for
justice which made him wish to catch the convict and almost to wish that
Stamboul might worry him to death; it was the secret hope that Goddard
might be killed and that he, Charles James Juxon, might have the chance
to marry his widow. "In other words," he said to himself, "I really want
to murder Goddard and take his wife."

It was not easy to see where legitimate severity ended and unlawful and
murderous selfishness began. The temptation was a terrible one. The very
uncertainty which there was, tempted the squire to disregard the
possibility of Goddard's death as compared with the importance of his
capture. It was quite likely, he unconsciously argued, that the
bloodhound would not kill him after all; it was even possible that he
might not find him; but it would be worth while to make the attempt, for
the results to be obtained by catching the fugitive were very great--Mrs.
Goddard's peace was to be considered before all things. But still before
the squire's eyes arose the picture of Stamboul tearing the throat of the
man he had killed in the Belgrade forest. If he killed the felon, Juxon
would know that to all intents and purposes he had himself done the deed
in order to marry Mrs. Goddard. But still the thought remained with him
and would not leave him.

The fellow had threatened his own life. It was then a fair fight,
for a man cannot be blamed if he tries to get the better of one who is
going about to kill him. On one of his many voyages, he had once shot a
man in order to quell a mutiny; he had not killed him it is true, but
he had disabled him for the time--he had handled many a rough customer
in his day. The case, he thought, was similar, for it was the case of
self-defence. The law, even, would say he was justified. But to slay a
man in self-defence and then to marry his widow, though justifiable in
law, is a very delicate case for the conscience; and in spite of the
wandering life he had led, Mr. Juxon's conscience was sensitive. He was
an honest man and a gentleman, he had tried all his life to do right as
he saw it, and did not mean to turn murderer now, no matter how easy it
would be for him to defend his action.

At the end of an hour he had decided that it would be murder, and no
less, to let Stamboul track Goddard to his hiding-place. The hound might
accompany him in his walks, and if anybody attacked him it would be so
much the worse for his assailant. Murder or no murder, he was entitled to
take any precautions he pleased against an assault. But he would not
willingly put the bloodhound on the scent, and he knew well enough that
the dog would not run upon a strange trail unless he were put to it.
The squire went to his lunch, feeling that he had made a good resolution;
but he ate little and soon afterwards began to feel the need of going
down to see Mrs. Goddard. No day was complete without seeing her, and
considering the circumstances which had occurred on the previous
afternoon, it was natural that he should call to inquire after her state.
In the hall, the gigantic beast which had played such an important part
in his thoughts during the morning, came solemnly up to him, raising his
great red eyes as though asking whether he were to accompany his master.
The squire stood still and looked at him for a moment.

"Come along, Stamboul!" he said suddenly, as he put on his hat. The hound
leaped up and laid his heavy paws on the squire's shoulders, trying to
lick his face in his delight, then, almost upsetting the sturdy man he
sprang back, slipped on the polished floor, recovered himself and with an
enormous stride bounded past Mr. Juxon, out into the park. But Mr. Juxon
quickly called him back, and presently he was following close at heel in
his own stately way, looking neither to the right nor to the left. The
squire felt nervous, and the sensation was new to him. He did not believe
that Goddard would really attack him at all, certainly not that he would
dare to attack him in broad daylight. But the knowledge of the threat the
fellow had uttered made him watchful. He glanced to the right and left as
he walked and gripped his heavy blackthorn stick firmly in his hand. He
wished that if the man were to appear he would come quickly--it might be
hard to hold Stamboul back if he were attacked unawares.

He reached the gate, crossed the road and rang the bell of the cottage.
As he stood waiting, Stamboul smelled the ground, put up his head,
smelled it again and with his nose down trotted slowly to the window on
the left hand of the door. He smelled the ground, the wall and presently
put both his fore paws upon the outer ledge of the window. Then he
dropped again, and looked at his master. Martha was a long time in coming
to the door.

"After him, Stamboul!" said the squire, almost unconsciously. The dog put
his nose down and began to move slowly about. At that moment the door
opened.

"Oh, sir," said Martha, "it's you, sir. I was to say, if you please, that
if you called, Mrs. Goddard was poorly to-day, sir."

"Dear me!" said Mr. Juxon, "I hope she is not ill. Is it anything
serious, Martha?"

"Well, sir, she's been down this mornin', but her head ached terrible bad
and she went back to her room--oh, sir, your dog--he's a runnin' home."

As she spoke a sound rang in the air that made Martha start back. It was
a deep, resounding, bell-like note, fierce and wild, rising and falling,
low but full, with a horror indescribable in its echo--the sound which no
man who has heard it ever forgets--the baying of a bloodhound on the
track of a man.

The squire turned deadly pale, but he shouted with all his might, as he
would have shouted to a man on the topsail yard in a gale at sea.

"Stamboul! Stamboul! Stamboul!" Again and again he yelled the dog's name.

Stamboul had not gone far. The quickset hedge had baffled the scent for a
moment and he was not a dozen yards beyond it in the park when his
master's cry stopped him. Instantly he turned, cleared the six-foot hedge
and double ditch at a bound and came leaping back across the road. The
squire breathed hard, for it had been a terrible moment. If he had not
succeeded in calling the beast back, it might have been all over with
Walter Goddard, wherever he was hidden.

"It is only his play," said Mr. Juxon, still very white and holding
Stamboul by the collar. "Please tell Mrs. Goddard, Martha, that I am very
sorry indeed to hear that she is ill, and that I will inquire this
evening."

"Yes, sir," said Martha, who eyed the panting beast timidly and showed an
evident desire to shut the door as soon as possible.

The squire felt more nervous than ever as he walked slowly along the road
in the direction of the village, his hand still on the bloodhound's
collar. He felt what a narrow escape Goddard had probably had, and the
terrible sound of Stamboul's baying had brought back to him once again
and very vividly the scene in the woods by the Bosphorus. He felt that
for a few minutes at least he would rather not enter the park with the
dog by him, and he naturally turned towards the vicarage, not with any
intention of going in, but from sheer force of custom, as people under
the influence of strong emotions often do things unconsciously which they
are in the habit of doing. He walked slowly along, and had almost reached
Mr. Ambrose's pretty old red brick house, when he found himself face to
face with the vicar's wife. She presented an imposing appearance, as
usual; her grey skirt, drawn up a little from the mud, revealed a bright
red petticoat and those stout shoes which she regarded as so essential
to health; she wore moreover a capacious sealskin jacket and a dark
bonnet with certain jet flowers, which for many years had been regarded
by the inhabitants of Billingsfield as the distinctive badge of a
gentlewoman. Mrs. Ambrose was wont to smile and say that they were
indestructible and would last as long as she did. She greeted Mr. Juxon
cordially.

"How do you, Mr. Juxon--were you going to see us? I was just going for a
walk--perhaps you will come with me?"

Mr. Juxon turned back and prepared to accompany her.

"Such good news this morning, from John Short," she said. "He has
finished his examinations, and it seems almost certain that he will be
senior classic. His tutor at Trinity has written already to congratulate
my husband upon his success."

"I am sure, I am delighted, too," said the squire, who had regained his
composure but kept his hold on Stamboul's collar. "He deserves all he
gets, and more too," he continued. "I think he will be a remarkable man."

"I did not think you liked him so very much," said Mrs. Ambrose rather
doubtfully, as she walked slowly by his side.

"Oh--I liked him very much. Indeed, I was going to ask him to stay with
me for a few days at the Hall."

The inspiration was spontaneous. Mr. Juxon was in a frame of mind in
which he felt that he ought to do something pleasant for somebody, to set
off against the bloodthirsty designs which had passed through his mind in
the morning. He knew that if he had not been over friendly to John, it
had been John's own fault; but since he had found out that it was
impossible to marry Mrs. Goddard, he had forgiven the young scholar his
shortcomings and felt very charitably inclined towards him. It suddenly
struck him that it would give John great pleasure to stop at the Hall for
a few days, and that it would be no inconvenience to himself. The effect
upon Mrs. Ambrose was greater even than he had expected. She was
hospitable, good and kind, but she was also economical, as she had need
to be. The squire was rich. If the squire would put up John during a part
of his visit it would be a kindness to John himself, and an economy to
the vicarage. Mr. Ambrose himself would not have gone to such a length;
but then, as his wife said to herself in self-defence, Augustin did not
pay the butcher's bills, and did not know how the money went. She did not
say that Augustin was precisely what is called reckless, but he of course
did not understand economy as she did. How should he, poor man, with all
his sermons and his funerals and other occupations to take his mind off?
Mrs. Ambrose was delighted at the squire's proposal.

"Really!" she exclaimed. "That would be too good of you, Mr. Juxon. And
you do not know how it would quite delight him! He loves books so much,
and then you know," she added in a confidential manner, "he has never
stayed in a country house in his life, I am quite sure."

"And when is he coming down?" asked Mr. Juxon. "I should be very much
pleased to have him."

"To-morrow, I think," said Mrs. Ambrose.

"Well--would you ask him from me to come up and stop a week? Can you
spare him, Mrs. Ambrose? I know you are very fond of him, of course,
but--"

"Oh very," said she warmly. "But I think it likely he will stay some
time," she added in explanation of her willingness to let him go to the
Hall.

The squire felt vaguely that the presence of a guest in his house would
probably be a restraint upon him, and he felt that some restraint would
be agreeable to him at the present time.

"Besides," added Mrs. Ambrose, "if you would like to have him
first--there is a little repair necessary in his room at the vicarage--we
have put it off too long--"

"By all means." said the squire, following out his own train of thought.
"Send him up to me as soon as he comes. If I can manage it I will be down
here to ask him myself."

"It is so good of you," said Mrs. Ambrose.

"Not at all. Are you going to the cottage?"

"Yes--why?"

"Nothing," said Mr. Juxon. "I did not know whether you would like to walk
on a little farther with me. Good-bye, then. You will tell Short as soon
as he comes, will you not?"

"Certainly," replied Mrs. Ambrose, still beaming upon him. "I will not
let him unpack his things at the vicarage. Good-bye--so many thanks."




CHAPTER XVIII.


Mrs. Goddard's head ached "terrible bad" according to Martha, and when
the vicar left her she went and lay down upon her bed, with a sensation
that if the worst were not yet over she could bear no more. But she had
an elastic temperament, and the fact of having consulted Mr. Ambrose that
morning had been a greater relief than she herself suspected. She felt
that he could be trusted to save Mr. Juxon from harm and Walter from
capture, and having once confided to him the important secret which had
so heavily weighed upon her mind she felt that the burthen of her
troubles was lightened. Mr. Juxon could take any measures he pleased for
his own safety; he would probably choose to stay at home until the danger
was past. As for her husband, Mary Goddard did not believe that he would
return a third time, for she thought that she had thoroughly frightened
him. It was even likely that he had only thrown out his threat for the
sake of terrifying his wife, and was now far beyond the limits of the
parish. So great was the relief she felt after she had talked with the
vicar that she almost ceased to believe there was any danger at all;
looking at it in the light of her present mood, she almost wondered why
she had thought it necessary to tell Mr. Ambrose--until suddenly a vision
of her friend the squire, attacked and perhaps killed, in his own park,
rose to her mental vision, and she remembered what agonies of fear she
had felt for him until she had sent for the vicar. The latter indeed
seemed to have been a sort of _deus ex maohina_ by whom she suddenly
obtained peace of mind and a sense of security in the hour of her
greatest distress.

All that afternoon she lay upon her bed, while Nellie sat beside her and
read to her, and stroked her hands; for Nellie was in reality
passionately fond of her mother and suffered almost as much at the sight
of her suffering as she could have done had she been in pain herself.
Both Mrs. Goddard and the child started at the sound of Stamboul's
baying, which was unlike anything they had ever heard before, and Nellie
ran to the window.

"It is only Mr. Juxon and Stamboul having a game," said Nellie. "What a
noise he made, though! Did not he?"

Poor Nellie--had she had any idea of what the "game" was from which the
squire found it so hard to make his hound desist, she must have gone
almost mad with horror. For the game was her own father, poor child. But
she came back and sat beside her mother utterly unconscious of what might
have happened if Stamboul had once got beyond earshot, galloping along
the trail towards the disused vault at the back of the church. Mrs.
Goddard had started at the sounds and had put her hand to her forehead,
but Nellie's explanation was enough to quiet her, and she smiled faintly
and closed her eyes again. Then, half an hour later, Mrs. Ambrose came,
and would not be denied. She wanted to make Mrs. Goddard comfortable, she
said, when she found she was ill, and she did her best, being a kind and
motherly woman when not hardened by the presence of strangers. She told
her that John was coming on the next day, speaking with vast pride of his
success and omitting to look sternly at Mrs. Goddard as she had formerly
been accustomed to do when she spoke of the young scholar. Then at last
she went away, after exacting a promise from Mrs. Goddard to come and
dine, bringing Nellie with her, on the following day, in case she should
have recovered by that time from her headache.

But during all that night Mrs. Goddard lay awake, listening for the sound
she so much dreaded, of a creeping footstep on the slated path outside
and for the tapping at the window. Nothing came, however, and as the grey
dawn began to creep in through the white curtains, she fell peacefully
asleep. Nellie would not let her be waked, and breakfasted without her,
enjoying with childish delight the state of being waited on by Martha
alone.

Meanwhile, at an early hour, John arrived at the vicarage and was
received with open arms by Mr. Ambrose and his wife. The latter seemed to
forget, in the pleasure of seeing him again, that she had even once
spoken doubtfully of him or hinted that he was anything short of
perfection itself. And to prove how much she had done for him she
communicated with great pride the squire's message, to the effect that he
expected John at the Hall that very day.

John's heart leaped with delight at the idea. It was natural. He was
indeed most sincerely attached to the Ambroses, and most heartily glad to
be with them; but he had never in his life had an opportunity of staying
in a "big" house, as he would have described it. It seemed as though he
were already beginning to taste the sweet first-fruits of success after
all his labour and all his privations; it was the first taste of another
world, the first mouthful of the good things of life which had fallen to
his lot. Instantly there rose before him delicious visions of hot-water
cans brought by a real footman, of luxurious meals served by a real
butler, of soft carpets perpetually beneath his feet, of liberty to
lounge in magnificent chairs in the magnificent library; and last, though
not least, there was a boyish feeling of delight in the thought that when
he went to see Mrs. Goddard he would go from the Hall, that she would
perhaps associate him henceforth with a different kind of existence, in a
word, that he was sure to acquire importance in her eyes from the fact of
his visit to the squire. Many a young fellow of one and twenty is as
familiar with all that money can give and as tired of luxury as a
broken-down hard liver of forty years; for this is an age of luxurious
living. But poor John had hardly ever tasted the least of those things
too familiar to the golden youth of the period to be even noticed. He had
felt when he first entered the little drawing-room of the cottage that
Mrs. Goddard herself belonged, or had belonged, to that delicious unknown
world of ease where the question of expense was never considered, much
less mentioned. In her own eyes she was indeed living in a state
approaching to penury, but the spectacle of her pictures, her furniture
and her bibelots had impressed John with a very different idea. The
squire's invitation, asking him to spend a week at the Hall, seemed in a
moment to put him upon the same level as the woman to whom he believed
himself so devotedly attached. To his mind the ideal woman could not but
be surrounded by a luxurious atmosphere of her own. To enter the charmed
precincts of those surroundings seemed to John equivalent to being
transported from the regions of the Theocritan to the level of the
Anacreontic ode, from the pastoral, of which he had had too much, to the
aristocratic, of which he felt that he could not have enough. It was a
natural feeling in a very young man of his limited experience.

He stayed some hours at the vicarage. Both Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose thought
him changed in the short time which had elapsed since they had seen him.
He had grown more grave; he was certainly more of a man. The great
contest he had just sustained with so much honour had left upon his young
face its mark, an air of power which had not formerly been visible there;
even his voice seemed to have grown deeper and rounder, and his words
carried more weight. The good vicar, who had seen several generations
of students, already distinguished in John Short the budding "don," and
rubbed his hands with great satisfaction.

John asked few questions but found himself obliged to answer many
concerning his recent efforts. He would have liked to say something about
Mrs. Goddard, but he remembered with some awe and much aversion the
circumstances in which he had last quitted the vicarage, and he held his
peace; whereby he again rose in Mrs. Ambrose's estimation. He made up for
his silence by speaking effusively of the squire's kindness in asking him
to the Hall; forgetting perhaps the relief he had felt when he escaped
from Billingsfield after Christmas without being again obliged to shake
hands with Mr. Juxon. Things looked very differently now, however. He
felt himself to be somebody in the world, and that distressing sense of
inferiority which had perhaps been at the root of his jealousy against
the squire was gone, swallowed in the sense of triumph. His face was
pale, perhaps, from overwork, but there was a brilliancy in his eyes and
an incisiveness in his speech which came from the confidence of victory.
He now desired nothing more than to meet the squire, feeling sure that he
should receive his congratulations, and though he stayed some hours in
conversation with his old friends, in imagination he was already at the
Hall. The squire had not come down to meet him, as he had proposed, but
he had sent his outlandish American gig with his groom to fetch John.
While he was at the vicarage the latter was probably too much occupied
with conversation to notice that Mr. Ambrose seemed preoccupied and
changed, and the vicar was to some extent recalled to his usual manner by
the presence of his pupil. Mrs. Ambrose had taxed her husband with
concealing something from her ever since the previous day, but the good
man was obstinate and merely said that he felt unaccountably nervous and
irritable, and begged her to excuse his mood. Mrs. Ambrose postponed her
cross-examination until a more favourable opportunity should present
itself.

John got into the gig and drove away. He was to return with the squire to
dinner in the evening, and he fully expected that Mrs. Goddard and Nellie
would be of the party--it seemed hardly likely that they should be
omitted. Indeed, soon after John had left a note arrived at the vicarage
explaining that Mrs. Goddard was much better and would certainly come,
according to Mrs. Ambrose's very kind invitation.

It is unnecessary to dwell upon the meeting which took place between Mr.
Juxon and John Short. The squire was hospitable in the extreme and
expressed his great satisfaction at having John under his own roof at
last. He was perhaps, like the vicar, a little nervous, but the young man
did not notice it, being much absorbed by the enjoyment of his good
fortune and of the mental rest he so greatly needed. Mr. Juxon
congratulated him warmly and expressed a hope, amounting to certainty,
that John might actually be at the head of the Tripos; to which John
modestly replied that he would be quite satisfied to be in the first ten,
knowing in his heart that he should be most bitterly disappointed if he
were second to any one. He sat opposite to his host in a deep chair
beside the fire in the library and revelled in comfort and ease, enjoying
every trifle that fell in his way, feeling only a very slight diffidence
in regard to himself for the present and none at all for the future. The
squire was so cordial that he felt himself thoroughly at home. Indeed Mr.
Juxon already rejoiced at his wisdom in asking John to the Hall. The lad
was strong, hopeful, well-balanced in every respect and his presence was
an admirable tonic to the almost morbid state of anxiety in which the
squire had lived ever since his interview with Policeman Gall, two days
before. In the sunshine of John's young personality, fears grew small and
hope grew big. The ideas which had passed through Mr. Juxon's brain on
the previous evening, just after Mr. Ambrose had warned him of Goddard's
intentions, seemed now like the evil shadows of a nightmare. All
apprehension lest the convict should attempt to execute his threats
disappeared like darkness before daylight, and in the course of an hour
or two the squire found himself laughing and chatting with his guest as
though there were no such things as forgery or convicts in the world. The
afternoon passed very pleasantly between the examination of Mr. Juxon's
treasures and the conversation those objects elicited. For John, who was
an accomplished scholar, had next to no knowledge of bibliology and took
delight in seeing for the first time many a rare edition which he had
heard mentioned or had read of in the course of his studies. He would not
have believed that he could be now talking on such friendly terms with a
man for whom he had once felt the strongest antipathy, and Mr. Juxon on
his part felt that in their former meetings he had not done full justice
to the young man's undoubted talents.

As they drove down to the vicarage that evening Mrs. Goddard's name was
mentioned for the first time. John, with a fine affectation of
indifference, asked how she was.

"She has not been very well lately," answered Mr. Juxon.

"What has been the matter?" inquired John, who could not see his
companion's face in the dark shade of the trees.

"Headache, I believe," returned the squire laconically, and silence
ensued for a few moments. "I should not wonder if it rained again this
evening," he added presently as they passed through the park gate, out
into the road. The sky was black and it was hard to see anything beyond
the yellow streak of light which fell from the lamps and ran along the
road before the gig.

"If it turns out a fine night, don't come for us. We will walk home,"
said the squire to the groom as they descended before the vicarage and
Stamboul, who had sat on the floor between them, sprang down to the
ground.

John was startled when he met Mrs. Goddard. He was amazed at the change
in her appearance for which no one had prepared him. She met him indeed
very cordially but he felt as though she were not the same woman he had
known so short a time before. There was still in her face that delicate
pathetic expression which had at first charmed him, there was still the
same look in her eyes; but what had formerly seemed so attractive seemed
now exaggerated. Her cheeks looked wan and hollow and there were deep
shadows about her eyes and temples; her lips had lost their colour and
the lines about her mouth had suddenly become apparent where John had not
before suspected them. She looked ten years older as she put her thin
hand in his and smiled pleasantly at his greeting. Some trite phrase
about the "ravages of time" crossed John's mind and gave him a
disagreeable sensation, for which it was hard to account. He felt as
though his dream were suddenly dead and a strange reality had taken life
in its place. Could this be she to whom he had written verses by the
score, at whose smile he had swelled with pride, at whose careless laugh
he had trembled with shame? She was terribly changed, she looked
positively old--what John called old. As he sat by her side talking and
wondering whether he would fall back into those same grooves of
conversation he had associated with her formerly, he felt something akin
to pity for her, which he had certainly never expected to feel. She was
not the same as before--even the tone of her voice was different; she was
gentle, pathetic, endowed even now with many charms, but she was not
the woman he had dreamed of and tried to speak to of the love he fancied
was in his heart. She talked--yes; but there were long pauses, and her
eyes wandered strangely from him, often towards the windows of the
vicarage drawing-room, often towards the doors; her answers were not
always to the point and her interest seemed to flag in what was said.
John could not fail to notice too that both Mr. Ambrose and Mr. Juxon
treated her with the kind of attention which is bestowed upon invalids,
and the vicar's wife was constantly doing something to make her
comfortable, offering her a footstool, shading the light from her eyes,
asking if she felt any draught where she sat. These were things no one
had formerly thought of doing for Mrs. Goddard, who in spite of her sad
face had been used to laugh merrily enough with the rest, and whose lithe
figure had seemed to John the embodiment of youthful activity. At last he
ventured to ask her a question.

"Have you been ill, Mrs. Goddard?" he inquired in a voice full of
interest. Her soft eyes glanced uneasily at him. He was now the only one
of the party who was not in some degree acquainted with her troubles.

"Oh no!" she answered nervously. "Only a little headache. It always makes
me quite wretched when I have it."

"Yes. I often have headaches, too," answered John. "The squire told me as
we came down."

"What did he tell you?" asked Mrs. Goddard so quickly as to startle her
companion.

"Oh--only that you had not been very well. Where is it that you suffer?"
he asked sympathetically. "I think it is worst when it seems to be in
the very centre of one's head, like a red-hot nail being driven in with a
hammer--is that like what you feel?"

"I--yes, I daresay. I don't quite know," she answered, her eyes wandering
uneasily about the room. "I suppose you have dreadful headaches over
your work, do you not, Mr. Short?" she added quickly, feeling that she
must say something.

"Oh, it is all over now," said John rather proudly. But as he leaned back
in his chair he said to himself that this meeting was not precisely what
he had anticipated; the subject of headaches might have a fine interest
in its way, but he had expected to have talked of more tender things. To
his own great surprise he felt no desire to do so, however. He had not
recovered from the shock of seeing that Mrs. Goddard had grown old.

"Yes," said she, kindly. "How glad you must be! To have done so
splendidly too--you must feel that you have realised a magnificent
dream."

"No," said John. "I cannot say I do. I have done the thing I meant to do,
or I have good reason to believe that I have; but I have not realised my
dream. I shall never write any more odes, Mrs. Goddard."

"Why not? Oh, you mean to me, Mr. Short?" she added with something of her
old manner. "Well, you know, it is much better that you should not."

"Perhaps so," answered John rather sadly. "I don't know. Frankly, Mrs.
Goddard, did not you sometimes think I was very foolish last Christmas?"

"Very," she said, smiling at him kindly. "But I think you have changed. I
think you are more of a man, now--you have something more serious--"

"I used to think I was very serious, and so I was," said John, with the
air of a man who refers to the follies of his long past youth. "Do you
remember how angry I was when you wanted me to skate with Miss Nellie?"

"Oh, I only said that to teaze you," Mrs. Goddard answered. "I daresay
you would be angry now, if I suggested the same thing."

"No," said John quietly. "I do not believe I should be. As you say, I
feel very much older now than I did then."

"The older we grow the more we like youth," said Mary Goddard,
unconsciously uttering one of the fundamental truths of human nature, and
at the same time so precisely striking the current of John's thoughts
that he started. He was wondering within himself why it was that she now
seemed too old for him, whereas a few short months ago she had seemed to
be of his own age.

"How true that is!" he exclaimed. Mrs. Goddard laughed faintly.

"You are not old enough to have reached that point yet, Mr. Short," she
said. "Really, here we are moralising like a couple of old philosophers!"

"This is a moralising season," answered John. "When we last met, it was
all holly-berries and Christmas and plum-pudding."

"How long ago that seems!" exclaimed the poor lady with a sigh.

"Ages!" echoed John, sighing in his turn, but not so much for sadness, it
may be, as from relief that the great struggle was over. That time of
anxiety and terrible effort seemed indeed very far removed from him, but
its removal was a cause of joy rather than of sadness. He sighed like a
man who, sitting over his supper, remembers the hard fought race he has
won in the afternoon, feeling yet in his limbs the ability to race and
win again but feeling in his heart the delicious consciousness that the
question of his superiority has been decided beyond all dispute.

"And now you will stay here a long time, of course," said Mrs. Goddard
presently.

"I am stopping at the Hall, just now," said John with a distinct sense of
the importance of the fact, "and after a week I shall stay here a few
days. Then I shall go to London to see my father."

"No one will be so glad as he to hear of your success."

"No indeed. I really think it is more for his sake that I want to be
actually first," said John. "Do you know, I have so often thought how he
will look when I meet him and tell him I am the senior classic."

John's voice trembled and as Mrs. Goddard looked at him, she thought she
saw a moisture in his eyes. It pleased her to see it, for it showed that
John Short had more heart than she had imagined.

"I can fancy that," she said, warmly. "I envy you that moment."

Presently the squire came over to where they were sitting and joined
them; and then Mrs. Ambrose spoke to John, and Nellie came and asked him
questions. Strange to say John felt none of that annoyance which he
formerly felt when his conversations with Mrs. Goddard were interrupted,
and he talked with Nellie and Mrs. Ambrose quite as readily as with her.
He felt very calm and happy that night, as though he had done with the
hard labour of life. In half an hour he had realised that he was no more
in love with Mrs. Goddard than he was with Mrs. Ambrose, and he was
trying to explain to himself how it was that he had ever believed in such
a palpable absurdity. Love was doubtless blind, he thought, but he was
surely not so blind as to overlook the evidences of Mrs. Goddard's age.
All the dreams of that morning faded away before the sight of her face,
and so deep is the turpitude of the best of human hearts that John was
almost ashamed of having once thought he loved her. That was probably the
best possible proof that his love had been but a boyish fancy.

What the little party at the vicarage would have been like, if John's
presence had not animated it, would be hard to say. The squire and Mr.
Ambrose treated Mrs. Goddard with the sort of paternal but solemn care
which is usually bestowed either upon great invalids or upon persons
bereaved of some very dear relation. The two elder men occasionally
looked at her and exchanged glances when they were not observed by Mrs.
Ambrose, wondering perhaps what would next befall the unfortunate lady
and whether she could bear much more of the excitement and anxiety to
which she had of late been subjected. On the whole the conversation was
far from being lively, and Mrs. Goddard herself felt that it was a relief
when the hour came for going home.

The vicar had ordered his dog-cart for her and Nellie, but as the night
had turned out better than had been expected Mr. Juxon's groom had not
come down from the Hall. Both he and John would be glad of the walk; it
had not rained for two days and the roads were dry.

"Look here," said the squire, as they rose to take their leave, "Mr.
Short had better go as far as the cottage in the dog-cart, to see Mrs.
Goddard home. I will go ahead on foot--I shall probably be there as soon
as you. There is not room for us all, and somebody must go with her, you
know. Besides," he added, "I have got Stamboul with me."

Mrs. Goddard, who was standing beside the squire, laid her hand
beseechingly upon his arm.

"Oh, pray don't," she said in low voice. "Why have you not got your
carriage?"

"Never mind me," he answered in the same tone. "I am all right, I like to
walk."

Before she could say anything more, he had shaken hands with Mr. and Mrs.
Ambrose and was gone. Perhaps in his general determination to be good to
everybody he fancied that John would enjoy the short drive with Mrs.
Goddard better than the walk with himself.

But when he was gone, Mrs. Goddard grew very nervous. One of her wraps
could not be found, and while search was being made for it the motherly
Mrs. Ambrose insisted upon giving her something hot, in the way of brandy
and water. She looked very ill, but showed the strongest desire to go. It
was no matter about the shawl, she said; Mr. Ambrose could send it in the
morning; but the thing was found and at last Mrs. Goddard and Nellie and
John got into the dog-cart with old Reynolds and drove off. All these
things consumed some time.

The squire on the other hand strode briskly forward towards the cottage,
not wishing to keep John waiting for him. As he walked his mind wandered
back to the consideration of the almost tragic events which were
occurring in the peaceful village. He forgot all about John, as he looked
up at the half moon which struggled to give some light through the
driving clouds; he fell to thinking of Mrs. Goddard and to wondering
where her husband might be lying hidden. The road was lonely and he
walked fast, with Stamboul close at his heel. The dog-cart did not
overtake him before he reached the cottage, and he forgot all about it.
By sheer force of habit he opened the white gate and, closing it behind
him, entered the park alone.




CHAPTER XIX.


John's impression of Mrs. Goddard was strengthened by the scene at the
vicarage at the moment of leaving. The extraordinary nervousness she
betrayed, the anxiety for her welfare shown by Mrs. Ambrose and the grave
face of the vicar all favoured the idea that she had become an invalid
since he had last met her. He himself fell into the manner of those about
him and spoke in low tones and moved delicately as though fearing to
offend her sensitive nerves. The vicar alone understood the situation and
had been very much surprised at the squire's sudden determination to walk
home; he would gladly have seized his hat and run after his friend, but
he feared Mrs. Ambrose's curiosity and moreover on reflection felt sure
that the dog-cart would overtake Mr. Juxon before he was half way to the
cottage. He was very far from suspecting him of the absence of mind which
he actually displayed, but it was a great relief to him to see the little
party safe in the dog-cart and on the way homeward.

Mrs. Goddard was on the front seat with old Reynolds, and John, who would
have preferred to sit by her side a few months ago, was glad to find
himself behind with Nellie. It was a curious instinct, but he felt it
strongly and was almost grateful to the old man for stolidly keeping his
seat. So he sat beside Nellie and talked to her, to the child's intense
delight; she had not enjoyed the evening very much, for she felt the
general sense of oppression as keenly as children always feel such
things, and she had long exhausted the slender stock of illustrated books
which lay upon the table in the vicarage drawing-room.

"There is no more skating now," said John. "What do you do to amuse
yourselves?"

"I am studying history with mamma," answered Nellie, "and that takes ever
so much time, you know. And then--oh, we are beginning to think of the
spring, and we look after the violet plants in the frames."

"It does not feel much like spring," remarked John.

"No--and mamma has not been well lately, so we have not done much of
anything."

"Has she been ill long?" asked John.

"No--oh no! Only the last two or three days, ever since--" Nellie stopped
herself. Her mother had told her not to mention the tramp's visit.

"Ever since when?" asked John, becoming suddenly interested.

"Ever since the last time the Ambroses came to tea," said Nellie with a
readiness beyond her years. "But she looks dreadfully, does not she?"

"Dreadfully," answered John. Then, leaning back and turning his head he
spoke to Mrs. Goddard. "I hope you are quite warm enough?" he said.

"Quite--thanks," answered she, but her voice sounded tremulous in the
night. It might have been the shaking of the dog-cart. In a few minutes
they drew up before the door of the cottage. John sprang to the ground
and almost lifted Mrs. Goddard from the high seat.

"Where is Mr. Juxon?" she asked anxiously.

John looked round, peering into the gloom. A black cloud driven by the
strong east wind was passing over the moon, and for some moments it was
almost impossible to see anything. The squire was nowhere to be seen.
John turned and helped Nellie off the back seat of the dog-cart.

"I am afraid we must have passed him," he said quietly. Formerly Mrs.
Goddard's tone of anxiety as she asked for the squire would have roused
John's resentment; he now thought nothing of it. Reynolds prepared to
move off.

"Won't you please wait a moment, Reynolds?" said Mrs. Goddard, going
close to the old man. She could not have told why she asked him to stay,
it was a nervous impulse.

"Why?" asked John. "You know I am going to the Hall."

"Yes, of course. I only thought, perhaps, you and Mr. Juxon would like to
drive up--it is so dark. I am sure Mr. Ambrose would not mind you taking
the gentlemen up to the Hall, Reynolds?"

"No m'm. I'm quite sure as he wouldn't," exclaimed Reynolds with great
alacrity. He immediately had visions of a pint of beer in the Hall
kitchen.

"You do not think Mr. Juxon may have gone on alone, Mr. Short?" said Mrs.
Goddard, leaning upon the wicket gate. Her face looked very pale in the
gloom.

"No--at would be very odd if he did," replied John, who had his hands in
his greatcoat pockets and slowly stamped one foot after another on the
hard ground, to keep himself warm.

"Then we must have passed him on the road," said Mrs. Goddard. "But I was
so sure I saw nobody--"

"I think he will come presently," answered John in a reassuring tone.
"Why do you wait, Mrs. Goddard? You must be cold, and it is dangerous for
you to be out here. Don't wait, Reynolds," he added; "we will walk up."

"Oh please don't," cried Mrs. Goddard, imploringly.

John looked at her in some surprise. The cloud suddenly passed from
before the moon and he could see her anxious upturned face quite plainly.
He could not in the least understand the cause of her anxiety, but he
supposed her nervousness was connected with her indisposition. Reynolds
on his part, being anxious for beer, showed no disposition to move, but
sat with stolid indifference, loosely holding the reins while Strawberry,
the old mare, hung down her head and stamped from time to time in a
feeble and antiquated fashion. For some minutes there was total silence.
Not a step was to be heard upon the road, not a sound of any kind, save
the strong east wind rushing past the cottage and losing itself among the
withered oaks of the park opposite.

Suddenly a deep and bell-mouthed note resounded through the air.
Strawberry started in the shafts and trembled violently.

"Stamboul! Stamboul!" The squire's ringing voice was heard far up the
park. The bloodhound's distant baying suddenly ceased. John thought he
heard a fainter cry, inarticulate, and full of distress, through the
sighing wind. Then there was silence again. Mrs. Goddard leaned back
against the wicket gate, and Nellie, startled by the noises, pressed
close to her mother's side.

"Why--he has gone up the park!" exclaimed John in great surprise. "He was
calling to his dog--"

"Oh, Mr. Short!" cried Mrs. Goddard in agonised tones, as soon as she
could speak, "I am sure something dreadful has happened--do go. Mr.
Short--do go and see--"

Something of the extreme alarm that sounded in her voice seized upon
John.

"Stay with Mrs. Goddard, Reynolds," he said quickly and darted across the
road towards the park gate. John was strong and active. He laid his
hands upon the highest rails and vaulted lightly over, then ran at the
top of his speed up the dark avenue.

Mr. Juxon, in his absence of mind, had gone through the gate alone,
swinging his blackthorn stick in his hand, Stamboul stalking at his heel
in the gloom. He was a fearless man and the presence of John during the
afternoon had completely dissolved that nervous presentiment of evil he
had felt before his guest's coming. But in the short walk of scarcely
half a mile, from the vicarage to the cottage, his thoughts had become
entirely absorbed in considering Mrs. Goddard's strange position, and for
the moment John was quite forgotten. He entered the park and the long
iron latch of the wooden gate fell into its socket behind him with a
sharp click. Mr. Juxon walked quickly on and Stamboul trod noiselessly
behind him. At about a hundred yards from the gate the avenue turned
sharply to the right, winding about a little elevation in the ground,
where the trees stood thicker than elsewhere. As he came towards this
hillock the strong east wind blew sharply behind him. Had the wind been
in the opposite direction, Stamboul's sharp nostrils would have scented
danger. As it was he gave no sign but stalked solemnly at the squire's
heels. The faint light of the half moon was obscured at that moment, as
has been seen, by a sweeping cloud. The squire turned to the right and
tramped along the hard road.

At the darkest spot in the way a man sprang out suddenly before him and
struck a quick blow at his head with something heavy. But it was very
dark. The blow was aimed at his head, but fell upon the heavy padded
frieze of his ulster greatcoat, grazing the brim of his hat as it passed
and knocking it off his head. Mr. Juxon staggered and reeled to one side.
At the same instant--it all happened in the space of two seconds,
Stamboul sprang past his master and his bulk, striking the squire at the
shoulder just as he was staggering from the blow he had received, sent
him rolling into the ditch; by the same cause the hound's direction as he
leaped was just so changed that he missed his aim and bounded past the
murderer into the darkness. Before the gigantic beast could recover
himself and turn to spring again, Walter Goddard, who had chanced never
to see Stamboul and little suspected his presence, leaped the ditch and
fled rapidly through the dark shadow. But death was at his heels. Before
the squire, who was very little hurt, could get upon his feet, the
bloodhound had found the scent and, uttering his deep-mouthed baying
note, sprang upon the track of the flying man. Mr. Juxon got across the
ditch and followed him into the gloom.

"Stamboul! Stamboul!" he roared as he ran. But before he had gone thirty
yards he heard a heavy fall. The hound's cry ceased and a short scream
broke the silence.

A moment later the squire was dragging the infuriated animal from the
prostrate body of Walter Goddard. Stamboul had tasted blood; it was no
easy matter to make him relinquish his prey. The cloud passed from the
moon, driven before the blast, and a ray of light fell through the trees
upon the scene. Juxon stood wrestling with his hound, holding to his
heavy collar with both hands with all his might. He dared not let go for
an instant, well knowing that the frenzied beast would tear his victim
limb from limb. But Juxon's hands were strong, and though Stamboul
writhed and his throat rattled he could not free himself. The squire
glanced at the body of the fallen man, just visible in the flickering
moonlight. Walter Goddard lay quite still upon his back. If he was badly
wounded it was not possible to say where the wound was.

It was a terrible moment. Mr. Juxon felt that he could not leave the man
thus, not knowing whether he were alive or dead; and yet while all his
strength was exerted to the full in controlling the bloodhound, it was
impossible to approach a step nearer. He was beginning to think that he
should be obliged to take Stamboul to the Hall and return again to the
scene of the disaster.

"Mr. Juxon! Juxon! Juxon!" John was shouting as he ran up the park.

"This way! look sharp!" yelled the squire, foreseeing relief. John's
quick footsteps rang on the hard road. The squire called again and in a
moment the young man had joined him and stood horror-struck at what he
saw.

"Don't touch the dog!" cried the squire. "Don't come near him, I say!" he
added as John came forward. "There--there has been an accident, Mr.
Short," he added in calmer tones. "Would you mind seeing if the fellow is
alive?"

John was too much startled to say anything, but he went and knelt down by
Goddard's body and looked into his face.

"Feel his pulse," said the squire. "Listen at his heart." To him it
seemed a very simple matter to ascertain whether a man were alive or
dead. But John was nervous; he had never seen a dead man in his life and
felt that natural repulsion to approaching death which is common to all
living creatures. There was no help for it, however, and he took Walter
Goddard's limp hand in his and tried to find his pulse; he could not
distinguish any beating. The hand fell nerveless to the ground.

"I think he is dead," said John very softly, and he rose to his feet and
drew back a little way from the body.

"Then just wait five minutes for me, if you do not mind," said Mr. Juxon,
and he turned away dragging the reluctant and still struggling Stamboul
by his side.

John shuddered when he was left alone. It was indeed a dismal scene
enough. At his feet lay Walter Goddard's body, faintly illuminated by the
struggling moonbeams; all around and overhead the east wind was howling
and whistling and sighing in the dry oak branches, whirling hither and
thither the few brown leaves that had clung to their hold throughout the
long winter; the sound of the squire's rapidly retreating footsteps grew
more faint in the distance; John felt that he was alone and was very
uncomfortable. He would have liked to go back to the cottage and tell
Mrs. Goddard of what had happened, and that Mr. Juxon was safe; but he
thought the squire might return and find that he had left his post and
accuse him of cowardice. He drew back from the man's body and sheltered
himself from the wind, leaning against the broad trunk of an old oak
tree. He had not stood thus many minutes when he heard the sound of
wheels upon the hard road. It might be Mrs. Goddard, he thought. With one
more glance at the prostrate body, he turned away and hurried through the
trees towards the avenue. The bright lamps of the dog-cart were almost
close before him. He shouted to Reynolds.

"Whoa, January!" ejaculated that ancient functionary as he pulled up
Strawberry close to John Short. Why the natives of Essex and especially
of Billingsfield habitually address their beasts of burden as "January"
is a matter best left to the discrimination of philologers; obedient to
the familiar words however, Strawberry stood still in the middle of the
road. John could see that Mrs. Goddard was seated by the side of Reynolds
but that Nellie was not in the cart.

"Oh, Mrs. Goddard, is that you?" said John. "Mr. Juxon will be here in a
moment. Don't be frightened--he is not hurt in the least; awfully bad
luck for the tramp, though!"

"The tramp?" repeated Mrs. Goddard with a faint cry of horror.

"Yes," said John, whose spirits rose wonderfully in the light of the
dog-cart lamps. "There was a poor tramp hanging about the park--poaching,
very likely--and Mr. Juxon's dog got after him, somehow, I suppose. I do
not know how it happened, but when I came up--oh! here is Mr. Juxon
himself--he will tell you all about it."

The squire came up in breathless haste, having locked Stamboul into the
house.

"Good Heavens! Mrs. Goddard!" he ejaculated in a tone of profound
surprise. But Mrs. Goddard gave no answer. The squire sprang upon the
step and looked closely at her. She lay back against old Reynolds's
shoulder, very pale, with her eyes shut. It was evident that she had
fainted. The old man seemed not to comprehend what had happened; he
had never experienced the sensation of having a lady leaning upon his
shoulder, and he looked down at her with a half idiotic smile on his
deeply furrowed face.

"She's took wuss, sir," he remarked. "She was all for comin' up the park
as soon as Master John was gone. She warn't feelin' herself o' no account
t' evenin'."

"Look here, Mr. Short," said the squire decisively. "I must ask you to
take Mrs. Goddard home again and call her women to look after her. I
fancy she will come to herself before long. Do you mind?"

"Not in the least," said John cheerfully, mounting at the back of the
dog-cart.

"And--Reynolds--bring Mr. Short back to the Hall immediately, please, and
you shall have some beer."

"All right, sir."

John supported the fainting lady with one arm, turning round upon his
seat at the back. Old Strawberry wheeled quickly in her tracks and
trotted down the avenue under the evident impression that she was going
home. Mr. Juxon dashed across the ditch again to the place where Walter
Goddard had fallen.

The squire knelt down and tried to ascertain the extent of the man's
injuries; as far as he could see there was a bad wound at his throat, and
one hand was much mangled. But there seemed to have been no great flow of
blood. He tore open the smock-frock and shirt and put his ear to the
heart. Faintly, very faintly, he could hear it beat. Walter Goddard was
alive still--alive to live for years perhaps, the squire reflected; to
live in a prison, it was true, but to live. To describe his feelings in
that moment would be impossible. Had he found the convict dead, it would
be useless to deny that he would have felt a very great satisfaction,
tempered perhaps by some pity for the wretched man's miserable end, but
still very great. It would have seemed such a just end, after all; to be
killed in the attempt to kill, and to have died not by the squire's hand
but by the sharp strong jaws of the hound who had once before saved the
squire's life. But he was alive. It would not take much to kill him; a
little pressure on his wounded throat would be enough. Even to leave
him there, uncared for, till morning in the bleak wind, lying upon the
cold ground, would be almost certain to put an end to his life. But to
the honour of Charles James Juxon be it said that such thoughts never
crossed his mind. He pulled off his heavy ulster greatcoat, wrapped it
about the felon's insensible body, then, kneeling, raised up his head and
shoulders, got his strong arms well round him and with some difficulty
rose to his feet. Once upright, it was no hard matter to carry his
burthen through the trees to the road, and up the avenue to his own door.

"Holmes," said Mr. Juxon to his butler, "this man is badly hurt, but he
is alive. Help me to carry him upstairs."

There was that in the squire's voice which brooked neither question nor
delay when he was in earnest. The solemn butler took Walter Goddard by
the feet and the squire took him by the shoulders; so they carried him up
to a bedroom and laid him down, feeling for the bed in the dark as they
moved. Holmes then lit a candle with great calmness.

"Shall I send for the medical man, sir?" he asked quietly.

"Yes. Send the gig as fast as possible. If he is not at home, or cannot
be found, send on to the town. If anybody asks questions say the man is a
tramp who attacked me in the park and Stamboul pulled him down. Send at
once, and bring me some brandy and light the fire here."

"Yes, sir," said Holmes, and left the room.

Mr. Juxon lighted other candles and examined the injured man. There was
now no doubt that he was alive. He breathed faintly but regularly; his
pulse beat less rapidly and more firmly. His face was deadly pale and
very thin, and his half-opened eyes stared unconsciously upwards, but
they were not glazed nor death-like. He seemed to have lost little
blood, comparatively speaking.

"Bah!" ejaculated the squire. "I believe he is only badly frightened,
after all."

Holmes brought brandy and warm water and again left the room. Mr. Juxon
bathed Goddard's face and neck with a sponge, eying him suspiciously all
the while. It would not have surprised him at any moment if he had leaped
from the bed and attempted to escape. To guard against surprise, the
squire locked the door and put the key in his pocket, watching the
convict to see whether he noticed the act or was really unconscious. But
Goddard never moved nor turned his motionless eyeballs. Mr. Juxon
returned to his side, and with infinite care began to remove his clothes.
They were almost in rags. He examined each article, and was surprised to
find money in the pockets, amounting to nearly sixty pounds; then he
smiled to himself, remembering that the convict had visited his wife and
had doubtless got the money from her to aid him in his escape. He put the
notes and gold carefully together in a drawer after counting them, and
returning to his occupation succeeded at last in putting Goddard to bed,
after staunching his wounds as well as he could with handkerchiefs.

He stood long by the bedside, watching the man's regular breathing, and
examining his face attentively. Many strange thoughts passed through his
mind, as he stood there, looking at the man who had caused such misery to
himself, such shame and sorrow to his fair wife, such disappointment to
the honest man who was now trying to save him from the very grasp of
death. So this was Mary Goddard's husband, little Nellie's father--this
grimy wretch, whose foul rags lay heaped there in the corner, whose
miserable head pressed the spotless linen of the pillow, whose
half-closed eyes stared up so senselessly at the squire's face. This was
the man for whose sake Mary Goddard started and turned pale, fainted and
grew sick, languished and suffered so much pain. No wonder she concealed
it from Nellie--no wonder she had feared lest after many years he should
come back and claim her for his wife--no wonder either that a man with
such a face should do bad deeds.

Mr. Juxon was a judge of faces; persons accustomed for many years to
command men usually are. He noted Walter Goddard's narrow jaw and pointed
chin, his eyes set near together, his wicked lips, parted and revealing
sharp jagged teeth, his ill-shaped ears and shallow temples, his flat low
forehead, shown off by his cropped hair. And yet this man had once been
called handsome, he had been admired and courted. But then his hair had
hidden the shape of his head, his long golden moustache had covered his
mouth and disguised all his lower features, he had been arrayed by
tailors of artistic merit, and he had had much gold in his pockets. He
was a very different object now--the escaped convict, close cropped, with
a half-grown beard upon his ill-shaped face, and for all ornament a linen
sheet drawn up under his chin.

The squire was surprised that he did not recover consciousness, seeing
that he breathed regularly and was no longer so pale as at first. A faint
flush seemed to rise to his sunken cheeks, and for a long time Mr. Juxon
stood beside him, expecting every moment that he would speak. Once he
thought his lips moved a little. Then Mr. Juxon took a little brandy in a
spoon and raising his head poured it down his throat. The effect was
immediate. Goddard opened wide his eyes, the blood mounted to his cheeks
with a deep flush, and he uttered an inarticulate sound.

"What did you say?" asked the squire, bending over him.

But there was no answer. The sick man's head fell back upon the pillow,
though his eyes remained wide open and the flush did not leave his
cheeks. His pulse was now very high, and his breathing grew heavy and
stertorous.

"I hope I have not made him any worse," remarked Mr. Juxon aloud, as he
contemplated his patient. "But if he is going to die, I wish he would die
now."

The thought was charitable, on the whole. If Walter Goddard died then and
there, he would be buried in a nameless grave under the shadow of the
old church; no one would ever know that he was the celebrated forger, the
escaped convict, the husband of Mary Goddard. If he lived--heaven alone
knew what complications would follow if he lived.

There was a knock at the door. Mr. Juxon drew the key from his pocket and
opened it. Holmes the butler stood outside.

"Mr. Short has come back, sir. He asked if you wished to see him."

"Ask him to come here," replied the squire, to whom the tension of
keeping his solitary watch was becoming very irksome. In a few moments
John entered the room, looking pale and nervous.




CHAPTER XX.

John Short was in absolute ignorance of what was occurring. He attributed
Mrs. Goddard's anxiety to her solicitude for Mr. Juxon, and if he had
found time to give the matter serious consideration, he would have argued
very naturally that she was fond of the squire. It had been less easy
than the latter had supposed to take her home and persuade her to stay
there, for she was in a state in which she hardly understood reason.
Nothing but John's repeated assurances to the effect that Mr. Juxon was
not in the least hurt, and that he would send her word of the condition
of the wounded tramp, prevailed upon her to remain at the cottage; for
she had come back to consciousness before the dog-cart was fairly out of
the park and had almost refused to enter her own home.

The catastrophe had happened, after eight and forty hours of suspense,
and her position was one of extreme fear and doubt. She had indeed seen
the squire at the very moment when she fainted, but the impression was
uncertain as that of a dream, and it required all John's asseverations to
persuade her that Mr. Juxon had actually met her and insisted that she
should return to the cottage. Once there, in her own house, she abandoned
herself to the wildest excitement, shutting herself into the drawing-room
and refusing to see anyone; she gave way to all her sorrow and fear,
feeling that if she controlled herself any longer she must go mad. Indeed
it was the best thing she could do, for her nerves were overstrained, and
the hysterical weeping which now completely overpowered her for some
time, was the natural relief to her overwrought system. She had not the
slightest doubt that the tramp of whom John had spoken, and whom he had
described as badly hurt, was her husband; and together with her joy at
Mr. Juxon's escape, she felt an intolerable anxiety to know Walter's
fate. If in ordinary circumstances she had been informed that he had died
in prison, it would have been absurd to expect her to give way to any
expressions of excessive grief; she would perhaps have shed a few womanly
tears and for some time she would have been more sad than usual; but she
no longer loved him and his death could only be regarded as a release
from all manner of trouble and shame and evil foreboding. With his
decease would have ended her fears for poor Nellie, her apprehensions for
the future in case he should return and claim her, the whole weight of
her humiliation, and if she was too kind to have rejoiced over such a
termination of her woes, she was yet too sensible not to have fully
understood and appreciated the fact of her liberation and of the freedom
given to the child she loved, by the death of a father whose return could
bring nothing but disgrace. But now she did not know whether Walter were
alive or dead. If he was alive he was probably so much injured as to
preclude all possibility of his escaping, and he must inevitably be given
up to justice, no longer to imprisonment merely, but by his own
confession to suffer the death of a murderer. If on the other hand he
was already dead, he had died a death less shameful indeed, but of which
the circumstances were too horrible for his wife to contemplate, for he
must have been torn to pieces by Stamboul the bloodhound.

She unconsciously comprehended all these considerations, which entirely
deprived her of the power to weigh them in her mind, for her mind was
temporarily loosed from all control of the reasoning faculty. She had
borne much during the last three days, but she could bear no more;
intellect and sensibility were alike exhausted and gave way together.
There were indeed moments, intervals in the fits of hysteric tears
and acute mental torture, when she lay quite still in her chair and
vaguely asked herself what it all meant, but her disturbed consciousness
gave no answer to the question, and presently her tears broke out afresh
and she tossed wildly from side to side, or walked hurriedly up and down
the room, wringing her hands in despair, sobbing aloud in her agony and
again abandoning herself to the uncontrolled exaggerations of her grief
and terror. One consolation alone presented itself at intervals to her
confused intelligence; Mr. Juxon was safe. Whatever other fearful thing
had happened, he was safe, saved perhaps by her warning--but what was
that, if Walter had escaped death only to die at the hands of the
hangman, or had found it in the jaws of that fearful bloodhound? What was
the safety even of her best friend, if poor Nellie was to know that her
father was alive, only to learn that he was to die again?

But human suffering cannot outlast human strength; as a marvellous
adjustment of forces has ordered that even at the pole, in the regions of
boundless and perpetual cold, the sea shall not freeze to the bottom, so
there is also in human nature a point beyond which suffering cannot
extend. The wildest emotions must expend themselves in time, the fiercest
passions must burn out. At the end of two hours Mary Goddard was
exhausted by the vehemence of her hysteric fear, and woke as from a dream
to a dull sense of reality. She knew, now that some power of reflection
was restored to her, that the squire would give her intelligence of what
had happened, so soon as he was able, and she knew also that she must
wait until the morning before any such message could reach her. She took
the candle from the table and went upstairs. Nellie was asleep, but her
mother felt a longing to look at her again that night, not knowing what
misery for her child the morrow might bring forth.

Nellie lay asleep in her bed, her rich brown hair plaited together and
thrown back across the pillow. The long dark fringes of her eyelashes
cast a shade upon the transparent colour of her cheek, and the light
breath came softly through her parted lips. But as Mary Goddard looked
she saw that there were still tears upon her lovely face and that the
pillow was still wet. She had cried herself to sleep, for Martha had told
her that her mother was very ill and would not see her that night; Nellie
was accustomed to say her prayers at her mother's knee every evening
before going to bed, she was used to having her mother smooth her pillow
and kiss her and put out her light, leaving her with sweet words, to wake
her with sweet words on the next morning, and to-night she had missed all
this and had been told moreover that her mother was very ill and was
acting very strangely. She had gone to bed and had cried herself to
sleep, and the tears were still upon her cheeks. Shading the light
carefully from the child's eyes, Mary Goddard bent down and kissed her
forehead once and then feeling that her sorrow was rising again she
turned and passed noiselessly from the room.

But Nellie was dreaming peacefully and knew nothing of her mother's
visit; she slept on not knowing that scarcely a quarter of a mile away
her own father, whom she had been taught to think of as dead, was
lying at the Hall, wounded and unconscious while half the detectives in
the kingdom were looking for him. Had Nellie known that, her sleep would
have been little and her dreams few.

There was little rest at the Hall that night. When Reynolds had driven
John back to the great house he found his way to the kitchen and got his
beer, and he became at once a centre of interest, being overwhelmed with
questions concerning the events of the evening. But he was able to say
very little except that while waiting before the cottage he had heard
strange noises from the park, that Master John had run up the avenue,
that Mrs. Goddard had taken Miss Nellie into the house and had then
insisted upon being driven towards the Hall, that they had met Master
John and the squire and that Mrs. Goddard had been "took wuss."

Meanwhile John entered the room where Mr. Juxon was watching over Walter
Goddard. John looked pale and nervous; he had not recovered from the
unpleasant sensation of being left alone with what he believed to be a
dead body, in the struggling moonlight and the howling wind. He was by no
means timid by nature, but young nerves are not so tough as old ones and
he had felt exceedingly uncomfortable. He stood a moment within the room,
then glanced at the bed and started with surprise.

"Why--he is not dead after all!" he exclaimed, and going nearer he looked
hard at Goddard's flushed face.

"No," said Mr. Juxon, "he is not dead. He may be dying for all I know. I
have sent for the doctor."

"Was he much hurt?" asked John, still looking at the sick man. "He looks
to me as though he were in a fever."

"He does not seem so badly hurt. I cannot make it out at all. At first I
thought he was badly frightened, but I cannot bring him to consciousness.
Perhaps he has a fever, as you say. This is a most unpleasant experience,
Mr. Short--your first night at the Hall, too. Of course I am bound to
look after the man, as Stamboul did the damage--it would have served him
right if he had been killed. It was a villainous blow he gave me--I can
feel it still. The moral of it is that one should always wear a thick
ulster when one walks alone at night."

"I did not know he struck you," said John in some surprise.

"Jumped out of the copse at the turning and struck at me with a
bludgeon," said Mr. Juxon. "Knocked my hat off, into the bargain, and
then ran away with Stamboul after him. If I had not come up in time
there would have been nothing left of him."

"I should say the dog saved your life," remarked John, much impressed by
the squire's unadorned tale. "What object can the fellow have had in
attacking you? Strange--his eyes are open, but he does not seem to
understand us."

Mr. Juxon walked to the bedside and contemplated the sick man's features
with undisguised disgust.

"You villain!" he said roughly. "Why don't you answer for yourself?" The
man did not move, and the squire began to pace the room. John was struck
by Mr. Juxon's tone: it was not like him, he thought, to speak in that
way to a helpless creature. He could not understand it. There was a long
silence, broken only by the heavy breathing of Goddard.

"Really, Mr. Short," said the squire at last, "I have no intention of
keeping you up all night. The village doctor must have been out. It may
be more than an hour before my man finds another."

"Never mind," said John quietly. "I will wait till he comes at all
events. You may need me before it is over."

"Do you think he looks as if he were going to die?" asked the squire
doubtfully, as he again approached the bedside.

"I don't know," answered John, standing on the other side. "I never saw
any one die. He looks very ill."

"Very ill. I have seen many people die--but somehow I have a strong
impression that this fellow will live."

"Let us hope so," said John.

"Well--" The squire checked himself. Probably the hope he would have
expressed would not have coincided with that to which John had given
utterance. "Well," he repeated, "I daresay he will. Mr. Short, are you at
all nervous? Since you are so good as to say you will wait until the
doctor comes, would you mind very much being left alone here for five
minutes?"

"No," answered John, stoutly, "not in the least." To be left in a
well-lighted room by the bedside of Walter Goddard, ill indeed, but alive
and breathing vigorously, was very different from being requested to
watch his apparently dead body out in the park under the moonlight.

With a word of thanks, the squire left the room, and hastened to his
study, where he proceeded to write a note, as follows:--

"MY DEAR MR. AMBROSE--The man we were speaking of yesterday morning
actually attacked me this evening. Stamboul worried him badly, but he is
not dead. He is lying here, well cared for, and I have sent for the
doctor. If convenient to you, would you come in the morning? I need not
recommend discretion.--Sincerely yours,

"C.J. JUXON.
_N.B._--I am not hurt."

Having ascertained that Reynolds was still in the kitchen, the missive
was given to the old man with an injunction to use all speed, as the
vicar might be going to bed and the note was important.

John, meanwhile, being left alone sat down near the wounded man's bed and
waited, glancing at the flushed face and staring eyes from time to time,
and wondering whether the fellow would recover. The young scholar had
been startled by all that had occurred, and his ideas wandered back to
the beginning of the evening, scarcely realising that a few hours ago he
had not met Mrs. Goddard, had not experienced a surprising change in his
feelings towards her, had not witnessed the strange scene under the
trees. It seemed as though all these things had occupied a week at the
very least, whereas on that same afternoon he had been speculating upon
his meeting with Mrs. Goddard, calling up her features to his mind as he
had last seen them, framing speeches which when the meeting came he had
not delivered, letting his mind run riot in the delicious anticipation of
appearing before her in the light of a successful competitor for one of
the greatest honours of English scholarship. And yet in a few hours all
his feelings were changed, and to his infinite surprise, were changed
without any suffering to himself; he knew well that, for some reason,
Mrs. Goddard had lost the mysterious power of making him blush, and of
sending strange thrills through his whole nature when he sat at her side;
with some justice he attributed his new indifference to the extraordinary
alteration in her appearance, whereby she seemed now so much older than
himself, and he forthwith moralised upon the mutability of human affairs,
with all the mental fluency of a very young man whose affairs are still
extremely mutable. He fell to musing on the accident in the park,
wondering how he would have acted in Mr. Juxon's place, wondering
especially what object could have led the wretched tramp to attack the
squire, wondering too at the very great anxiety shown by Mrs. Goddard.

As he sat by the bedside, the sick man suddenly moved and turning his
eyes full upon John's face stared at him with a look of dazed surprise.
He thrust out his wounded hand, bound up in a white handkerchief through
which a little blood was slowly oozing, and to John's infinite surprise
he spoke.

"Who are you?" he asked in a strange, mumbling voice, as though he had
pebbles in his mouth.

John started forward in his chair and looked intently at Goddard's face.

"My name is Short," he answered mechanically. But the passing flash of
intelligence was already gone, and Goddard's look became a glassy and
idiotic stare. Still his lips moved. John came nearer and listened.

"Mary Goddard! Mary Goddard! Let me in!" said the sick man quite
intelligibly, in spite of his uncertain tone. John uttered an exclamation
of astonishment; his heart beat fast and he listened intently. The sick
man mumbled inarticulate sounds; not another word could be distinguished.
John looked for the bell, thinking that Mr. Juxon should be informed of
the strange phenomenon at once; but before he could ring the squire
himself entered the room, having finished and despatched his note to Mr.
Ambrose.

"It is most extraordinary," said John. "He spoke just now--"

"What did he say?" asked Mr. Juxon very quickly.

"He said first, 'Who are you?' and then he said 'Mary Goddard, let me
in!' Is it not most extraordinary? How in the world should he know
about Mrs. Goddard?"

The squire turned a little pale and was silent for a moment. He had left
John with the wounded man feeling sure that, for some time at least, the
latter would not be likely to say anything intelligible.

"Most extraordinary!" he repeated presently. Then he looked at Goddard
closely, and turned him again upon his back and put his injured hand
beneath the sheet.

"Do you understand me? Do you know who I am?" he asked in a loud tone
close to his ear.

But the unfortunate man gave no sign of intelligence, only his
inarticulate mumbling grew louder though not more distinct. Mr. Juxon
turned away impatiently.

"The fellow is in a delirium," he said. "I wish the doctor would come."
He had hardly turned his back when the man spoke again.

"Mary Goddard!" he cried. "Let me in!"

"There!" said John. "The same words!"

Mr. Juxon shuddered, and looked curiously at his companion; then thrust
his hands into his pockets and whistling softly walked about the room.
John was shocked at what seemed in the squire a sort of indecent levity;
he could not understand that his friend felt as though he should go mad.

Indeed the squire suffered intensely. The name of Mary Goddard,
pronounced by the convict in his delirium brought home more vividly than
anything could have done the relation between the wounded tramp and the
woman the squire loved. It was positively true, then--there was not a
shadow of doubt left, since this wretch lay there mumbling her name in
his ravings! This was the husband of that gentle creature with sad
pathetic eyes, so delicate, so refined that it seemed as though the
coarser breath of the world of sin and shame could never come near
her--this was her husband! It was horrible. This was the father of lovely
Nellie, too. Was anything wanting to make the contrast more hideous?

Mr. Juxon felt that it was impossible to foresee what Walter Goddard
might say in the course of another hour. He had often seen people in a
delirium and knew how strangely that inarticulate murmuring sometimes
breaks off into sudden incisive speech, astonishing every one who hears.
The man had already betrayed that he knew Mary Goddard; at the next
interval in his ravings he might betray that she was his wife. John was
still standing by the bedside, not having recovered from his
astonishment; if John heard any more, he would be in possession of Mrs.
Goddard's secret. The squire was an energetic man, equal to most
emergencies; he suddenly made up his mind.

"Mr. Short," he said, "I will tell you something. You will see the
propriety of being very discreet, in fact it is only to ensure your
discretion that I wish to tell you this much. I have reason to believe
that this fellow is a convict--do not be surprised--escaped from prison.
He is a man who once--was in love with Mrs. Goddard, which accounts for
his having found his way to Billingsfield. Yes--I know what you are going
to say--Mrs. Goddard is aware of his presence, and that accounts for her
excitement and her fainting. Do you understand?"

"But--good heavens!" exclaimed John in amazement. "Why did she not give
information, if she knew he was in the neighbourhood?"

"That would be more than could be expected of any woman, Mr. Short. You
forget that the man once loved her."

"And how did you--well, no. I won't ask any questions."

"No," said the squire, "please don't. You would be placing me in a
disagreeable position. Not that I do not trust you implicitly, Mr.
Short," he added frankly, "but I should be betraying a confidence. If
this fellow dies here, he will be buried as an unknown tramp. I found no
trace of a name upon his clothes. If he recovers, we will decide what
course to pursue. We will do our best for him--it is a delicate case of
conscience. Possibly the poor fellow would very much prefer being allowed
to die; but we cannot let him. Humanity, for some unexplained reason,
forbids euthanasia and the use of the hemlock in such cases."

"Was he sentenced for a long time?" asked John, very much impressed by
the gravity of the situation.

"Twelve years originally, I believe. Aggravated by his escape and by his
assault on me, his term might very likely be extended to twenty years if
he were taken again."

"That is to say, if he recovers?" inquired John.

"Precisely. I do not think I would hesitate to send him back to prison if
he recovered."

"I do not wonder you think he would rather die here, if he were
consulted," said John. "It would not be murder to let him die
peacefully--"

"In the opinion of the law it might be called manslaughter, though I do
not suppose anything would be said if I had simply placed him here and
omitted to call in a physician. He cannot live very long in this state,
unless something is done for him immediately. Look at him."

There was no apparent change in Goddard's condition. He lay upon his back
staring straight upward and mumbling aloud with every breath he drew.

"He must have been ill, before he attacked me," continued Mr. Juxon, very
much as though he were talking to himself. "He evidently is in a raging
fever--brain fever I should think. That is probably the reason why he
missed his aim--that and the darkness. If he had been well he would have
killed me fast enough with that bludgeon. As you say, Mr. Short, there is
no doubt whatever that he would prefer to die here, if he had his choice.
In my opinion, too, it would be far more merciful to him and to--to him
in fact. Nevertheless, neither you nor I would like to remember that we
had let him die without doing all we could to keep him alive. It is
a very singular case."

"Most singular," echoed John.

"Besides--there is another thing. Suppose that he had attacked me as he
did, but that I had killed him with my stick--or that Stamboul had made
an end of him then and there. The law would have said it served him
right--would it not? Of course. But if I had not quite killed him, or, as
has actually happened, he survived the embraces of my dog, the law
insists that I ought to do everything in my power to save the remnant of
his life. What for? In order that the law may give itself the
satisfaction of dealing with him according to its lights. I think the law
is very greedy, I object to it, I think it is ridiculous from that point
of view, but then, when I come to examine the thing I find that my own
conscience tells me to save him, although I think it best that he should
die. Therefore the law is not ridiculous. Pleasant dilemma--the
impossible case! The law is at the same time ridiculous and not
ridiculous. The question is, does the law deduce itself from conscience,
or is conscience the direct result of existing law?"

The squire appeared to be in a strangely moralising mood, and John
listened to him with some surprise. He could not understand that the good
man was talking to persuade himself, and to concentrate his faculties,
which had been almost unbalanced by the events of the evening.

"I think," said John with remarkable good sense, "that the instinct of
man is to preserve life when he is calm. When a man is fighting with
another he is hot and tries to kill his enemy; when the fight is over,
the natural instinct returns."

"The only thing worth knowing in such cases is the precise point at which
the fight may be said to be over. I once knew a young surgeon in India
who thought he had killed a cobra and proceeded to extract the fangs in
order to examine the poison. Unfortunately the snake was not quite dead;
he bit the surgeon in the finger and the poor fellow died in
thirty-five minutes."

"Dreadful!" said John. "But you do not think this poor fellow could do
anything very dangerous now--do you?"

"Oh, dear me, no!" returned the squire. "I was only stating a case to
prove that one is sometimes justified in going quite to the end of a
fight. No indeed! He will not be dangerous for some time, if he ever is
again. But, as I was saying, he must have been ill some time. Delirium
never comes on in this way, so soon--"

Some one knocked at the door. It was Holmes, who came to say that the
physician, Doctor Longstreet, had arrived.

"Oh--it is Doctor Longstreet is it?" said the squire. "Ask him to come
up."




CHAPTER XXI.


Doctor Longstreet was not the freethinking physician of Billingsfield.
The latter was out when Mr. Juxon's groom went in search of him, and the
man had driven on to the town, six miles away. The doctor was an old man
with a bright eye, a deeply furrowed forehead, a bald head and clean
shaved face. He walked as though his frame were set together with springs
and there was a curious snapping quickness in his speech. He seemed full
of vitality and bore his years with a jaunty air of merriment which
inspired confidence, for he seemed perpetually laughing at the ills of
the flesh and ready to make other people laugh at them too. But his
bright eyes had a penetrating look and though he judged quickly he
generally was right in his opinion. He entered the room briskly, not
knowing that the sick man was there.

"Now, Mr. Juxon," he said cheerfully, "I am with you." He had the habit
of announcing his presence in this fashion, as though his brisk and
active personality were likely to be overlooked. A moment later he caught
sight of the bed. "Dear me," he added in a lower voice, "I did not know
our patient was here."

He went to Walter Goddard's side, looked at him attentively, felt his
pulse, and his forehead, glanced at the bandages the squire had roughly
put upon his throat and hand, drew up the sheet again beneath his chin
and turned sharply round.

"Brain fever, sir," he said cheerfully. "Brain fever. You must get some
ice and have some beef tea made as soon as possible. He is in a very
bad way--curious, too; he looks like a cross between a ticket of leave
man and a gentleman. Tramp, you say? That would not prevent his being
either. You cannot disturb him--don't be afraid. He hears nothing--is
off, the Lord knows where, raving delirious. Must look to his scratches
though--dangerous--inflammation. Do you mind telling me what
happened--how long he has been here?"

The squire in a few words informed Doctor Longstreet of the attack made
upon him in the park. The doctor looked at his watch.

"Only two hours and a half since," he remarked. "It is just midnight now,
very good--the man must have been in a fever all day--yesterday, too,
perhaps. He is not badly hurt by the dog--like to see that dog, if you
don't mind--the fright most likely sent him into delirium. You have
nothing to accuse yourself of, Mr. Juxon: it was certainly not your
fault. Even if the dog had not bitten him, he would most likely have been
in his present state by this time. Would you mind sending for some ice at
once? Thank you. It was very lucky for the fellow that he attacked you
just when he did--secured him the chance of being well taken care of. If
he had gone off like this in the park he would have been dead before
morning."

The squire rang and sent for the ice the doctor demanded.

"Do you think he will live?" he asked nervously.

"I don't know," answered Doctor Longstreet, frankly. "Nobody can tell. He
is very much exhausted--may live two or three days in this state and then
die or go to sleep and get well--may die in the morning--often do--cannot
say. With a great deal of care, I think he has a chance."

"I am very anxious to save him," said the squire, looking hard at the
physician.

"Very good of you, I am sure," replied Doctor Longstreet, cheerfully. "It
is not everybody who would take so much trouble for a tramp. Of course if
he dies people will say your dog killed him; but I will sign a paper to
the effect that it is not true. If he had left you and your dog alone, he
would have been dead in the morning to an absolute certainty."

"How very extraordinary!" exclaimed the squire, suddenly realising that
instead of causing the man's death Stamboul had perhaps saved his life.

"It was certainly very odd that he should have chosen the best moment for
assaulting you," continued the doctor. "It is quite possible that even
then he was under some delusion--took you for somebody else--some old
enemy. People do queer things in a brain fever. By the bye has he said
anything intelligible since he has been here?"

John Short who had been standing silently by the bedside during the whole
interview looked up quickly at the squire, wondering how he would answer.
But Mr. Juxon did not hesitate.

"Yes. Twice he repeated a woman's name. That is very natural, I suppose.
Do you think he will have any lucid moments for some time?"

"May," said the doctor, "may. When he does it is likely to be at the
turning point; he will either die or be better very soon after. If it
comes soon he may say something intelligible. If he is much more
exhausted than he is now, he will understand you, but you will not
understand him. Meningitis always brings a partial paralysis of the
tongue, when the patient is exhausted. Most probably he will go on
moaning and mumbling, as he does now, for another day. You will be able
to tell by his eye whether he understands anything; perhaps he will make
some sign with his head or hand. Ah--here is the ice."

Doctor Longstreet went about his operations in a rapid and business like
fashion and John gave what assistance he could. The squire stood leaning
against the chimney-piece in deep thought.

Indeed he had enough to think of, when he had fully weighed the meaning
of the doctor's words. He was surprised beyond measure at the turn things
had taken; for although, as he had previously told John, he suspected
that Goddard must have been in a fever for several hours before the
assault, it had not struck him that Stamboul's attack had been absolutely
harmless, still less that it might prove to have been the means of saving
the convict's life. It was terribly hard to say that he desired to save
the man, and yet the honest man in his heart prayed that he might really
hope for that result. It would be far worse, should Goddard die, to
remember that he had wished for his death. But it would be hard to
imagine a more unexpected position than that in which the squire found
himself; by a perfectly natural chain of circumstances he was now tending
with the utmost care the man who had tried to murder him, and who of all
men in the world, stood most in the way of the accomplishment of his
desires.

He could not hide from himself the fact that he hated the sick man, even
though he hoped, or tried to hope for his recovery. He hated him for the
shame and suffering he had brought upon Mary Goddard in the first
instance, for the terrible anxiety he had caused her by his escape and
sudden appearance at her house; he hated him for being what he was, being
also the father of Nellie, and he hated him honestly for his base attempt
upon himself that night. He had good cause to hate him, and perhaps he
was not ashamed of his hatred. To be called upon, however, to return good
for such an accumulated mass of evil was almost too much for his human
nature. It was but a faint satisfaction to think that if he recovered he
was to be sent back to prison. Mr. Juxon did not know that there was
blood upon the man's hands--he had yet to learn that; he would not deign
to mention the assault in the park when he handed him over to the
authorities; the man should simply go back to Portland to suffer the term
of his imprisonment, as soon as he should be well enough to be moved--if
that time ever came. If he died, he should be buried decently in a
nameless grave, "six feet by four, by two," as Thomas Reid would have
said--if he died.

Meanwhile, however, there was yet another consideration which disturbed
the squire's meditations. Mrs. Goddard had a right to know that her
husband was dying and, if she so pleased, she had a right to be at his
bedside. But at the same time it would be necessary so to account for her
presence as not to arouse Doctor Longstreet's suspicions, nor the
comments of Holmes, the butler, and of his brigade in the servants' hall.
It was no easy matter to do this unless Mrs. Goddard were accompanied by
the vicar's wife, the excellent and maternally minded Mrs. Ambrose. To
accomplish this it would be necessary to ask the latter lady to spend a
great part of her time at the Hall in taking care of the wretched
Goddard, who would again be the gainer. But Mrs. Ambrose was as yet
ignorant of the fact that he had escaped from prison; she must be told
then, and an effort must be made to elicit her sympathy. Perhaps she and
the vicar would come and stop a few days, thought the squire. Mrs.
Goddard might then come and go as she pleased. Her presence by her
husband's bedside would then be accounted for on the ground of her
charitable disposition.

While Mr. Juxon was revolving these things in his mind he watched the
doctor and John who were doing what was necessary for the sick man.
Goddard moaned helplessly with every breath, in a loud, monotonous tone,
very wearing to the nerves of those who heard it.

"There is little to be done," said Doctor Longstreet at last. "He must be
fed--alternately a little beef tea and then a little weak brandy and
water. We must try and keep the system up. That is his only chance. I
will prescribe something and send it back by the groom."

"You are not going to leave us to-night?" exclaimed the squire in alarm.

"Must. Very sorry. Bad case of diphtheria in town--probably die before
morning, unless I get there in time--I would not have come here for any
one else. I will certainly be here before ten--he will live till then, I
fancy, and I don't believe there will be any change in his condition.
Good-night, Mr. Juxon--beef tea and brandy every quarter of an hour.
Good-night, Mr.--" he turned to John.

"Short," said John. "Good-night, doctor."

"Ah--I remember--used to be with Mr. Ambrose--yes. Delighted to meet you
again, Mr. Short--good-night."

The doctor vanished, before either the squire or John had time to follow
him. His departure left an unpleasant sense of renewed responsibility in
the squire's mind.

"You had better go to bed, Mr. Short," he said kindly. "I will sit up
with him."

But John would not hear of any such arrangement; he insisted upon bearing
his share of the watching and stoutly refused to leave the squire alone.
There was a large dressing-room attached to the room where Goddard was
lying; the squire and John finally agreed to watch turn and turn about,
one remaining with Goddard, while the other rested upon the couch in the
dressing-room aforesaid. The squire insisted upon taking his watch first,
and John lay down. It was past midnight and he was very tired, but it
seemed impossible to sleep with the sound of that loud, monotonous
mumbling perpetually in his ears. It was a horrible night, and John Short
never forgot it so long as he lived. Years afterwards he could not enter
the room where Goddard had lain without fancying he heard that perpetual
groaning still ringing in his ears. For many hours it continued unabated
and unchanging, never dying away to silence nor developing to articulate
words. From time to time John could hear the squire's step as he moved
about, administering the nourishment prescribed. If he had had the
slightest idea of Mr. Juxon's state of mind he would hardly have left him
even to rest awhile in the next room.

Fortunately the squire's nerves were solid. A firm constitution hardened
by thirty years of seafaring and by the consistent and temperate
regularity which was part of his character, had so toughened his natural
strength as to put him almost beyond the reach of mortal ills; otherwise
he must have broken down under the mental strain thus forced upon him. It
is no light thing to do faithfully the utmost to save a man one has good
reason to hate, and whose death would be an undoubted blessing to every
one who has anything to do with him. Walter Goddard was to Charles Juxon
at once an enemy, an obstacle and a rival; an enemy, for having attempted
his life, an obstacle, because while he lived he prevented the squire
from marrying Mrs. Goddard and a rival because she had once loved him and
for the sake of that love was still willing to sacrifice much for him.
And yet the very fact that she had loved him made it easier to be kind to
him; it seemed to the squire that, after all, in taking care of Goddard
he was in some measure serving her, too, seeing that she would have done
the same thing herself could she have been present.

Yet there was something very generous and large-hearted in the way
Charles Juxon did his duty by the sick man. There are people who seem by
nature designed to act heroic parts in life, whose actions habitually
take an heroic form, and whose whole character is of another stamp from
that of average humanity. Of such people much is expected, because they
seem to offer much; no one is surprised to hear of their making great
sacrifices, no one is astonished if they exhibit great personal courage
in times of danger. Very often they are people of large vanity, whose
chiefest vanity is not to seem vain; gifted with great powers and always
seeking opportunities of using them, holding high ideas upon most
subjects but rarely conceiving themselves incapable of attaining to any
ideal they select for their admiration; brave in combat partly from real
courage, partly, as I have often heard officers say of a dandy soldier in
the ranks, because they are too proud to run away; but, on the whole,
heroic by temperament and in virtue of a singular compound of pride,
strength and virtue, often accomplishing really great things. They are
almost always what are called striking people, for their pride and their
strength generally attract attention by their magnitude, and something in
their mere appearance distinguishes them from the average mass.

But Charles Juxon did not in any way belong to this type, any more than
the other persons who found themselves concerned in the events which
culminated in Goddard's illness. He was a very simple man whose pride was
wholly unconscious, who did not believe himself destined to do anything
remarkable, who regarded his own personality as rather uninteresting and
who, had he been asked about himself, would have been the first to
disclaim any sentiments of the heroic kind. With very little imagination,
he possessed great stability himself and great belief in the stability of
things in general, a character of the traditional kind known as
"northern," though it would be much more just to describe it as the
"temperate" or "central" type of man. Wherever there is exaggeration in
nature, there is exaggerated imagination in man. The solid and
unimaginative part of the English character is undeniably derived from
the Angles or from the Flemish; it is morally the best part, but it is by
all odds the least interesting--it is found in the type of man belonging
to the plains in a temperate zone, who differs in every respect from the
real northman, his distant cousin and hereditary enemy. If Charles Juxon
was remarkable for anything it was for his modesty and reticence, in a
word, for his apparent determination not to be remarkable at all.

And now, in the extremest anxiety and difficulty, his character served
him well; for he unconsciously refused to allow to himself that his
position was extraordinary or his responsibility greater than he was
able to bear. He disliked intensely the idea of being put forward or
thrust into a dramatic situation, and he consequently failed signally to
fulfil the dramatic necessities. There was not even a struggle in his
heart between the opposite possibilities of letting Goddard die, by
merely relaxing his attention, and of redoubling his care and bringing
about his recovery. He never once asked himself, after the chances of the
patient surviving the fever were stated, whether he would not be
justified in sending for some honest housewife from the village to take
care of the tramp instead of looking to his wants himself. He simply did
his best to save the man's life, without hesitation, without suspecting
that he was doing anything extraordinary, doing, as he had always done,
the best thing that came in his way according to the best of his ability.
He could not wholly suppress the reflection that much good might ensue
from Goddard's death, but the thought never for a moment interfered with
his efforts to save the convict alive.

But John lay in the next room, kept awake by the sick man's perpetual
groaning and by the train of thought which ran through his brain. There
were indeed more strange things than his philosophy could account for,
but the strangest of all was that the squire should know who the tramp
was; he must know it, John thought, since he knew all about him, his
former love for Mrs. Goddard and his recent presence in the
neighbourhood. The young man's curiosity was roused to its highest pitch,
and he longed to know more. He at once guessed that there must have
been much intimate confidence between Mr. Juxon and Mrs. Goddard; he
suspected moreover that there must be some strange story connected with
her, something which accounted for the peculiar stamp of a formerly
luxurious life which still clung to her, and which should explain her
residence in Billingsfield But John was very far from suspecting the real
truth.

His mind was restless and the inaction became intolerable to him. He rose
at last and went again into the room where his friend was watching. Mr.
Juxon sat by the bedside, the very picture of patience, one leg crossed
over the other and his hands folded together upon his knee, his face
paler than usual but perfectly calm, his head bent a little to one side
and his smooth hair, which had been slightly ruffled in the encounter in
the park, as smooth as ever. It was a very distinctive feature of him; it
was part of the sleek and spotless neatness which Mrs. Ambrose so much
admired.

"It is my turn, now," said John. "Will you lie down for a couple of
hours?"

The squire rose. Being older and less excitable than John, he was
beginning to feel the need of rest. People who have watched often by the
sick know how terribly long are those hours of the night between three
o'clock and dawn; long always, but seeming interminable when one is
obliged to listen perpetually to a long-drawn, inarticulate moaning, a
constant effort to speak which never results in words.

"You are very good," said Mr. Juxon, quietly. "If you will give him the
things from time to time, I will take a nap."

With that he went and lay down upon the couch, and in three minutes was
as sound asleep as though he were in bed. John sat by the sick man and
looked at his flushed features and listened to the hard-drawn breath
followed each time by that terrible, monotonous, mumbling groan.

It might have been three-quarters of an hour since the squire had gone to
sleep when John thought he saw a change in Goddard's face; it seemed to
him that the flush subsided from his forehead, very slowly, leaving only
a bright burning colour in his cheeks. His eyes seemed suddenly to grow
clearer and a strange look of intelligence came into them; his whole
appearance was as though illuminated by a flash of some light different
from that of the candles which burned upon the table. John rose to his
feet and came and looked at him. The groaning suddenly ceased and
Goddard's eyelids, which had been motionless for hours, moved naturally.
He appeared to be observing John's face attentively.

"Where is the squire?" he asked quite naturally--so naturally that John
was startled.

"Asleep in the next room," replied the latter.

"I did not kill him after all," said Goddard, turning himself a little as
though to be more at his ease.

"No," answered John. "He is not hurt at all. Can you tell me who you
are?" For his life, he could not help asking the question. It seemed so
easy to find out who the fellow was, now that he could speak
intelligibly. But Goddard's face contracted suddenly, in a hideous smile.

"Don't you wish you knew?" he said roughly. "But I know you, my boy, I
know you--ha! ha! There's no getting away from you, my boy, is there?"

"Who am I?" asked John in astonishment.

"You are the hangman," said Goddard. "I know you very well. The hangman
is always so well dressed. I say, old chap, turn us off quick, you
know--no fumbling about the bolt. Look here--I like your face," he
lowered his voice--"there are nearly sixty pounds in my right-hand
trouser pocket--there are--Mary--ah--gave--M--a--"

Again his eyes fixed themselves and the moaning began and continued. John
was horror-struck and stood for a moment gazing at his face, over which
the deep flush had spread once more, seeming to obliterate all appearance
of intelligence. Then the young man put his hand beneath Goddard's head
and gently replaced him in his former position, smoothing the pillows,
and giving him a little brandy. He debated whether or not he should call
the squire from his rest to tell him what had happened, but seeing that
Goddard had now returned to his former state, he supposed such moments of
clear speech were to be expected from time to time. He sat down again,
and waited; then after a time he went to the window and looked anxiously
for the dawn. It seemed an intolerably long night.

But the day came at last and shed a ghastly grey tinge upon the
sick-room, revealing as it were the outlines of all that was bad to look
at, which the warm yellow candle-light had softened with a kindlier
touch. John accidentally looked at himself in the mirror as he passed and
was startled at his own pale face; but the convict, labouring in the
ravings of his fever, seemed unconscious of the dawning day; he was not
yet exhausted and his harsh voice never ceased its jarring gibber. John
wondered whether he should ever spend such a night again, and shuddered
at the recollection of each moment.

The daylight waked the squire from his slumbers, however, and before the
sun was up he came out of the dressing-room, looking almost as fresh as
though nothing had happened to him in the night. Accustomed for years to
rise at all hours, in all weathers, unimpressionable, calm and strong, he
seemed superior to the course of events.

"Well, Mr. Short, you allowed me a long nap. You must be quite worn out,
I should think. How is the patient?"

John told what had occurred.

"Took you for the hangman, did he?" said the squire. "I wonder why--but
you say he asked after me very sensibly?"

"Quite so. It was when I asked him his own name, that he began raving
again," answered John innocently.

"What made you ask him that?" asked Mr. Juxon, who did not seem pleased.

"Curiosity," was John's laconic answer.

"Yes--but I fancy it frightened him. If I were you I would not do it
again, if he has a lucid moment. I imagine it was fright that made him
delirious in the first instance."

"All right," quoth John. "I won't." But he made his own deductions. The
squire evidently knew who he was, and did not want John to know, for some
unexplained reason. The young man wondered what the reason could be; the
mere name of the wretched man was not likely to convey any idea to his
mind, for it was highly improbable that he had ever met him before his
conviction. So John departed to his own room and refreshed himself with
a tub, while the squire kept watch by daylight.

It was not yet eight o'clock when Holmes brought a note from the vicar,
which Mr. Juxon tore open and read with anxious interest.

"MY DEAR MR. JUXON--I received your note late last night, but I judged it
better to answer this morning, not wishing to excite suspicion by sending
to you at so late an hour. The intelligence is indeed alarming and you
will, I daresay, understand me, when I tell you that I found it necessary
to communicate it to Mrs. Ambrose--"

The squire could not refrain from smiling at the vicar's way of putting
the point; but he read quickly on.

"She however--and I confess my surprise and gratification--desires to
accompany me to the Hall this morning, volunteering to take all possible
care of the unfortunate man. As she has had much experience in visiting
the sick, I fancy that she will render us very valuable assistance in
saving his life. Pray let me know if the plan has your approval, as it
may be dangerous to lose time.--Yours sincerely,

"AUGUSTIN AMBROSE."

Mr. Juxon was delighted to find that the difficult task of putting Mrs.
Ambrose in possession of the facts of the case had been accomplished in
the ordinary, the very ordinary, course of events by her own
determination to find out what was to be known. In an hour she might be
at Goddard's bedside, and Mrs. Goddard would be free to see her husband.
He despatched a note at once and redoubled his attentions to the sick man
whose condition, however, showed no signs of changing.




CHAPTER XXII.


Mrs. Ambrose kept her word and arrived with the vicar before nine
o'clock, protesting her determination to take care of poor Goddard, so
long as he needed any care. Mr. Juxon warned her that John did not know
who the man was, and entreated her to be careful of her speech when John
was present. There was no reason why John should ever know anything more
about it, he said; three could keep a secret, but no one knew whether
four could be as discreet.

The squire took Mrs. Ambrose and her husband to Goddard's room and
telling her that Doctor Longstreet was expected in an hour, by which time
he himself hoped to have returned, he left the two good people in charge
of the sick man and went to see Mrs. Goddard. He sent John a message to
the effect that all was well and that he should take some rest while the
Ambroses relieved the watch, and having thus disposed his household he
went out, bound upon one of the most disagreeable errands he had ever
undertaken. But he set his teeth and walked boldly down the park.

At the turn of the avenue he paused, at the spot where Goddard had
attacked him. There was nothing to be seen at first, for the road was
hard and dry and there was no trace of the scuffle; but as the squire
looked about he spied his hat, lying in the ditch, and picked it up. It
was heavy with the morning dew and the brim was broken and bent where
Goddard's weapon had struck it. Hard by in a heap of driven oak leaves
lay the weapon itself, which Mr. Juxon examined curiously. It was a
heavy piece of hewn oak, evidently very old, and at one end a thick iron
spike was driven through, the sharp point projecting upon one side and
the wrought head upon the other. He turned it over in his hands and
realised that he had narrowly escaped his death. Then he laid the hat and
the club together and threw a handful of leaves over them, intending to
take them to the Hall at a later hour, and he turned to go upon his way
towards the cottage. But as he turned he saw two men coming towards him,
and now not twenty yards away. His heart sank, for one of the two was
Thomas Gall the village constable; the other was a quiet-looking
individual with grey whiskers, plainly dressed and unassuming in
appearance. Instinctively the squire knew that Gall's companion must be a
detective. He was startled, and taken altogether unawares; but the men
were close upon him and there was nothing to be done but to face them
boldly.

Gall made his usual half military salute as he came up, and the man in
plain clothes raised his hat politely.

"The gentleman from Lunnon, sir," said Gall by way of introduction,
assuming an air of mysterious importance.

"Yes?" said Mr. Juxon interrogatively. "Do you wish to speak to me?"

"The gentleman's come on business, sir. In point of fact, sir, it's the
case we was speakin' of lately."

The squire knew very well what was the matter. Indeed, he had wondered
that the detective had not arrived sooner. That did not make it any
easier to receive him, however; on the contrary, if he had come on the
previous day matters would have been much simpler.

"Very well, Gall," answered Mr. Juxon. "I am much obliged to you for
bringing Mr.--" he paused and looked at the man in plain clothes.

"Booley, sir," said the detective.

"Thank you--yes--for bringing Mr. Booley so far. You may go home, Gall.
If we need your services we will send to your house."

"It struck me, sir," remarked Gall with a bland smile, "as perhaps I
might be of use--prefeshnal in fact, sir."

"I will send for you," said the detective, shortly. The manners of the
rural constabulary had long ceased to amuse him.

Gall departed rather reluctantly, but to make up for being left out of
the confidential interview which was to follow, he passed his thumb round
his belt and thrust out his portly chest as he marched down the avenue.
He subsequently spoke very roughly to a little boy who was driving an old
sheep to the butcher's at the other end of the village.

Mr. Juxon and the detective turned back and walked slowly towards the
Hall.

"Will you be good enough to state exactly what the business is," said the
squire, well knowing that it was best to go straight to the point.

"You are Mr. Juxon, I believe?" inquired Mr. Booley looking at his
companion sharply. The squire nodded. "Very good, Mr. Juxon," continued
the official. "I am after a man called Walter Goddard. Do you know
anything about him? His wife, Mrs. Mary Goddard, lives in this village."

"Walter Goddard is at this moment in my house," said the squire calmly.
"I know all about him. He lay in wait for me at this very spot last night
and attacked me. My dog pulled him down."

The detective was somewhat surprised at the intelligence, and at the cool
manner in which his companion conveyed it.

"I am very glad to hear that. In that case I will take him at once."

"I fear that is impossible," answered the squire. "The man is raving in
the delirium of a brain fever. Meanwhile I shall be glad if you will stay
in the house, until he is well enough to be moved. The doctor will be
here at ten o'clock, and he will give you the details of the case better
than I can. It would be quite impossible to take him away at present."

"May I ask," inquired Mr. Booley severely, "why you did not inform the
local police?"

"Because it would have been useless. If he had escaped after attacking
me, I should have done so. But since I caught him, and found him to be
very ill--utterly unable to move, I proposed to take charge of him
myself. Mrs. Goddard is a friend of mine, and of the vicar, who knows her
story perfectly well. To publish the story in the village would be to do
her a great injury. Mrs. Ambrose, the vicar's wife, who is also
acquainted with the circumstances, is at this moment taking care of the
sick man. I presume that my promise--I am a retired officer of the
Navy--and the promise of Mr. Ambrose, the vicar, are sufficient
guarantee--"

"Oh, there is no question of guarantee," said Mr. Booley. "I assure you,
Mr. Juxon, I have no doubt whatever that you have acted for the best.
Can you tell me how long Goddard has been in the neighbourhood?"

The squire told the detective what he knew, taking care not to implicate
Mrs. Goddard, even adding with considerable boldness, for he was not
positively certain of the statement, that neither she nor any one else
had known where the man was hiding. Mr. Booley being sure that Goddard
could not escape him, saw that he could claim the reward offered for the
capture of the convict. He asked whether he might see him.

"That is doubtful," said the squire. "When I left him just now he was
quite unconscious, but he has lucid moments. To frighten him at such a
time might kill him outright."

"It is very easy for me to say that I am another medical man," remarked
Mr. Booley. "Perhaps I might say it in any case, just to keep the
servants quiet. I would like to see Mrs. Goddard, too."

"That is another matter. She is very nervous. I am going to her house,
now, and probably she will come back to the Hall with me. I might perhaps
tell her that you are here, but I think it would be likely to shock her
very much."

"Well, well, we will see about it," answered Mr. Booley. They reached the
house and the squire ushered the detective into the study, begging him to
wait for his return.

It was a new complication, though it had seemed possible enough. But the
position was not pleasant. To feel that there was a detective in the
house waiting to carry off Goddard, so soon as he should be well enough
to be moved, was about as disagreeable as anything well could be. The
longer the squire thought of it, the more impossible and at the same time
unnecessary it seemed to be to inform Mrs. Goddard of Booley's arrival.
He hastened down the park, feeling that no time must be lost in bringing
her to her husband's bedside.

He found her waiting for him, and was struck by the calmness she
displayed. To tell the truth the violence of her emotions had been wholly
expended on the previous night and the reaction had brought an intense
melancholy quiet, which almost frightened Mr. Juxon. The habit of bearing
great anxiety had not been wholly forgotten, for the lesson had been well
learned during those terrible days of her husband's trial, and it was as
though his sudden return had revived in her the custom of silent
suffering. She hardly spoke, but listened quietly to Mr. Juxon's account
of what had happened.

"You are not hurt?" she asked, almost incredulously. Her eyes rested on
her friend's face with a wistful look.

"No, I assure you, not in the least," he said. "But your poor husband is
very ill--very ill indeed."

"Tell me," said she quietly, "is he dead? Are you trying to break it to
me?"

"No--no indeed. He is alive--he may even recover. But that is very
uncertain. It might be best to wait until the doctor has been again. I
will come back and fetch you--"

"Oh, no, I will go at once. I would like to walk. It will do me good."

So the two set out without further words upon their errand. Mr. Juxon had
purposely omitted to speak of Mr. Booley's arrival. It would be easy, he
thought, to prevent them from meeting in the great house.

"Do you know," said Mary Goddard, as they walked together, "it is very
hard to wish that he may recover--" she stopped short.

"Very hard," answered the squire. "His life must be one of misery, if he
lives."

"Of course you would send him back?" she asked nervously.

"My dear friend, there is no other course open to me. Your own safety
requires it."

"God knows--you would only be doing right," she said and was silent
again. She knew, though the squire did not, what fate awaited Walter
Goddard if he were given up to justice. She knew that he had taken life
and must pay the penalty. Yet she was very calm; her senses were all
dulled and yet her thoughts seemed to be consecutive and rational. She
realised fully that the case of life and death was ill balanced; death
had it which ever course events might take, and she could not save her
husband. She thought of it calmly and calmly hoped that he might die now,
in his bed, with her by his side. It was a better fate.

"You say that the doctor thinks he must have been ill some time?" she
asked after a time.

"Yes--he was quite sure of it," answered the squire.

"Perhaps that was why he spoke so roughly to me," she said in a low
voice, as though speaking to herself.

The tears came into the squire's eyes for sheer pity. Even in this utmost
extremity the unhappy woman tried to account for her husband's rude and
cruel speech. Mr. Juxon did not answer but looked away. They passed the
spot where the scuffle had occurred on the previous night, but still he
said nothing, fearing to disturb her by making his story seem too vividly
real.

"Where is he?" she asked as they reached the Hall, looking up at the
windows.

"On the other side."

They went in and mounted the stairs towards the sick man's chamber. Mr.
Juxon went in, leaving Mrs. Goddard outside for a moment. She could
hear that hideous rattling monotonous moan, and she trembled from head to
foot. Presently Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose came out, looking very grave and
passed by her with a look of sympathy.

"Will you come in?" said the squire in a low voice.

Mrs. Goddard entered the room quickly. On seeing her husband, she uttered
a low cry and laid her hand upon Mr. Juxon's arm. For some seconds she
stood thus, quite motionless, gazing with intense and sympathetic
interest at the sick man's face. Then she went to his side and laid her
hand upon his burning forehead and looked into his eyes.

"Walter! Walter!" she cried. "Don't you know me? Oh, why does he groan
like that? Is he suffering?" she asked turning to Mr. Juxon.

"No--I do not think he suffers much. He is quite unconscious. He is
talking all the time but cannot pronounce the words."

The squire stood at a distance looking on, noting the womanly
thoughtfulness Mrs. Goddard displayed as she smoothed her husband's
pillow and tried to settle his head more comfortably upon the bags of
ice; and all the while she never took her eyes from Goddard's face, as
though she were fascinated by her own sorrow and his suffering. She moved
about the bed with that instinctive understanding of sickness which
belongs to delicate women, but her glance never strayed to Mr. Juxon; she
seemed forced by a mysterious magnetism to look at Walter and only at
him.

"Has he been long like this?" she asked.

"Ever since last night. He called you once--he said, 'Mary Goddard, let
me in!' And then he said something else--he said--I cannot remember what
he said." Mr. Juxon checked himself, remembering the words John had
heard, and of which he only half understood the import. But Mrs. Goddard
hardly noticed his reply.

"Will you leave me alone with him?" she said presently. "There is a bell
in the room--I could ring if anything--happened," she added with mournful
hesitation.

"Certainly," answered the squire. "Only, I beg of you my dear friend--do
not distress yourself needlessly--"

"Needlessly!" she repeated with a sorrowful smile. "It is all I can do
for him--to watch by his side. He will not live--he will not live, I am
sure."

The squire inwardly prayed that she might be right, and left her alone
with the sick man. Who, he thought, was better fitted, who had a stronger
right to be at his bedside at such a time? If only he might die! For if
he lived, how much more terrible would the separation be, when Booley the
detective came to conduct him back to his prison! In truth, it would be
more terrible even than Mr. Juxon imagined.

Meanwhile he must go and see to the rest of the household. He must speak
to John Short; he must see Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose, and he must take
precautions against any of them seeing Mr. Booley. This was, he thought,
very important, and he resolved to speak with the latter first. John was
probably asleep, worn out with the watching of the night.

Mr. Booley sat in the squire's study where he had been left almost an
hour earlier. He had installed himself in a comfortable corner by the
fire and was reading the morning paper which he had found unopened upon
the table. He seemed thoroughly at home as he sat there, a pair of
glasses upon his nose and his feet stretched out towards the flame upon
the hearth.

"Thank you, I am doing very well, Mr. Juxon," he said as the squire
entered.

"Oh--I am very glad," answered Mr. Juxon politely. The information was
wholly voluntary as he had not asked any question concerning the
detective's comfort.

"And how is the patient?" inquired Mr. Booley. "Do you think there is any
chance of removing him this afternoon?"

"This afternoon?" repeated the squire, in some astonishment. "The man is
very ill. It may be weeks before he can be removed."

"Oh!" ejaculated the other. "I was not aware of that. I cannot possibly
stay so long. To-morrow, at the latest, he will have to go."

"But, my dear sir," argued Mr. Juxon, "the thing is quite impossible. The
doctor can testify to that--"

"We are apt to be our own doctors in these cases," said Mr. Booley,
calmly. "At all events he can be taken as far as the county gaol."

"Upon my word, it would be murder to think of it--a man in a brain fever,
in a delirium, to be taken over jolting roads--dear me! It is not to be
thought of!"

Mr. Booley smiled benignly, for the first time since the squire had made
his acquaintance.

"You seem to forget, Mr. Juxon, that my time is very valuable," he
observed.

"Yes--no doubt--but the man's life, Mr. Booley, is valuable too."

"Hardly, I should say," returned the detective coolly. "But since you are
so very pressing, I will ask to see the man at once. I can soon tell you
whether he will die on the road or not. I have had considerable
experience in that line."

"You shall see him, as soon as the doctor comes," replied the squire,
shocked at the man's indifference and hardness.

"It certainly cannot hurt him to see me, if he is still unconscious or
raving," objected Mr. Booley.

"He might have a lucid moment just when you are there--the fright would
very likely kill him."

"That would decide the question of moving him," answered Booley, taking
his glasses from his nose, laying down the paper and rising to his feet.
"There is clearly some reason why you object to my seeing him now. I
would not like to insist, Mr. Juxon, but you must please remember that it
may be my duty to do so."

The squire was beginning to be angry; even his calm temper was not proof
against the annoyance caused by Mr. Booley's appearance at the Hall, but
he wisely controlled himself and resorted to other means of persuasion.

"There is a reason, Mr. Booley; indeed there are several very good
reasons. One of them is that it might be fatal to frighten the man;
another is that at this moment his wife is by his bedside. She has
entirely made up her mind that when he is recovered he must return to
prison, but at present it would be most unkind to let her know that you
are in the house. The shock to her nerves would be terrible."

"Oh," said Mr. Booley, "if there is a lady in the case we must make some
allowances, I presume. Only, put yourself in my place, Mr. Juxon, put
yourself in my place."

The squire doubted whether he would be willing to exchange his
personality for that of Mr. Booley.

"Well--what then?" he said. "I think I would try to be merciful."

"Yes; but suppose that in being merciful, you just allowed that lady the
time necessary to present her beloved husband with a convenient little
pill, just to shorten his sufferings? And suppose that--"

"Really, Mr. Booley, I think you make very unwarrantable suppositions,"
said Mr. Juxon severely. "I cannot suppose any such thing."

"Many women--ladies too--have done that to save a man from hanging,"
returned Mr. Booley, fixing his grey eye on the squire.

"Hanging?" repeated the latter in surprise. "But Goddard is not to be
hanged."

"Of course he is. What did you expect?" Mr. Booley looked surprised in
his turn.

"But--what for?" asked the squire very anxiously. "He has not killed
anybody--"

"Oh--then you don't know how he escaped?"

"No--I have not the least idea--pray tell me."

"I don't wonder you don't understand me, then," said Mr. Booley. "Well,
it is a short tale but a lively one, as they say. Of course it stands to
reason in the first place that he could not have got out of Portland. He
was taken out for a purpose. You know that after his trial was over, all
sorts of other things besides the forgery came out about him, proving
that he was altogether a very bad lot. Now about three weeks ago there
was a question of identifying a certain person--it was a very long story,
with a bad murder case and all the rest of it--commonplace, you know the
sort--never mind the story, it will all be in the papers before long when
they have got it straight, which is more than I have, seeing that these
affairs do get a little complicated occasionally, you know, as such
things will." Mr. Booley paused. It was evident that his command of the
English tongue was not equal to the strain of constructing a long
sentence.

"This person, whom he was to identify, was the person murdered?" inquired
Mr. Juxon.

"Exactly. It was not the person, but the person's body, so to say.
Somebody who had been connected with the Goddard case was sure that if
Goddard could be got out of prison he could do the identifying all
straight. It did not matter about his being under sentence of hard
labour--it was a private case, and the officer only wanted Goddard's
opinion for his personal satisfaction. So he goes to the governor of
Portland, and finds that Goddard had a very good character in that
institution--he was a little bit of a gay deceiver, you see, and knew how
to fetch the chaps in there and particularly the parson. So he had a good
character. Very good. The governor consents to send him to town for this
private job, under a strong force--that means three policemen--with irons
on his hands. When they reached London they put him in a fourwheeler.
Those things are done sometimes, and nobody is the wiser, because the
governor does it on his own responsibility, for the good of the law, I
suppose. I never approved of it. Do you follow me, Mr. Juxon?"

"Perfectly," answered the squire. "He was driven from the station with
three policemen in a hackney-coach, you say."

"Exactly so. It was a queer place where the body was--away down in the
Minories. Ever been there, Mr. Juxon? Queer place it is, and no mistake.
I would like to show you some little bits of London. Well, as I was
saying, the fourwheeler went along, with two policemen inside with
Goddard and one on the box. Safe, you would say. Not a bit of it. Just
the beggar's luck, too. It was dusk. That is always darker than when the
lamps are well going. The fourwheeler ran into a dray-cart, round a
corner where they were repairing the street. The horse went down with a
smash, shafts, lamp, everything broken to smithereens, as they say. The
policeman jumps off the box with the cabby to see what is the matter. One
of the bobbies--the policemen I would say--it's a technical term, Mr.
Juxon--gets out of the cab to see what's up, leaving Goddard in charge of
the other. Then there is a terrific row; more carts come up, more
fourwheelers--everybody swearing at once. Presently the policeman who
had got out comes back and looks in to see if everything is straight. Not
a bit of it again. Other door of the cab was open and--no Goddard. But
the policeman was lying back in the corner and when they struck a light
and looked, they found he was stone dead. Goddard had brained him with
the irons on his wrists. No one ever saw him from that day to this. He
must have known London well--they say he did, and he was a noted quick
runner. Being nightfall and rather foggy as it generally is in those
parts he got clear off. But he killed the man who had him in charge and
if he lives he will have to swing for it. May be Mrs. Goddard does not
know that---may be she does. That is the reason I don't want her to be
left alone with him. No doubt she is very good and all that, but she
might just take it into her head to save the government twenty feet of
rope."

"I am very much surprised, and very much shocked," said the squire
gravely. "I had no idea of this. But I will answer for Mrs. Goddard.
Why was all this never In the papers--or was there an account of it, Mr.
Booley?"

"Oh no--it was never mentioned. We felt sure that we should catch him and
until we did we--I mean the profession--thought it just as well to say
nothing. The governor remembered to have read a letter from Goddard's
wife, just telling him where she was living, about two years ago. Being
harmless, he passed it and never copied the address; then he could not
remember it. At last they found it in his cell, hidden away somehow. The
beggar had kept it."

"Poor fellow!" exclaimed Mr. Juxon. In the silence which followed, the
sound of wheels was heard outside. Doctor Longstreet had arrived.




CHAPTER XXIII.


While Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose were together in the library downstairs, while
John Short was waking from the short sleep he had enjoyed, and while the
squire was listening in the study to Mr. Booley's graphic account of the
convict's escape, Mrs. Goddard was alone with her husband, watching every
movement and listening intently to every moaning breath he drew.

In the desperate anxiety for his fate, she forgot herself and seemed no
longer to feel fatigue or exhaustion from all she herself had suffered.
She stood long by his bedside, hoping that he might recognise her and yet
fearing the moment when he should recover his senses. Then she noticed
that the morning sun was pouring in through the window and she drew a
curtain across, to shade his eyes from the glare. Whether the sudden
changing of the light affected Goddard, as it does sometimes affect
persons in the delirium of a brain fever, or whether it was only a
natural turn in his condition, she never knew. His expression changed and
acquired that same look of strange intelligence which John Short had
noticed in the night; the flush sank from his forehead and gave place to
a luminous, transparent colour, his eyelids once more moved naturally,
and he looked at his wife as she stood beside him, and recognised her. He
was weaker now than when he had spoken with John Short six hours earlier,
but he was more fully in possession of his faculties for a
brief moment. Mary Goddard trembled and felt her hands turn cold with
excitement.

"Walter, do you know me now?" she asked very softly.

"Yes," he said faintly, and closed his eyes. She laid her hand upon his
forehead; the coldness of it seemed pleasant to him, for a slight smile
flickered over his face.

"You are better, I think," she said again, gazing intently at him.

"Mary--it is Mary?" he murmured, slowly opening his eyes and looking up
to her. "Yes--I know you--I have been dreaming a long time. I'm so
tired--"

"You must not talk," said she. "It will tire you more." Then she gave him
some drink. "Try and sleep," she said in a soothing tone.

"I cannot--oh, Mary, I am very ill."

"But you will get well again--"

Goddard started suddenly, and laid his hand upon her arm with more force
than she suspected he possessed.

"Where am I?" he asked, staring about the room. "Is this your house,
Mary? What became of Juxon?"

"He is not hurt. He brought you home in his arms, Walter, to his own
house, and is taking care of you."

"Good heavens! He will give me up. No, no, don't hold me--I must be
off"

He made a sudden effort to rise, but he was very weak. He fell back
exhausted upon his pillow; his fingers gripped the sheet convulsively,
and his face grew paler.

"Caught--like a rat!" he muttered. Mary Goddard sighed.

Was she to give him hope of escape? Or should she try to calm him now,
and when he was better, break the truth to him? Was she to make him
believe that he was safe for the present, and hold out a prospect of
escape when he should be better, or should she tell him now, once for
all, while he was in his senses, that he was lost? It was a terrible
position. Love she had none left for him, but there was infinite pity
still in her heart and there would be while he breathed. She hesitated
one moment only, and it may be that she decided for the wrong; but it was
her pity that moved her, and not any remnant of love.

"Hush, Walter," she said. "You may yet escape, when you are strong
enough. You are quite safe here, for the present. Mr. Juxon would not
think of giving you up now. By and by--the window is not high, Walter,
and I shall often be alone with you. I will manage it."

"Is that true? Are you cheating me?" cried the wretched man in broken
tones. "No--you are speaking the truth--I know it--God bless you, Mary!"
Again he closed his eyes and drew one or two long deep breaths.

Strange to say, the blessing the miserable convict called down upon her
was sweet to Mary Goddard, sweeter than anything she remembered for a
long time. She had perhaps done wrong in giving him hopes of escaping,
but at least he was grateful to her. It was more than she expected, for
she remembered her last meeting with him, and the horrible ingratitude
he had then shown her. It seemed to her that his heart had been softened
a little; anything was better than that rough indifference he had
affected before. Presently he spoke again.

"Not that it makes much difference now, Mary," he said. "I don't think
there is much left of me."

"Do not say that, Walter," she answered gently. "Rest now. The more you
rest the sooner you will be well again. Try and sleep."

"Sleep--no--I cannot sleep. I have murdered sleep--like Macbeth, Mary,
like Macbeth--Do you remember Macbeth?"

"Hush," said Mary Goddard, endeavouring to calm him, though she turned
pale at his strange quotation. "Hush--"

"That is to say," said the sick man, heedless of her exhortation and
soothing touch, "that is to say, I did not. He was very wide awake, and
if I had not been quick, I should never have got off. Ugh! How damp that
cellar was, that first night. That is where I got my fever. It is fever,
I suppose?" he asked, unable to keep his mind for long in one groove.
"What does the doctor say? Has he been here?"

"Yes. He said you would soon be well; but he said you must be kept very
quiet. So you must not talk, or I will go away."

"Oh Mary, don't go--don't go! It's like--ha! ha! it's quite like old
times, Mary!" He laughed harshly, a hideous, half-delirious laugh.

Mary Goddard shuddered but made a great effort to control herself.

"Yes," she said gently, "it is like old times. Try and think that it is
the old house at Putney, Walter. Do you hear the sparrows chirping, just
as they used to do? The curtains are the same colour, too. You used to
sleep so quietly at the old house. Try and sleep now. Then you will
soon get well. Now, I will sit beside you, but I will not talk any
more--there--are you quite comfortable? A little higher? Yes--so. Go to
sleep."

Her quiet voice soothed him, and her gentle hands made his rest more
easy. She sat down beside him, thinking from his silence that he would
really go to sleep; hoping and yet not hoping, revolving in her mind the
chances of his escape, so soon as he should be strong enough to attempt
it, shuddering at the thought of what his fate must be if he again fell
into the hands of the police. She did not know that a detective was at
that moment in the house, determined to carry her husband away so soon as
the doctor pronounced it possible. Nothing indeed, not even that
knowledge could have added much to the burden of her sorrows as she sat
there, a small and graceful figure with a sad pathetic face, leaning
forward as she sat and gazing drearily at the carpet, where the sunlight
crept in beneath the curtains from the bright world without. It seemed to
her that the turning point in her existence had come, and that this day
must decide all; yet she could not see how it was to be decided, think of
it as she might. One thing stood prominent in her thoughts, and she
delighted to think of it--the generosity of Charles Juxon. From first to
last, from the day when she had frankly told him her story and he had
accepted it and refused to let it bring any difference to his friendship
for her, down to this present time, when after being basely attacked by
her own husband, he had nobly brought the wretch home and was caring
for him as for one of his own blood--through all and in spite of all, the
squire had shown the same unassuming but unfailing generosity. She asked
herself, as she sat beside the sick man, whether there were many like
Charles Juxon in the world. There was the vicar, but the case was very
different. He too had been kind and generous from the first; but he had
not asked her to marry him--she blushed at the thought--he had not loved
her. If Charles Juxon loved her, his generosity to Goddard was all the
greater.

She could not tell whether she loved him, because her ideas were what the
world calls simple, and what, in heaven, would be called good. Her
husband was alive; none the less so because he had been taken away and
separated from her by the law--he was alive, and now was brought face to
face with her again. While he was living, she did not suppose it possible
to love another, for she was very simple. She said to herself truly that
she had a very high esteem for the squire and that he was the best friend
she had in the world; that to lose him would be the most terrible of
imaginable losses; that she was deeply indebted to him, and she even half
unconsciously allowed that if she were free she might marry him. There
was no harm in that, she knew very well. She owed her own husband no
longer either respect or affection, even while she still felt pity for
him. Her esteem at least, she might give to another; nay, she owed it,
and if she had refused Charles Juxon her friendship, she would have
called herself the most ungrateful of women. If ever man deserved
respect, esteem and friendship, it was the squire.

Even in the present anxiety she thought of him, for his conduct seemed
the only bright spot in the gloom of her thoughts; and she sincerely
rejoiced that he had escaped unhurt. Had any harm come to him, she would
have been, if it were possible, more miserable than she now was. But he
was safe and sound, and doing his best to help her--doing more than she
knew, in fact, at that very moment. There was at least something to be
thankful for.

Goddard stirred again, and opened his eyes.

"Mary," he said faintly, "they won't catch me after all."

"No, Walter," said she, humouring him. "Sleep quietly, for no one will
disturb you."

"I am going where nobody can catch me. I am dying--"

"Oh, Walter!" cried Mary Goddard, "you must not speak like that. You will
be better soon. The doctor is expected every moment."

"He had better make haste," said the sick man with something of the
roughness he had shown at their first meetings. "It is no use, Mary. I
have been thinking about it. I have been mad for--for very long, I am
sure. I want to die, Mary. Nobody can catch me if I die--I shall be safe
then. You will be safe too--that is a great thing."

His voice had a strange and meditative tone in it, which frightened his
wife, as she stood close beside him. She could not speak, for her
excitement and fear had the mastery of her tongue.

"I have been thinking about it--I am not good for much, now--Mary--I
never was. It will do some good if I die--just because I shall be out of
the way. It will be the only good thing I ever did for you."

"Oh Walter," cried his wife in genuine distress, "don't--don't!
Think--you must not die so--think of--of the other world, Walter--you
must not die so!"

Goddard smiled faintly--scornfully, his wife thought.

"I daresay I shall not die till to-morrow, or next day--but I will not
live," he said with sudden energy. "Do you understand me, I will not
live! Bah!" he cried, falling back upon his pillow, "the grapes are
sour--I can't live if I would. Oh yes, I know all about that--my sins.
Well, I am sorry for them. I am sorry, Mary. But it is very little
good--people always laugh at--deathbed repentance--"

He stopped and his thoughts seemed wandering. Mary Goddard gave him
something to drink and tried to calm him. But he moved restlessly, though
feebly.

"Softly, softly," he murmured again. "He is coming--close to me. Get
ready--now--no not yet, yes--now. Ugh!" yelled Goddard, suddenly
springing up, his eyes starting from his head. "Ugh! the dog--oh!"

"Hush, Walter," cried his wife, pushing him back. "Hush--no one will hurt
you."

"What--is that you, Mary?" asked the sick man, trembling violently. Then
he laughed harshly. "I was off again. Pshaw! I did not really mean to
hurt him--he need not have set that beast at me. He did not catch me
though--Mary, I am going to die--will you pray for me? You are a good
woman--somebody will hear your prayers, I daresay. Do, Mary--I shall feel
better somehow, though I daresay it is very foolish of me."

"No, Walter--not foolish, not foolish. Would you like me to call Mr.
Ambrose? he is a clergyman--he is in the house."

"No, no. You Mary, you--nobody will hear anybody else's prayers--for
me--for poor me--"

"Try and pray with me, Walter," said Mary Goddard, very quietly. She
seemed to have an unnatural strength given to her in that hour of
distress and horror. She knelt down by the bedside and took his wounded
hand in hers, tenderly, and she prayed aloud in such words as she could
find.

Below, in the study, the detective had just finished telling his tale to
the squire, and the wheels of Doctor Longstreet's dog-cart ground upon
the gravel outside. The two men looked at each other for a moment, and
Mr. Juxon spoke first.

"That is the doctor," said he. "I will ask you to have patience for five
minutes, Mr. Booley. He will give you his opinion. I am still very much
shocked at what you have told me--I had no idea what had happened."

"No--I suppose not," answered Mr. Booley calmly. "If you will ask the
medical man to step in here for one moment, I will explain matters to
him. I don't think he will differ much from me."

"Very well," returned the squire, leaving the room. He went to meet
Doctor Longstreet, intending to warn him of the presence of Mr. Booley,
and meaning to entreat his support for the purpose of keeping Goddard in
the house until he should be recovered. He passed through the library and
exchanged a few words with Mr. Ambrose, explaining that the doctor had
come. Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose were sitting on opposite sides of the
fireplace in huge chairs, with a mournful air of resigned expectation
upon their worthy faces. The detective remained alone in the study.

Meanwhile John Short had refreshed himself from his fatigues, and came
down stairs in search of some breakfast. He had recovered from his
excitement and was probably the only one who thought of eating, as he was
also the one least closely concerned in what was occurring. Instead of
going to the library he went to the dining-room, and, seeing no one
about, entered the study from the door which on that side connected the
two rooms. To his surprise he saw Mr. Booley standing before the
fireplace, his hands in his pockets and his feet wide apart. He had not
the least idea who he was.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, staring hard at him.

"Yes," said Mr. Booley, who took him for the physician whom he expected.
"I am George Booley of the detective service. I was expecting you, sir.
There is very little to be said. My time, as I told Mr. Juxon, is very
valuable. I must have Goddard out of the house by to-morrow afternoon at
the latest. Now, doctor, it is of no use your talking to me about fever
and all that--"

John had stood with his mouth open, staring in blank astonishment at the
detective, unable to find words in which to question the man. At last he
got his breath.

"What in the world are you talking about?" he asked slowly. "Are you a
raving lunatic--or what are you?"

"Come, come, doctor," said Mr. Booley in persuasive accents, "none of
that with me, you know. If the man must be moved--why he must, that is
all, and you must make it possible, somehow."

"You are crazy!" exclaimed John. "I am not the doctor, to begin with--"

"Not the doctor!" cried Mr. Booley. "Then who are you? I beg your pardon,
I am sure--"

"I am John Short," said John, quickly, heedless of the fact that his name
conveyed no idea whatever to the mind of the detective. He cared little,
for he began to comprehend the situation, and he fled precipitately into
the library, leaving Mr. Booley alone to wait for the coming of the real
physician. But in the library a fresh surprise awaited him; there he
found Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose seated in solemn silence opposite to each
other. He had not suspected their presence in the house, but he was
relieved to see them--anything was a relief at that moment.

"Mr. Ambrose," he said hurriedly, "there is a detective in the next room
who means to carry off that poor man at once--as he is--sick--dying
perhaps--it must be prevented!"

"A detective!" cried the vicar and his wife in the same breath.

"My dear John," said the vicar immediately afterwards, "where is he? I
will reason with him."

"Augustin," said Mrs. Ambrose with extreme severity, "it is barbarous. I
will go upstairs. If he enters the room it shall be across my body."

"Do, my dear," replied the vicar in great excitement, and not precisely
appreciating the proposition to which he gave so willing an assent.

"Of course I will," said his wife, who had already reached the door. From
which it appears that Mrs. Ambrose was a brave woman. She passed rapidly
up the staircase to Goddard's room, but she paused as she laid her hand
upon the latch. From within she could hear Mary Goddard's voice, praying
aloud, as she had never heard any one pray before. She paused and
listened, hesitating to interrupt the unhappy lady in such a moment.
Moreover, though her goodwill was boundless, she had not any precise
idea how to manage the defence. But as she stood there, the thought that
the detective might at any moment follow her was predominant. The voice
within the room paused for an instant and Mrs. Ambrose entered, raising
one finger to her lips as though expecting that Mary Goddard would speak
to her. But Mary was not looking, and at first did not notice the
intrusion. She knelt by the bedside, her face buried in the coverlet, her
hands clasped and clasping the sick man's wounded hand.

Goddard's face was pale but not deathlike, and his breathing seemed
regular and gentle; but his eyes were almost closed and he seemed not
aware that any one had entered. Mrs. Ambrose was struck by his appearance
which was greatly changed since she had left him half an hour earlier,
his face purple and his harsh moaning continuing unceasingly. She said
to herself that he was probably better. There was all the more reason for
warning Mary Goddard of the new danger that awaited him. She shut the
door and locked it and withdrew the key. At the sound Mary looked
up--then rose to her feet with a sad look of reproach, as though not
wishing to be disturbed. But Mrs. Ambrose came quickly to her side, and
glancing once at Goddard, to see whether he was unconscious, she led her
away from the bed.

"My dear," she said very kindly, but in a voice trembling with
excitement, "I had to come. There are detectives in the house, clamouring
to take him away--but I will protect you--they shall not do it."

Mary Goddard started and her eyes stared wildly at her friend. But
presently the look of resigned sadness returned, and a faint and mournful
smile flickered on her lips.

"I think it is all over," she said. "He is still alive--but he will not
live till they come."

Then she bit her lip tightly, and all the features of her face trembled a
little. The tears would rise spasmodically, though they were only tears
of pity, not of love. Mrs. Ambrose, the severe, the stern, the eternally
vigilant Mrs. Ambrose, sat down by the window; she put her arm about Mary
Goddard's waist and took her upon her knee as though she had been a
little child and laid her head upon her breast, comforting her as best
she could. And their tears flowed down and mingled together, for many
minutes.

But once more the sick man's voice was heard; both women started to their
feet and went to his side.

"Mary Goddard! Mary Goddard! Let me in!" he moaned faintly.

"It is I--here I am, Walter, dear Walter--I am with you," answered Mary,
raising him and putting her arm about his neck, while Mrs. Ambrose
arranged the pillows behind him. He opened his eyes as though with a
great effort.

Some one knocked softly at the door. Mrs. Ambrose left the bedside
quickly and put the key in the lock.

"Who is there?" she asked, before she opened.

"I--John. Please let me in."

Mrs. Ambrose opened and John entered, very pale; she locked the door
again after him. He stood still looking with astonishment at Mrs. Goddard
who still propped the sick man in her arms and hardly noticed him.

"Why--?" he ejaculated and then checked himself, or rather was checked by
Mrs. Ambrose's look. Then he spoke to her in a whisper.

"There is an awful row going on between the doctor and the detective," he
said hurriedly under his breath. "They are coming upstairs and the vicar
and Mr. Juxon are trying to part them--I don't know what they are not
saying to each other--"

"Hush," replied Mrs. Ambrose, "do not disturb him--he was conscious again
just now. This may be the crisis--he may recover. The door is locked--try
and prevent anybody--that is, the detective, from coming in. They will
not dare to break open the door in Mr. Juxon's house."

"But why is Mrs. Goddard here?" asked John unable to control his
curiosity any longer. He did not mean that she should hear, but as she
laid Goddard's head gently upon the pillows, trying to soothe him to rest
again, if rest it were, she looked up and met John's eyes.

"Because he is my husband," said she very quietly.

John laid his hand on Mrs. Ambrose's arm in utmost bewilderment and
looked at her as though to ask if it were true. She nodded gravely.
Before John had time to recover himself from the shock of the news,
footsteps were heard outside, and the loud altercation of angry voices.
John Short leaned his shoulder against the door and put his foot against
it below, expecting an attack.




CHAPTER XXIV.


When Mr. Ambrose undertook to reason with the detective he went directly
towards the study where John said the man was waiting. But Mr. Booley was
beginning to suspect that the doctor was not coming to speak with him as
the squire had promised, and after hesitating for a few moments followed
John into the library, determining to manage matters himself. As he
opened the door he met Mr. Ambrose coming towards him, and at the same
moment Mr. Juxon and Doctor Longstreet entered from the opposite end of
the long room. The cheerful and active physician was talking in a rather
excited tone.

"My dear sir," said he, "I cannot pretend to say that the man will or
will not recover. I must see him again. Things look quite differently by
daylight, and six or seven hours may make all the change in the world. To
say that he can be moved to-day or even to-morrow, is absurd. I will
stake my reputation as a practitioner--Hulloa!"

The exclamation was elicited by Mr. Booley, who had pushed past Mr.
Ambrose and stood confronting the doctor with a look which was intended
to express a combination of sarcasm, superior cunning and authority.

"This is Mr. Booley," explained the squire. "Doctor Longstreet will tell
you what he has been telling me," he added turning to the detective.

"I must see this man instantly," said the latter somewhat roughly. "I
believe I am being trifled with, and I will not submit to it. No, sir, I
will not be trifled with, I assure you! I must see this man at once. It
is absolutely necessary to identify him."

"And I say," said Doctor Longstreet with equal firmness, "that I must see
him first, in order to judge whether you can see him or not--"

"It is for me to judge of that," returned Mr. Booley, with more haste
than logic.

"After you have seen him, you cannot judge whether you ought to see him
or not," retorted Doctor Longstreet growing red in the face. The
detective attempted to push past him. At this moment John Short hastily
left the room and fled upstairs to warn Mrs. Ambrose of what was
happening.

"Really," said Mr. Ambrose, making a vain attempt to stop the course of
events, "this is very unwarrantable."

"Unwarrantable!" cried Mr. Booley. "Unwarrantable, indeed! I have the
warrant in my pocket. Mr. Juxon, sir, I fear I must insist."

"Permit me," said Mr. Juxon, planting his square and sturdy form between
the door and the detective. "You may certainly insist, but you must begin
by listening to reason."

Charles Juxon had been accustomed to command others for the greater part
of his life, and though he was generally the most unobtrusive and gentle
of men, when he raised his voice in a tone of authority his words carried
weight. His blue eyes stared hard at Mr. Booley, and there was something
imposing in his square head--even in the unruffled smoothness of his
brown hair. Mr. Booley paused and discontentedly thrust his hands into
his pockets.

"Well?" he said.

"Simply this," answered the squire. "You may accompany us to the door of
the room; you may wait with me, while Doctor Longstreet goes in to look
at the patient. If the man is unconscious you may go in and see him. If
he chances to be in a lucid interval, you must wait until he is
unconscious again. It will not be long. That is perfectly reasonable."

"Perfectly," echoed Mr. Ambrose, biting his long upper lip and glaring as
fiercely at Mr. Booley as though he had said it all himself.

"Absolutely reasonable," added Doctor Longstreet.

"Well, we will try it," said the detective moodily. "But I warn you I
will not be trifled with."

"Nobody is trifling with you," answered the squire coldly. "This way if
you please." And he forthwith led the way upstairs, followed by Mr.
Booley, the physician and the vicar.

Before they reached the door, however, the discussion broke out again.
Mr. Booley had been held in check for a few moments by Mr. Juxon's
determined manner, but as he followed the squire he began to regret that
he had yielded so far and he made a fresh assertion of his rights.

"I cannot see why you want to keep me outside," he said. "What difference
can it make, I should like to know?"

"You will have to take my word for it that it does make a difference,"
said the doctor, testily. "If you frighten the man, he will die. Now
then, here we are."

"I don't like your tone, sir," said Booley angrily, again trying to push
past the physician. "I think I must insist, after all. I will go in with
you--I tell you I will, sir--don't stop me."

Doctor Longstreet, who was fifteen or twenty years older than the
detective but still strong and active, gripped his arm quickly, and held
him back.

"If you go into that room without my permission, and if the man dies of
fright, I will have an action brought against you for manslaughter," he
said in a loud voice.

"And I will support it," said the squire. "I am justice of the peace
here, and what is more, I am in my own house. Do not think your position
will protect you."

Again Mr. Juxon's authoritative tone checked the detective, who drew
back, making some angry retort which no one heard. The squire tried the
door and finding it locked, knocked softly, not realising that every word
of the altercation had been heard within.

"Who is there?" asked John, who though he had heard all that had been
said was uncertain of the issue.

"Let in Doctor Longstreet," said the squire's voice.

But meanwhile Mrs. Ambrose and Mary Goddard were standing on each side of
the sick man. He must have heard the noises outside, and they conveyed
some impression to his brain.

"Mary, Mary!" he groaned indistinctly. "Save me--they are coming--I
cannot get away--softly, he is coming--now--I shall just catch him as he
goes by--Ugh! that dog--oh! oh!--"

With a wild shriek, the wretched man sprang up, upon his knees, his eyes
starting out, his face transfigured with horror. For one instant he
remained thus, half-supported by the two terror-struck women; then with a
groan his head drooped forward upon his breast and he fell back heavily
upon the pillows, breathing still but quite unconscious.

Doctor Longstreet entered at that moment and ran to his side. But when he
saw him he paused. Even Mrs. Ambrose was white with horror, and Mary
Goddard stood motionless, staring down at her husband, her hands gripping
the disordered coverlet convulsively.

Mr. Juxon had entered, too, while Mr. Ambrose remained outside with the
detective, who had been frightened into submission by the physician's
last threat. The squire saw what was happening and paced the room in the
greatest agitation, wringing his hands together and biting his lips. John
had closed the door and came to the foot of the bed and looked at
Goddard's face. After a pause, Doctor Longstreet spoke.

"We might possibly restore him to consciousness for a moment--"

"Don't!" cried Mary Goddard, starting as though some one had struck her.
"That is--" she added quickly, in broken tones, "unless he can live!"

"No," answered the physician, gravely, but looking hard at the unhappy
woman. "He is dying."

Goddard's staring eyes were glazed and white. Twice and three times he
gasped for breath, and then lay quite still. It was all over. Mary gazed
at his dead face for one instant, then a faint smile parted her lips: she
raised one hand to her forehead as though dazed.

"He is safe now," she murmured very faintly. Her limbs relaxed suddenly,
and she fell straight backwards. Charles Juxon, who was watching her,
sprang forward and caught her in his arms. Then he bore her from the
room, swiftly, while John Short who was as white and speechless as the
rest opened the door.

"You may go in now," said Juxon as he passed Booley and Mr. Ambrose in
the passage, with his burden in his arms. A few steps farther on he met
Holmes the butler, who carried a telegram on a salver.

"For Mr. Short, sir," said the impassive servant, not appearing to notice
anything strange in the fact that his master was carrying the inanimate
body of Mary Goddard.

"He is in there--go in," said Juxon hurriedly as he went on his way.

The detective and the vicar had already entered the room where the dead
convict was lying. All stood around the bed, gazing at his pale face as
he lay.

"A telegram for Mr. Short," said Holmes from the door. John started and
took the despatch from the butler's hands. He hastily tore it open,
glanced at the contents and thrust it into his pocket. Every one looked
round.

"What is it, John?" whispered the vicar, who was nearest to him.

"Oh--nothing. I am first in the Tripos, that is all," answered John very
simply, as though it were not a matter of the least consequence.

Through all those months of untiring labour, through privation and
anxiety, through days of weariness and nights of study, he had looked
forward to the triumph, often doubting but never despairing. But he had
little guessed that the news of victory would reach him at such a moment.
It was nothing, he said; and indeed as he stood with the group of pale
and awe-struck spectators by the dead man's bed, he felt that the
greatest thing which had ever happened to him was as nothing compared
with the tragedy of which he had witnessed the last act.

It was all over. There was nothing more to be said; the convict had
escaped the law in the end, at the very moment when the hand of the law
was upon him. Thomas Reid, the conservative sexton, buried him "four by
six by two," grumbling at the parish depth as of yore, and a simple stone
cross marked his nameless grave. There it stands to this day in the
churchyard of Billingsfield, Essex, in the shadow of the ancient abbey.

All these things happened a long time ago, according to Billingsfield
reckoning, but the story of the tramp who attacked Squire Juxon and was
pulled down by the bloodhound is still told by the villagers, and Mr.
Gall, being once in good cheer, vaguely hinted that he knew who the tramp
was; but from the singular reticence he has always shown in the matter,
and from the prosperity which has attended his constabulary career, it
may well be believed that he has a life interest in keeping his counsel.
Indeed as it is nearly ten years since Mr. Reid buried the poor tramp, it
is possible that Mr. Gall's memory may be already failing in regard to
events which occurred at so remote a date.

It was but an incident, though it was perhaps the only incident of any
interest which ever occurred in Billingsfield; but until it reached its
termination it agitated the lives of the quiet people at the vicarage,
at the cottage and at the Hall as violently as human nature can be moved.
It was long, too, before those who had witnessed the scene of Goddard's
death could shake off the impression of those awful last moments. Yet
time does all things wonderful and in the course of not many months there
remained of Goddard's memory only a great sense of relief that he was no
longer alive. Mary Goddard, indeed, was very ill for a long time; and but
for Mrs. Ambrose's tender care of her, might have followed her husband
within a few weeks of his death. But the good lady never left her, until
she was herself again--absolutely herself, saving that as time passed and
her deep wounds healed her sorrows were forgotten, and she seemed to
bloom out into a second youth.

So it came to pass that within two years Charles Juxon once more asked
her to be his wife. She hesitated long--fully half an hour, the squire
thought; but in the end she put out her small hand and laid it in his,
and thanked God that a man so generous and true, and whom she so honestly
loved, was to be her husband as well as her friend and protector. Charles
James Juxon smoothed his hair with his other hand, and his blue eyes were
a little moistened.

"God bless you, Mary," he said; and that was all.

Then the Reverend Augustin Ambrose married them in the church of Saint
Mary's, between Christmas and New Year's Day; and the wedding-party
consisted of Mrs. Ambrose and Eleanor Goddard and John Short, Fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge. And again years passed by, and Nellie grew in
beauty as John grew in reputation; and Nellie had both brothers and
sisters, as she had longed to have, and to her, their father was as her
own; so that there was much harmony and peace and goodwill towards men
in Billingsfield Hall. John came often and stayed long, and was ever
welcome; for though Mary Goddard's youth returned with the daffodils and
the roses of the first spring after Walter's death, John's fleeting
passion returned not, and perhaps its place was better taken. Year by
year, as he came to refresh himself from hard work with a breath of the
country air, he saw the little girl grow to the young maiden of sixteen,
and he saw her beauty ripen again to the fulness of womanhood; and at
last, when she was one and twenty years of age he in his turn put out his
hand and asked her to take him--which she did, for better or worse, but
to all appearances for better. For John Short had prospered mightily in
the world, and had come to think his first great success as very small
and insignificant as compared with what he had done since. But his old
simplicity was in him yet, and was the cause of much of his prosperity,
as it generally is when it is found together with plenty of brains. It
was doubtless because he was so very simple that when he found that he
loved Eleanor Goddard he did not hesitate to ask the convict's daughter
to be his wife. His interview with Mr. Juxon was characteristic.

"You know what you are doing, John?" asked the squire. He always called
him John, now.

"Perfectly," replied the scholar, "I am doing precisely what my betters
have done before me with such admirable result."

"Betters?"

"You. You knew about it all and you married her mother. I know all about
it, and I wish to marry herself."

"You know that she never heard the story?"

"Yes. She never shall."

"No, John--she never must. Well, all good go with you."

So Charles Juxon gave his consent. And Mary Juxon consented too; but for
the first time in many years the tears rose again to her eyes, and she
laid her hand on John's arm, as they walked together in the park.

"Oh, John," she said, "do you think it is right--for you yourself?"

"Of course I think so," quoth John stoutly.

"You John--with your reputation, your success, with the whole world at
your feet--you ought not to marry the daughter of--of such a man."

"My dear Mrs. Juxon," said John Short, "is she not your daughter as well
as his? Pray, pray do not mention that objection. I assure you I have
thought it all over. There is really nothing more to be said, which I
have not said to myself. Dear Mrs. Juxon--do say Yes!"

"You are very generous, John, as well as great," she answered looking up
to his face. "Well--I have nothing to say. You must do as you think best.
I am sure you will be kind to Nellie, for I have known you for ten
years--you may tell her I am very glad--" she stopped, her eyes brimming
over with tears.

"Do you remember how angry I was once, when you told me to go and talk to
Nellie?" said John. "It was just here, too--"

Mary Juxon laughed happily and brushed the tears from her eyes. So it was
all settled.

Once more the Reverend Augustin Ambrose united two loving hearts before
the altar of Saint Mary's. He was well stricken in years, and his hair
and beard were very white. Mrs. Ambrose also grew more imposing with each
succeeding season, but her face was softer than of old, and her voice
more gentle. For the sorrow and suffering of a few days had drawn
together the hearts of all those good people with strong bands, and a
deep affection had sprung up between them all. The good old lady felt as
though Mary Juxon were her daughter--Mary Juxon, by whom she had stood in
the moment of direst trial and terror, whom she had tended in illness and
cheered in recovery. And the younger woman's heart had gone out towards
her, feeling how good a thing it is to find a friend in need, and
learning to value in her happiness the wealth of human kindness she had
found in her adversity.

They are like one family, now, having a common past, a common present,
and a common future, and there is no dissension among them. Honest and
loyal men and women may meet day after day, and join hands and exchange
greetings, without becoming firm friends, for the very reason that they
have no need of each other. But if the storm of a great sorrow breaks
among them and they call out to each other for help, and bear the brunt
of the weather hand in hand, the seed of a deeper affection is brought
into their midst; and when the tempest is past the sweet flower of
friendship springs up in the moistened furrows of their lives.

So those good people in the lonely parish of Billingsfield gathered round
Mary Goddard, as they called her then, and round poor little Nellie, and
did their best to protect the mother and the child from harm and
undeserved suffering; and afterwards, when it was all over, and there was
nothing more to be feared in the future, they looked into each other's
faces and felt that they were become as brothers and sisters, and that so
long as they should live--may it be long indeed!--there was a bond
between them which could never be broken. So it was that Mrs. Ambrose's
face softened and her voice was less severe than it had been.

Mary Juxon is the happiest of women; happy in her husband, in her
eldest daughter, in John Short and in the little children with bright
faces and ringing voices who nestle at her knee or climb over the sturdy
sailor-squire, and pull his great beard and make him laugh. They will
never know, any more than Nellie knew, all that their mother suffered;
and as she looks upon them and strokes their long fair hair and listens
to their laughter, she says to herself that it was perhaps almost worth
while to have been dragged down towards the depths of shame for the sake
of at last enjoying such pride and glory of happy motherhood.


THE END.




THE COMPLETE WORKS OF F. MARION CRAWFORD

      I. Mr. Isaacs
     II. Doctor Claudius
    III. To Leeward
     IV. A Roman Singer
      V. An American Politician
     VI. Marzio's Crucifix Zoroaster
    VII. A Tale of a Lonely Parish
   VIII. Paul Patoff
     IX. Love in Idleness: A Tale of Bar Harbor Marion Darche
      X. Saracinesca
     XI. Sant' Ilario
    XII. Don Orsino
   XIII. Corleone: A Sicilian Story
    XIV. With the Immortals
     XV. Greifenstein
    XVI. A Cigarette-Maker's Romance Khaled
   XVII. The Witch of Prague
  XVIII. The Three Fates
    XIX. Taquisara
     XX. The Children of the King
    XXI. Pietro Ghisleri
   XXII. Katharine Lauderdale
  XXIII. The Ralstons
   XXIV. Casa Braccio (Part I)
    XXV. Casa Braccio (Part II)
   XXVI. Adam Johnstone's Son A Rose of Yesterday
  XXVII. Via Crucia
 XXVIII. In the Palace of the King
   XXIX. Marietta: A Maid of Venice
    XXX. Cecilia: A Story of Modern Rome
   XXXI. The Heart of Rome
  XXXII. Whosoever Shall Offend



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TALE OF A LONELY PARISH***


******* This file should be named 13597.txt or 13597.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/3/5/9/13597



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

