The Project Gutenberg eBook, Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party, by Sara Ware
Bassett


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party


Author: Sara Ware Bassett



Release Date: December 22, 2007  [eBook #23973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23973-h.htm or 23973-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h/23973-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h.zip)





MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY

by

SARA WARE BASSETT







Copyright, 1907
by Sara Ware Bassett


[Illustration: "Mrs. Christy."]




Mrs. Reginald Norman walked into Sherry's and sank down at a small table
with the calm assurance of one conscious of being both beautiful and
perfectly gowned. There were no defects for the critical world to take
up and magnify. Her gown fitted flawlessly, was built by the highest
court of appeal on Parisian fashions, and suited her to perfection.

There is nothing like such a latent consciousness to impart poise to the
wearer. Dainty little Ethel Danielson followed, dropping into the
opposite chair.

"It was awfully nice of you to set this time for me to meet and lunch
with you," said Mrs. Danielson, leisurely drawing off her long gloves.
"Really, if you do not set definite hours you never see your friends at
all; this last whirl before Lent has been frightful, hasn't it? I'm worn
to a shred!"

"Yes, I shall be glad of a rest. You must go to things--if for no other
reason than to prove you are asked. I haven't seen any of my family for
over a week. I saw your husband a moment or two at the Opera last night
with the Goodhue Livingstons," returned Mrs. Norman, as she loosened her
veil.

"Oh, did you? Poor Harry--how was he? He has been having the grip or
something, his valet told me a couple of days ago," answered Mrs.
Danielson carelessly. "Well, my dear, to change the subject--are you
going to the Christy's bridge party? I'm simply dying of curiosity to
know! I thought of you the minute I opened the cards and wondered what
you would do--you have said so much about them."

"Don't mention bridge to me!" burst out Mrs. Norman emphatically. "Look
at my hair--did you ever behold such a vision in your life? The
parlor-maid did it, after much persuasion and an ample tip. I'm
perfectly discouraged--Therese has gone!"

"Gone? That maid you brought from Paris! Why you told me that nothing
but fire or the sword would separate you from that girl," ejaculated
Mrs. Danielson in surprise; "wasn't she satisfactory after all?"

"Perfectly satisfactory--perfectly, my love. I never had a maid who so
thoroughly understood my style and what I could and could not wear. I
was forced to let her go; every one of the eleven servants would have
left. The housekeeper told me it was policy to dismiss her," said Mrs.
Norman, thrusting her fork into a soft shell crab with great vehemence.

"Might one ask why they objected to her? Certainly, her nationality
wasn't a ground for such a demand, for half your servants are French,
aren't they?" questioned Mrs. Danielson with much interest.

"Oh, it wasn't that. She didn't play bridge! She just made the twelfth
one, and her not playing spoiled the third table--they would not have
her," explained Mrs. Norman dubiously.

"What are we coming to!" Mrs. Danielson exclaimed in despair; "I don't
wonder you're discouraged--you have to be so careful how you are gotten
up. You look so stunning in some things and so--well, you
understand--one must study one's style! Now tell me, what are you going
to do about the Christy's bridge? Everyone is wild over it! I've heard
nothing else for days--it's to be quite the event of the season. Shall
you go?"

"No. I have thought it all out. It seems to me some of us must take a
stand. If we accept invitations from the Christys' why the harm is
done--they will be in society before we know it! There are enough queer
people in our set already without adding them. I shall not go!" Mrs.
Norman drew herself up haughtily.

"That's just what I think," echoed Ethel Danielson; "we must, as you
say, take some definite position in the matter. If we stand out I am
sure others will. The Christys are simply dying to get in, and they have
loads of money to back them. What was it--blacking? Something
disagreeable, I remember."

"No, ink! Just as black and disgusting. They've squandered hundreds on
this bridge party; all the prizes were bought abroad, I hear, and
Kathryn Van Rensselaer told me there were to be fifty tables," continued
Mrs. Norman.

"It will be one of those horribly vulgar affairs with five times as much
of everything as there is any need of, I suppose," rejoined Ethel
scornfully.

"Do you know, I hear that ballroom is the most magnificent in New
York--done entirely by Garten-Veen."

"Well, we shall at least hear about it," sighed Mrs. Norman, with a
slight tinge of regret in her tone, "we'll telephone--you have one of
course!"

"Have a telephone? Well, I should say! One might as well be out of the
world as try to live without one. Everyone has one now," answered Mrs.
Danielson with a shrug.

"Then do call me up and tell me everything you hear," said Mrs. Norman
eagerly, "and I will call you. Thank Heaven, there are two of us with
conscience enough to block the Christys' social pathway!"

During the week preceding the much talked of function, one heard it on
every hand. Some said the prizes alone mounted up into the hundreds;
others announced that the decorations were to be the floral marvel of
the season; two reporters had been permitted to view Mrs. Christy's gown
and wrote exhaustive descriptions on this monument to the Parisian art.

Mrs. Norman and Ethel Danielson had frequent long gossips over the
telephone, relating each fresh item and exulting that they, at least,
had not lost their heads.

"Elise Thayer says she shall not go if we don't," called Mrs. Norman
with great satisfaction; "I have talked to her very seriously about it
and told her it was her duty to the rest of us to stay away, and she
says she will. No, I haven't sent regrets yet--I shall wait until the
last moment and be as nasty as I can," and Mrs. Norman gave a rippling
laugh.

At last the eventful day of the great bridge party came and among the
early arriving guests was Mrs. Norman. She glanced around her, noting
critically every detail of the luxurious house with its exquisite
appointments. Of course Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer would hear that
she had come and be furious, but she was well prepared with explanations
when next she should meet them. She had planned it all very carefully.

She was sweeping down the staircase to greet her hostess when she
suddenly stopped aghast! From opposite directions--entirely unconscious
of the other's approach--came Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer. There
was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the stairs and the three
women were brought abruptly face to face.

[Illustration: "_There was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the
stairs and the three women were brought abruptly face to face._"]

"Mrs. Danielson!"

"Elise Thayer!"

"My dear Mrs. Norman!"

Mrs. Norman was the first to speak. She was the only one who had had the
opportunity to summon her story to her tongue's end. She began glibly
and with nervous haste:

"My dears, I positively had to come! Reggie would have it so. He and Mr.
Christy are mixed up in some financial operations, and he said it was
policy: I'm perfectly mortified to be here!"

Nevertheless, she glanced about her in most interested scrutiny.

"It was a pure and simple case of money with me," announced Ethel
Danielson, with suave frankness. "My furs are not paid for, and the
bills for my Palm Beach gowns are pouring in. These trades people are so
loathsomely prompt with their bills and so maddeningly slow every other
way! I wish they would reverse it. So I came to see if I could not get
something out of it--that's between us. If I draw any decent partners I
ought to, for I generally have good luck."

"Now, Elise, you see we were each forced into coming," said Mrs. Norman
accusingly, "for goodness sake, why did you come?"

"Well, I considered it carefully. The Christys are bound to get in--if
not now, later! They have come to stay, and they will hammer away, with
their millions behind them, until they're in. What's the use of standing
out against it? They will only snub me by and by," returned Elise Thayer
with defiant truthfulness.

Mrs. Norman colored and looked uneasily at Ethel Danielson.

Mrs. Danielson eyed Mrs. Norman uncomfortably. Each seemed to hear a
fearless echo of her own secret reasoning.

"Besides," continued Elise, smiling honestly, "you know you each meant
to come all the time, only you won't admit it."

For an instant there was an awkward pause, then Mrs. Norman laughed in
chagrined amusement.

"Well, we won't discuss it now," she said; "run along up and leave your
wraps--both of you--and I'll wait for you. We will go in together."

A few seconds later they were approaching their hostess with
outstretched hands.

"My dear Mrs. Christy," cooed Mrs. Norman, "so good of you to include me
among your guests! I know how many friends you have and one can't invite
them all."

Mrs. Christy took the extended hand murmuring:

"So nice of you to come with your chaos of engagements! Mrs. Danielson,
too!"

"I was delighted to have you think of me, Mrs. Christy," Mrs. Danielson
returned effusively, "and you may be sure yours was the only invitation
I considered for this afternoon--I let all the others go."

Elise Thayer followed with:

"Mrs. Christy, I've so anticipated to-day! I adore bridge and to have
the pleasure of being one of your guests made it additionally
delightful."

The three moved on and glanced over the rapidly crowding rooms.

"Really," whispered Mrs. Norman, "everybody is here. I'm amazed! There
are the Baring De Wolfs and the Wilson Delafields and Mrs. Morgan
Knickerbocker. You know how exclusive they are! And there is Mrs. Cecil
Jerome! I saw her yesterday and she never said a word about coming."

"Let's go and speak to her a moment before they sit down to play,"
suggested Ethel Danielson.

As they drifted in and out of the gathering assembly, varied snatches of
conversation reached them:

"Beautiful house, isn't it?"

"Yes, but overloaded--like the owner's hats! She is awfully bothered
about getting hats, she told me, and recently a French milliner begged
to see 'WHAT SHE COULD DO WITH HER.' Judging from the hat Mrs. Christy
wore at the St. Regis the other day, I guess the woman found out! Any
milliner who can get a patron to step out of the solitude of her boudoir
in such a concoction must have convinced herself that she can do
ANYTHING with her!"

"I don't think much of her gown," murmured another, "hideously
unbecoming!"

"I hope we shall not run into any of those people who 'TAKE A HAND JUST
TO ACCOMMODATE!'" chimed another. "I think there ought to be a law
prohibiting women who haven't taken lessons in the game, going to
parties and helping lose other people's money for them."

"I hate to play with either of those Hartwells--they simply blow your
head off after every hand; they haven't any manners!" put in a blond in
a creation of blue chiffon and silver.

"That girl in white over there ought to be ruled out!" said another
guest. "She is that artist visiting the Hollingsworths. She made it
HEARTS when I played with her once, 'so to lose as little as possible,'
she said."

The calling of the game cut short further comments.

The company was seated, the hands dealt, and the great bridge party was
at last really under way.

"Are they starting? I hope people won't talk--I don't think it's fair.
Is it my make? I haven't a thing! I'll pass it. CLUBS! Heavens! I could
have done better than that myself! What on earth did you have in your
hand? I don't care what Elwell says--I don't think that's enough; of
course we couldn't make it on that hand! It seems a shame to THROW
points away. I am NOT angry--do you think I mind a few dollars? it's
only so unnecessary! How many hands do we have to play with each
partner? I never said I wanted to get rid of you. No, it's NOT the same
thing--I simply asked!"

So the game went on!

Flushed cheeks and glistening eyes were the only indications that much
was at stake; social veneer concealed the real anxiety of the players,
but a hush of nervous tension pervaded the room. It was a relief when
the last hand was concluded. Everyone crowded around the table where the
beautiful prizes were displayed and where the scores were read.

"You don't mean to tell me that that girl who came with the
Hollingsworths and can't play at all, has first choice!" whispered Mrs.
Norman.

"A case of fool's luck, I guess," replied Mrs. Danielson, "let's see
what she takes."

"LOOK! She's going to take that Tiffany glass vase when she might have
had that diamond bracelet--probably thinks they are rhinestones!" burst
out Elise Thayer.

"Prizes never go to the best players," said Mrs. Cecil Jerome in
disgust. "It is never really fair."

Mrs. Cecil Jerome was conceded to be one of the "best players."

After the prizes had been duly admired and the winners congratulated,
the throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about the little gilt
tables in the dining-room, chatting eagerly and comparing scores.

[Illustration: "_The throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about
the little gilt tables in the dining-room._"]

Mrs. Christy flitted among her guests with a smile and cordial word for
each, but to some favored few she devoted her especial attention. She
stopped beside one group in the corner of the dining-room more than
once.

"Your dining-room is so attractive, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Norman, as
her hostess sat down beside her for an instant.

"It is good of you to say so--you do things so exquisitely yourself that
I'm quite afraid of YOU," returned Mrs. Christy with disarming
frankness.

She glanced at Miss Thayer, Mrs. Danielson and Mrs. Cecil Jerome, who
were also at the table.

"You clever people," she went on, "must be my guides, for New York is
rather new to me--we have lived West so much. You are all such
authorities on social matters that I shall have to depend on you for
many things. You'll help me, won't you?"

What women could resist such delicate flattery?

The four smiled graciously.

"Tell me, Mrs. Danielson," Mrs. Christy continued, "are you going to
Newport this summer--or haven't you decided?"

"Oh, we've decided! We've rented our house and we intend to spend the
summer in Switzerland and the Tyrol," answered Mrs. Danielson. "What are
you going to do, Mrs. Christy?"

"Jack and I expect to take an automobile trip through England and
Scotland--if he can get away," returned Mrs. Christy, "and by the way,
what do you all do with your houses through the summer months? That is
bothering me now! Do you leave your servants in them all summer?"

"Oh, no," exclaimed Mrs. Danielson hastily, "we have had such frightful
experiences doing that! One summer we had fine servants and we wanted to
hold on to them so we kept them in the house all the time we were gone
and we hadn't been back any time at all before they left in a body! So
pleasant to feel you'd only been giving a house-party for them!" she
concluded sarcastically.

"Why my dear, our servants had a dance in our house!" put in Mrs.
Norman.

"I always put a care-taker in ours," said Miss Thayer.

"Don't have a care-taker!" burst out Mrs. Cecil Jerome. "While our
care-taker was living in the basement, burglars got through our scuttle
and robbed all the upper part of the house!"

"You make a great mistake," said Mrs. Danielson.

"Don't you know about the Holmes Company? They have wired our house
every year since that experience with our servants--why, it's ten years
now! It is the only way to leave your house during the summer." I heard
the other day, said a handsome woman joining the group, "that, that
company had opened offices of their own all through the city this year
and they will not hereafter connect houses with the District Telegraph
offices, so you see their service is going to be a hundred per cent.
better than it has ever been before."

"You better wire your house, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Danielson, "you'll
feel perfectly safe then. An awfully funny thing happened to me when
ours was first done! Mr. Danielson neglected to have my signature on the
coupon and I came up from Newport and couldn't get into my own house! I
was raging at the time, but when I thought it over afterward it
convinced me how secure the protection is."

"Was it really true that your care-taker took boarders in your house
while you were in Europe a few years ago," asked Mrs. Norman, turning to
a newcomer who had joined them.

"Yes, we had it wired the minute we found it out. It put a stop to that
sort of thing!" returned the woman emphatically.

"I never heard of such things!" gasped Mrs. Christy.

"I didn't know they would dare!"

"Dare? They dare anything!" snapped a tall girl in green.

"Well, I shall have it wired the instant we go," said Mrs. Christy
conclusively. "I did not know there was any company who did that sort of
thing. I am perfectly relieved to solve the problem!"

She went on into the drawing-room and the groups of guests at the tables
gradually broke up and followed making their adieux.

The instant Mrs. Reginald Norman reached home she called Mrs. Danielson
up on the telephone.

"What did you think of it, Ethel?" she asked eagerly.

"It was a lovely party! All in such good taste, didn't you think so?"
returned Ethel Danielson. "Mrs. Christy, too, made a much better
appearance than I expected. She has a good deal of SAVOIR FAIRE
already!"

"Yes, and she'll gain more as time goes on," replied Mrs. Norman. "How
do you suppose she ever got the Schermerhorn's and the De Witts there."

"I can't imagine and it doesn't make much difference now, how she did
it! I got my furs paid for which pleased me into the ground. Wouldn't we
have been idiots to stay away? We should never have forgiven ourselves
for from now on, Mrs. Christy is unquestionably IN SOCIETY. She has
'bridged it' in more senses than one!"



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


******* This file should be named 23973.txt or 23973.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party, by Sara Ware
Bassett


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party


Author: Sara Ware Bassett



Release Date: December 22, 2007  [eBook #23973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23973-h.htm or 23973-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h/23973-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h.zip)





MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY

by

SARA WARE BASSETT







Copyright, 1907
by Sara Ware Bassett


[Illustration: "Mrs. Christy."]




Mrs. Reginald Norman walked into Sherry's and sank down at a small table
with the calm assurance of one conscious of being both beautiful and
perfectly gowned. There were no defects for the critical world to take
up and magnify. Her gown fitted flawlessly, was built by the highest
court of appeal on Parisian fashions, and suited her to perfection.

There is nothing like such a latent consciousness to impart poise to the
wearer. Dainty little Ethel Danielson followed, dropping into the
opposite chair.

"It was awfully nice of you to set this time for me to meet and lunch
with you," said Mrs. Danielson, leisurely drawing off her long gloves.
"Really, if you do not set definite hours you never see your friends at
all; this last whirl before Lent has been frightful, hasn't it? I'm worn
to a shred!"

"Yes, I shall be glad of a rest. You must go to things--if for no other
reason than to prove you are asked. I haven't seen any of my family for
over a week. I saw your husband a moment or two at the Opera last night
with the Goodhue Livingstons," returned Mrs. Norman, as she loosened her
veil.

"Oh, did you? Poor Harry--how was he? He has been having the grip or
something, his valet told me a couple of days ago," answered Mrs.
Danielson carelessly. "Well, my dear, to change the subject--are you
going to the Christy's bridge party? I'm simply dying of curiosity to
know! I thought of you the minute I opened the cards and wondered what
you would do--you have said so much about them."

"Don't mention bridge to me!" burst out Mrs. Norman emphatically. "Look
at my hair--did you ever behold such a vision in your life? The
parlor-maid did it, after much persuasion and an ample tip. I'm
perfectly discouraged--Therese has gone!"

"Gone? That maid you brought from Paris! Why you told me that nothing
but fire or the sword would separate you from that girl," ejaculated
Mrs. Danielson in surprise; "wasn't she satisfactory after all?"

"Perfectly satisfactory--perfectly, my love. I never had a maid who so
thoroughly understood my style and what I could and could not wear. I
was forced to let her go; every one of the eleven servants would have
left. The housekeeper told me it was policy to dismiss her," said Mrs.
Norman, thrusting her fork into a soft shell crab with great vehemence.

"Might one ask why they objected to her? Certainly, her nationality
wasn't a ground for such a demand, for half your servants are French,
aren't they?" questioned Mrs. Danielson with much interest.

"Oh, it wasn't that. She didn't play bridge! She just made the twelfth
one, and her not playing spoiled the third table--they would not have
her," explained Mrs. Norman dubiously.

"What are we coming to!" Mrs. Danielson exclaimed in despair; "I don't
wonder you're discouraged--you have to be so careful how you are gotten
up. You look so stunning in some things and so--well, you
understand--one must study one's style! Now tell me, what are you going
to do about the Christy's bridge? Everyone is wild over it! I've heard
nothing else for days--it's to be quite the event of the season. Shall
you go?"

"No. I have thought it all out. It seems to me some of us must take a
stand. If we accept invitations from the Christys' why the harm is
done--they will be in society before we know it! There are enough queer
people in our set already without adding them. I shall not go!" Mrs.
Norman drew herself up haughtily.

"That's just what I think," echoed Ethel Danielson; "we must, as you
say, take some definite position in the matter. If we stand out I am
sure others will. The Christys are simply dying to get in, and they have
loads of money to back them. What was it--blacking? Something
disagreeable, I remember."

"No, ink! Just as black and disgusting. They've squandered hundreds on
this bridge party; all the prizes were bought abroad, I hear, and
Kathryn Van Rensselaer told me there were to be fifty tables," continued
Mrs. Norman.

"It will be one of those horribly vulgar affairs with five times as much
of everything as there is any need of, I suppose," rejoined Ethel
scornfully.

"Do you know, I hear that ballroom is the most magnificent in New
York--done entirely by Garten-Veen."

"Well, we shall at least hear about it," sighed Mrs. Norman, with a
slight tinge of regret in her tone, "we'll telephone--you have one of
course!"

"Have a telephone? Well, I should say! One might as well be out of the
world as try to live without one. Everyone has one now," answered Mrs.
Danielson with a shrug.

"Then do call me up and tell me everything you hear," said Mrs. Norman
eagerly, "and I will call you. Thank Heaven, there are two of us with
conscience enough to block the Christys' social pathway!"

During the week preceding the much talked of function, one heard it on
every hand. Some said the prizes alone mounted up into the hundreds;
others announced that the decorations were to be the floral marvel of
the season; two reporters had been permitted to view Mrs. Christy's gown
and wrote exhaustive descriptions on this monument to the Parisian art.

Mrs. Norman and Ethel Danielson had frequent long gossips over the
telephone, relating each fresh item and exulting that they, at least,
had not lost their heads.

"Elise Thayer says she shall not go if we don't," called Mrs. Norman
with great satisfaction; "I have talked to her very seriously about it
and told her it was her duty to the rest of us to stay away, and she
says she will. No, I haven't sent regrets yet--I shall wait until the
last moment and be as nasty as I can," and Mrs. Norman gave a rippling
laugh.

At last the eventful day of the great bridge party came and among the
early arriving guests was Mrs. Norman. She glanced around her, noting
critically every detail of the luxurious house with its exquisite
appointments. Of course Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer would hear that
she had come and be furious, but she was well prepared with explanations
when next she should meet them. She had planned it all very carefully.

She was sweeping down the staircase to greet her hostess when she
suddenly stopped aghast! From opposite directions--entirely unconscious
of the other's approach--came Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer. There
was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the stairs and the three
women were brought abruptly face to face.

[Illustration: "_There was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the
stairs and the three women were brought abruptly face to face._"]

"Mrs. Danielson!"

"Elise Thayer!"

"My dear Mrs. Norman!"

Mrs. Norman was the first to speak. She was the only one who had had the
opportunity to summon her story to her tongue's end. She began glibly
and with nervous haste:

"My dears, I positively had to come! Reggie would have it so. He and Mr.
Christy are mixed up in some financial operations, and he said it was
policy: I'm perfectly mortified to be here!"

Nevertheless, she glanced about her in most interested scrutiny.

"It was a pure and simple case of money with me," announced Ethel
Danielson, with suave frankness. "My furs are not paid for, and the
bills for my Palm Beach gowns are pouring in. These trades people are so
loathsomely prompt with their bills and so maddeningly slow every other
way! I wish they would reverse it. So I came to see if I could not get
something out of it--that's between us. If I draw any decent partners I
ought to, for I generally have good luck."

"Now, Elise, you see we were each forced into coming," said Mrs. Norman
accusingly, "for goodness sake, why did you come?"

"Well, I considered it carefully. The Christys are bound to get in--if
not now, later! They have come to stay, and they will hammer away, with
their millions behind them, until they're in. What's the use of standing
out against it? They will only snub me by and by," returned Elise Thayer
with defiant truthfulness.

Mrs. Norman colored and looked uneasily at Ethel Danielson.

Mrs. Danielson eyed Mrs. Norman uncomfortably. Each seemed to hear a
fearless echo of her own secret reasoning.

"Besides," continued Elise, smiling honestly, "you know you each meant
to come all the time, only you won't admit it."

For an instant there was an awkward pause, then Mrs. Norman laughed in
chagrined amusement.

"Well, we won't discuss it now," she said; "run along up and leave your
wraps--both of you--and I'll wait for you. We will go in together."

A few seconds later they were approaching their hostess with
outstretched hands.

"My dear Mrs. Christy," cooed Mrs. Norman, "so good of you to include me
among your guests! I know how many friends you have and one can't invite
them all."

Mrs. Christy took the extended hand murmuring:

"So nice of you to come with your chaos of engagements! Mrs. Danielson,
too!"

"I was delighted to have you think of me, Mrs. Christy," Mrs. Danielson
returned effusively, "and you may be sure yours was the only invitation
I considered for this afternoon--I let all the others go."

Elise Thayer followed with:

"Mrs. Christy, I've so anticipated to-day! I adore bridge and to have
the pleasure of being one of your guests made it additionally
delightful."

The three moved on and glanced over the rapidly crowding rooms.

"Really," whispered Mrs. Norman, "everybody is here. I'm amazed! There
are the Baring De Wolfs and the Wilson Delafields and Mrs. Morgan
Knickerbocker. You know how exclusive they are! And there is Mrs. Cecil
Jerome! I saw her yesterday and she never said a word about coming."

"Let's go and speak to her a moment before they sit down to play,"
suggested Ethel Danielson.

As they drifted in and out of the gathering assembly, varied snatches of
conversation reached them:

"Beautiful house, isn't it?"

"Yes, but overloaded--like the owner's hats! She is awfully bothered
about getting hats, she told me, and recently a French milliner begged
to see 'WHAT SHE COULD DO WITH HER.' Judging from the hat Mrs. Christy
wore at the St. Regis the other day, I guess the woman found out! Any
milliner who can get a patron to step out of the solitude of her boudoir
in such a concoction must have convinced herself that she can do
ANYTHING with her!"

"I don't think much of her gown," murmured another, "hideously
unbecoming!"

"I hope we shall not run into any of those people who 'TAKE A HAND JUST
TO ACCOMMODATE!'" chimed another. "I think there ought to be a law
prohibiting women who haven't taken lessons in the game, going to
parties and helping lose other people's money for them."

"I hate to play with either of those Hartwells--they simply blow your
head off after every hand; they haven't any manners!" put in a blond in
a creation of blue chiffon and silver.

"That girl in white over there ought to be ruled out!" said another
guest. "She is that artist visiting the Hollingsworths. She made it
HEARTS when I played with her once, 'so to lose as little as possible,'
she said."

The calling of the game cut short further comments.

The company was seated, the hands dealt, and the great bridge party was
at last really under way.

"Are they starting? I hope people won't talk--I don't think it's fair.
Is it my make? I haven't a thing! I'll pass it. CLUBS! Heavens! I could
have done better than that myself! What on earth did you have in your
hand? I don't care what Elwell says--I don't think that's enough; of
course we couldn't make it on that hand! It seems a shame to THROW
points away. I am NOT angry--do you think I mind a few dollars? it's
only so unnecessary! How many hands do we have to play with each
partner? I never said I wanted to get rid of you. No, it's NOT the same
thing--I simply asked!"

So the game went on!

Flushed cheeks and glistening eyes were the only indications that much
was at stake; social veneer concealed the real anxiety of the players,
but a hush of nervous tension pervaded the room. It was a relief when
the last hand was concluded. Everyone crowded around the table where the
beautiful prizes were displayed and where the scores were read.

"You don't mean to tell me that that girl who came with the
Hollingsworths and can't play at all, has first choice!" whispered Mrs.
Norman.

"A case of fool's luck, I guess," replied Mrs. Danielson, "let's see
what she takes."

"LOOK! She's going to take that Tiffany glass vase when she might have
had that diamond bracelet--probably thinks they are rhinestones!" burst
out Elise Thayer.

"Prizes never go to the best players," said Mrs. Cecil Jerome in
disgust. "It is never really fair."

Mrs. Cecil Jerome was conceded to be one of the "best players."

After the prizes had been duly admired and the winners congratulated,
the throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about the little gilt
tables in the dining-room, chatting eagerly and comparing scores.

[Illustration: "_The throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about
the little gilt tables in the dining-room._"]

Mrs. Christy flitted among her guests with a smile and cordial word for
each, but to some favored few she devoted her especial attention. She
stopped beside one group in the corner of the dining-room more than
once.

"Your dining-room is so attractive, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Norman, as
her hostess sat down beside her for an instant.

"It is good of you to say so--you do things so exquisitely yourself that
I'm quite afraid of YOU," returned Mrs. Christy with disarming
frankness.

She glanced at Miss Thayer, Mrs. Danielson and Mrs. Cecil Jerome, who
were also at the table.

"You clever people," she went on, "must be my guides, for New York is
rather new to me--we have lived West so much. You are all such
authorities on social matters that I shall have to depend on you for
many things. You'll help me, won't you?"

What women could resist such delicate flattery?

The four smiled graciously.

"Tell me, Mrs. Danielson," Mrs. Christy continued, "are you going to
Newport this summer--or haven't you decided?"

"Oh, we've decided! We've rented our house and we intend to spend the
summer in Switzerland and the Tyrol," answered Mrs. Danielson. "What are
you going to do, Mrs. Christy?"

"Jack and I expect to take an automobile trip through England and
Scotland--if he can get away," returned Mrs. Christy, "and by the way,
what do you all do with your houses through the summer months? That is
bothering me now! Do you leave your servants in them all summer?"

"Oh, no," exclaimed Mrs. Danielson hastily, "we have had such frightful
experiences doing that! One summer we had fine servants and we wanted to
hold on to them so we kept them in the house all the time we were gone
and we hadn't been back any time at all before they left in a body! So
pleasant to feel you'd only been giving a house-party for them!" she
concluded sarcastically.

"Why my dear, our servants had a dance in our house!" put in Mrs.
Norman.

"I always put a care-taker in ours," said Miss Thayer.

"Don't have a care-taker!" burst out Mrs. Cecil Jerome. "While our
care-taker was living in the basement, burglars got through our scuttle
and robbed all the upper part of the house!"

"You make a great mistake," said Mrs. Danielson.

"Don't you know about the Holmes Company? They have wired our house
every year since that experience with our servants--why, it's ten years
now! It is the only way to leave your house during the summer." I heard
the other day, said a handsome woman joining the group, "that, that
company had opened offices of their own all through the city this year
and they will not hereafter connect houses with the District Telegraph
offices, so you see their service is going to be a hundred per cent.
better than it has ever been before."

"You better wire your house, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Danielson, "you'll
feel perfectly safe then. An awfully funny thing happened to me when
ours was first done! Mr. Danielson neglected to have my signature on the
coupon and I came up from Newport and couldn't get into my own house! I
was raging at the time, but when I thought it over afterward it
convinced me how secure the protection is."

"Was it really true that your care-taker took boarders in your house
while you were in Europe a few years ago," asked Mrs. Norman, turning to
a newcomer who had joined them.

"Yes, we had it wired the minute we found it out. It put a stop to that
sort of thing!" returned the woman emphatically.

"I never heard of such things!" gasped Mrs. Christy.

"I didn't know they would dare!"

"Dare? They dare anything!" snapped a tall girl in green.

"Well, I shall have it wired the instant we go," said Mrs. Christy
conclusively. "I did not know there was any company who did that sort of
thing. I am perfectly relieved to solve the problem!"

She went on into the drawing-room and the groups of guests at the tables
gradually broke up and followed making their adieux.

The instant Mrs. Reginald Norman reached home she called Mrs. Danielson
up on the telephone.

"What did you think of it, Ethel?" she asked eagerly.

"It was a lovely party! All in such good taste, didn't you think so?"
returned Ethel Danielson. "Mrs. Christy, too, made a much better
appearance than I expected. She has a good deal of SAVOIR FAIRE
already!"

"Yes, and she'll gain more as time goes on," replied Mrs. Norman. "How
do you suppose she ever got the Schermerhorn's and the De Witts there."

"I can't imagine and it doesn't make much difference now, how she did
it! I got my furs paid for which pleased me into the ground. Wouldn't we
have been idiots to stay away? We should never have forgiven ourselves
for from now on, Mrs. Christy is unquestionably IN SOCIETY. She has
'bridged it' in more senses than one!"



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


******* This file should be named 23973.txt or 23973.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party, by Sara Ware
Bassett


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party


Author: Sara Ware Bassett



Release Date: December 22, 2007  [eBook #23973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23973-h.htm or 23973-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h/23973-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h.zip)





MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY

by

SARA WARE BASSETT







Copyright, 1907
by Sara Ware Bassett


[Illustration: "Mrs. Christy."]




Mrs. Reginald Norman walked into Sherry's and sank down at a small table
with the calm assurance of one conscious of being both beautiful and
perfectly gowned. There were no defects for the critical world to take
up and magnify. Her gown fitted flawlessly, was built by the highest
court of appeal on Parisian fashions, and suited her to perfection.

There is nothing like such a latent consciousness to impart poise to the
wearer. Dainty little Ethel Danielson followed, dropping into the
opposite chair.

"It was awfully nice of you to set this time for me to meet and lunch
with you," said Mrs. Danielson, leisurely drawing off her long gloves.
"Really, if you do not set definite hours you never see your friends at
all; this last whirl before Lent has been frightful, hasn't it? I'm worn
to a shred!"

"Yes, I shall be glad of a rest. You must go to things--if for no other
reason than to prove you are asked. I haven't seen any of my family for
over a week. I saw your husband a moment or two at the Opera last night
with the Goodhue Livingstons," returned Mrs. Norman, as she loosened her
veil.

"Oh, did you? Poor Harry--how was he? He has been having the grip or
something, his valet told me a couple of days ago," answered Mrs.
Danielson carelessly. "Well, my dear, to change the subject--are you
going to the Christy's bridge party? I'm simply dying of curiosity to
know! I thought of you the minute I opened the cards and wondered what
you would do--you have said so much about them."

"Don't mention bridge to me!" burst out Mrs. Norman emphatically. "Look
at my hair--did you ever behold such a vision in your life? The
parlor-maid did it, after much persuasion and an ample tip. I'm
perfectly discouraged--Therese has gone!"

"Gone? That maid you brought from Paris! Why you told me that nothing
but fire or the sword would separate you from that girl," ejaculated
Mrs. Danielson in surprise; "wasn't she satisfactory after all?"

"Perfectly satisfactory--perfectly, my love. I never had a maid who so
thoroughly understood my style and what I could and could not wear. I
was forced to let her go; every one of the eleven servants would have
left. The housekeeper told me it was policy to dismiss her," said Mrs.
Norman, thrusting her fork into a soft shell crab with great vehemence.

"Might one ask why they objected to her? Certainly, her nationality
wasn't a ground for such a demand, for half your servants are French,
aren't they?" questioned Mrs. Danielson with much interest.

"Oh, it wasn't that. She didn't play bridge! She just made the twelfth
one, and her not playing spoiled the third table--they would not have
her," explained Mrs. Norman dubiously.

"What are we coming to!" Mrs. Danielson exclaimed in despair; "I don't
wonder you're discouraged--you have to be so careful how you are gotten
up. You look so stunning in some things and so--well, you
understand--one must study one's style! Now tell me, what are you going
to do about the Christy's bridge? Everyone is wild over it! I've heard
nothing else for days--it's to be quite the event of the season. Shall
you go?"

"No. I have thought it all out. It seems to me some of us must take a
stand. If we accept invitations from the Christys' why the harm is
done--they will be in society before we know it! There are enough queer
people in our set already without adding them. I shall not go!" Mrs.
Norman drew herself up haughtily.

"That's just what I think," echoed Ethel Danielson; "we must, as you
say, take some definite position in the matter. If we stand out I am
sure others will. The Christys are simply dying to get in, and they have
loads of money to back them. What was it--blacking? Something
disagreeable, I remember."

"No, ink! Just as black and disgusting. They've squandered hundreds on
this bridge party; all the prizes were bought abroad, I hear, and
Kathryn Van Rensselaer told me there were to be fifty tables," continued
Mrs. Norman.

"It will be one of those horribly vulgar affairs with five times as much
of everything as there is any need of, I suppose," rejoined Ethel
scornfully.

"Do you know, I hear that ballroom is the most magnificent in New
York--done entirely by Garten-Veen."

"Well, we shall at least hear about it," sighed Mrs. Norman, with a
slight tinge of regret in her tone, "we'll telephone--you have one of
course!"

"Have a telephone? Well, I should say! One might as well be out of the
world as try to live without one. Everyone has one now," answered Mrs.
Danielson with a shrug.

"Then do call me up and tell me everything you hear," said Mrs. Norman
eagerly, "and I will call you. Thank Heaven, there are two of us with
conscience enough to block the Christys' social pathway!"

During the week preceding the much talked of function, one heard it on
every hand. Some said the prizes alone mounted up into the hundreds;
others announced that the decorations were to be the floral marvel of
the season; two reporters had been permitted to view Mrs. Christy's gown
and wrote exhaustive descriptions on this monument to the Parisian art.

Mrs. Norman and Ethel Danielson had frequent long gossips over the
telephone, relating each fresh item and exulting that they, at least,
had not lost their heads.

"Elise Thayer says she shall not go if we don't," called Mrs. Norman
with great satisfaction; "I have talked to her very seriously about it
and told her it was her duty to the rest of us to stay away, and she
says she will. No, I haven't sent regrets yet--I shall wait until the
last moment and be as nasty as I can," and Mrs. Norman gave a rippling
laugh.

At last the eventful day of the great bridge party came and among the
early arriving guests was Mrs. Norman. She glanced around her, noting
critically every detail of the luxurious house with its exquisite
appointments. Of course Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer would hear that
she had come and be furious, but she was well prepared with explanations
when next she should meet them. She had planned it all very carefully.

She was sweeping down the staircase to greet her hostess when she
suddenly stopped aghast! From opposite directions--entirely unconscious
of the other's approach--came Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer. There
was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the stairs and the three
women were brought abruptly face to face.

[Illustration: "_There was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the
stairs and the three women were brought abruptly face to face._"]

"Mrs. Danielson!"

"Elise Thayer!"

"My dear Mrs. Norman!"

Mrs. Norman was the first to speak. She was the only one who had had the
opportunity to summon her story to her tongue's end. She began glibly
and with nervous haste:

"My dears, I positively had to come! Reggie would have it so. He and Mr.
Christy are mixed up in some financial operations, and he said it was
policy: I'm perfectly mortified to be here!"

Nevertheless, she glanced about her in most interested scrutiny.

"It was a pure and simple case of money with me," announced Ethel
Danielson, with suave frankness. "My furs are not paid for, and the
bills for my Palm Beach gowns are pouring in. These trades people are so
loathsomely prompt with their bills and so maddeningly slow every other
way! I wish they would reverse it. So I came to see if I could not get
something out of it--that's between us. If I draw any decent partners I
ought to, for I generally have good luck."

"Now, Elise, you see we were each forced into coming," said Mrs. Norman
accusingly, "for goodness sake, why did you come?"

"Well, I considered it carefully. The Christys are bound to get in--if
not now, later! They have come to stay, and they will hammer away, with
their millions behind them, until they're in. What's the use of standing
out against it? They will only snub me by and by," returned Elise Thayer
with defiant truthfulness.

Mrs. Norman colored and looked uneasily at Ethel Danielson.

Mrs. Danielson eyed Mrs. Norman uncomfortably. Each seemed to hear a
fearless echo of her own secret reasoning.

"Besides," continued Elise, smiling honestly, "you know you each meant
to come all the time, only you won't admit it."

For an instant there was an awkward pause, then Mrs. Norman laughed in
chagrined amusement.

"Well, we won't discuss it now," she said; "run along up and leave your
wraps--both of you--and I'll wait for you. We will go in together."

A few seconds later they were approaching their hostess with
outstretched hands.

"My dear Mrs. Christy," cooed Mrs. Norman, "so good of you to include me
among your guests! I know how many friends you have and one can't invite
them all."

Mrs. Christy took the extended hand murmuring:

"So nice of you to come with your chaos of engagements! Mrs. Danielson,
too!"

"I was delighted to have you think of me, Mrs. Christy," Mrs. Danielson
returned effusively, "and you may be sure yours was the only invitation
I considered for this afternoon--I let all the others go."

Elise Thayer followed with:

"Mrs. Christy, I've so anticipated to-day! I adore bridge and to have
the pleasure of being one of your guests made it additionally
delightful."

The three moved on and glanced over the rapidly crowding rooms.

"Really," whispered Mrs. Norman, "everybody is here. I'm amazed! There
are the Baring De Wolfs and the Wilson Delafields and Mrs. Morgan
Knickerbocker. You know how exclusive they are! And there is Mrs. Cecil
Jerome! I saw her yesterday and she never said a word about coming."

"Let's go and speak to her a moment before they sit down to play,"
suggested Ethel Danielson.

As they drifted in and out of the gathering assembly, varied snatches of
conversation reached them:

"Beautiful house, isn't it?"

"Yes, but overloaded--like the owner's hats! She is awfully bothered
about getting hats, she told me, and recently a French milliner begged
to see 'WHAT SHE COULD DO WITH HER.' Judging from the hat Mrs. Christy
wore at the St. Regis the other day, I guess the woman found out! Any
milliner who can get a patron to step out of the solitude of her boudoir
in such a concoction must have convinced herself that she can do
ANYTHING with her!"

"I don't think much of her gown," murmured another, "hideously
unbecoming!"

"I hope we shall not run into any of those people who 'TAKE A HAND JUST
TO ACCOMMODATE!'" chimed another. "I think there ought to be a law
prohibiting women who haven't taken lessons in the game, going to
parties and helping lose other people's money for them."

"I hate to play with either of those Hartwells--they simply blow your
head off after every hand; they haven't any manners!" put in a blond in
a creation of blue chiffon and silver.

"That girl in white over there ought to be ruled out!" said another
guest. "She is that artist visiting the Hollingsworths. She made it
HEARTS when I played with her once, 'so to lose as little as possible,'
she said."

The calling of the game cut short further comments.

The company was seated, the hands dealt, and the great bridge party was
at last really under way.

"Are they starting? I hope people won't talk--I don't think it's fair.
Is it my make? I haven't a thing! I'll pass it. CLUBS! Heavens! I could
have done better than that myself! What on earth did you have in your
hand? I don't care what Elwell says--I don't think that's enough; of
course we couldn't make it on that hand! It seems a shame to THROW
points away. I am NOT angry--do you think I mind a few dollars? it's
only so unnecessary! How many hands do we have to play with each
partner? I never said I wanted to get rid of you. No, it's NOT the same
thing--I simply asked!"

So the game went on!

Flushed cheeks and glistening eyes were the only indications that much
was at stake; social veneer concealed the real anxiety of the players,
but a hush of nervous tension pervaded the room. It was a relief when
the last hand was concluded. Everyone crowded around the table where the
beautiful prizes were displayed and where the scores were read.

"You don't mean to tell me that that girl who came with the
Hollingsworths and can't play at all, has first choice!" whispered Mrs.
Norman.

"A case of fool's luck, I guess," replied Mrs. Danielson, "let's see
what she takes."

"LOOK! She's going to take that Tiffany glass vase when she might have
had that diamond bracelet--probably thinks they are rhinestones!" burst
out Elise Thayer.

"Prizes never go to the best players," said Mrs. Cecil Jerome in
disgust. "It is never really fair."

Mrs. Cecil Jerome was conceded to be one of the "best players."

After the prizes had been duly admired and the winners congratulated,
the throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about the little gilt
tables in the dining-room, chatting eagerly and comparing scores.

[Illustration: "_The throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about
the little gilt tables in the dining-room._"]

Mrs. Christy flitted among her guests with a smile and cordial word for
each, but to some favored few she devoted her especial attention. She
stopped beside one group in the corner of the dining-room more than
once.

"Your dining-room is so attractive, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Norman, as
her hostess sat down beside her for an instant.

"It is good of you to say so--you do things so exquisitely yourself that
I'm quite afraid of YOU," returned Mrs. Christy with disarming
frankness.

She glanced at Miss Thayer, Mrs. Danielson and Mrs. Cecil Jerome, who
were also at the table.

"You clever people," she went on, "must be my guides, for New York is
rather new to me--we have lived West so much. You are all such
authorities on social matters that I shall have to depend on you for
many things. You'll help me, won't you?"

What women could resist such delicate flattery?

The four smiled graciously.

"Tell me, Mrs. Danielson," Mrs. Christy continued, "are you going to
Newport this summer--or haven't you decided?"

"Oh, we've decided! We've rented our house and we intend to spend the
summer in Switzerland and the Tyrol," answered Mrs. Danielson. "What are
you going to do, Mrs. Christy?"

"Jack and I expect to take an automobile trip through England and
Scotland--if he can get away," returned Mrs. Christy, "and by the way,
what do you all do with your houses through the summer months? That is
bothering me now! Do you leave your servants in them all summer?"

"Oh, no," exclaimed Mrs. Danielson hastily, "we have had such frightful
experiences doing that! One summer we had fine servants and we wanted to
hold on to them so we kept them in the house all the time we were gone
and we hadn't been back any time at all before they left in a body! So
pleasant to feel you'd only been giving a house-party for them!" she
concluded sarcastically.

"Why my dear, our servants had a dance in our house!" put in Mrs.
Norman.

"I always put a care-taker in ours," said Miss Thayer.

"Don't have a care-taker!" burst out Mrs. Cecil Jerome. "While our
care-taker was living in the basement, burglars got through our scuttle
and robbed all the upper part of the house!"

"You make a great mistake," said Mrs. Danielson.

"Don't you know about the Holmes Company? They have wired our house
every year since that experience with our servants--why, it's ten years
now! It is the only way to leave your house during the summer." I heard
the other day, said a handsome woman joining the group, "that, that
company had opened offices of their own all through the city this year
and they will not hereafter connect houses with the District Telegraph
offices, so you see their service is going to be a hundred per cent.
better than it has ever been before."

"You better wire your house, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Danielson, "you'll
feel perfectly safe then. An awfully funny thing happened to me when
ours was first done! Mr. Danielson neglected to have my signature on the
coupon and I came up from Newport and couldn't get into my own house! I
was raging at the time, but when I thought it over afterward it
convinced me how secure the protection is."

"Was it really true that your care-taker took boarders in your house
while you were in Europe a few years ago," asked Mrs. Norman, turning to
a newcomer who had joined them.

"Yes, we had it wired the minute we found it out. It put a stop to that
sort of thing!" returned the woman emphatically.

"I never heard of such things!" gasped Mrs. Christy.

"I didn't know they would dare!"

"Dare? They dare anything!" snapped a tall girl in green.

"Well, I shall have it wired the instant we go," said Mrs. Christy
conclusively. "I did not know there was any company who did that sort of
thing. I am perfectly relieved to solve the problem!"

She went on into the drawing-room and the groups of guests at the tables
gradually broke up and followed making their adieux.

The instant Mrs. Reginald Norman reached home she called Mrs. Danielson
up on the telephone.

"What did you think of it, Ethel?" she asked eagerly.

"It was a lovely party! All in such good taste, didn't you think so?"
returned Ethel Danielson. "Mrs. Christy, too, made a much better
appearance than I expected. She has a good deal of SAVOIR FAIRE
already!"

"Yes, and she'll gain more as time goes on," replied Mrs. Norman. "How
do you suppose she ever got the Schermerhorn's and the De Witts there."

"I can't imagine and it doesn't make much difference now, how she did
it! I got my furs paid for which pleased me into the ground. Wouldn't we
have been idiots to stay away? We should never have forgiven ourselves
for from now on, Mrs. Christy is unquestionably IN SOCIETY. She has
'bridged it' in more senses than one!"



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


******* This file should be named 23973.txt or 23973.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party, by Sara Ware
Bassett


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Mrs. Christy's Bridge Party


Author: Sara Ware Bassett



Release Date: December 22, 2007  [eBook #23973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23973-h.htm or 23973-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h/23973-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973/23973-h.zip)





MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY

by

SARA WARE BASSETT







Copyright, 1907
by Sara Ware Bassett


[Illustration: "Mrs. Christy."]




Mrs. Reginald Norman walked into Sherry's and sank down at a small table
with the calm assurance of one conscious of being both beautiful and
perfectly gowned. There were no defects for the critical world to take
up and magnify. Her gown fitted flawlessly, was built by the highest
court of appeal on Parisian fashions, and suited her to perfection.

There is nothing like such a latent consciousness to impart poise to the
wearer. Dainty little Ethel Danielson followed, dropping into the
opposite chair.

"It was awfully nice of you to set this time for me to meet and lunch
with you," said Mrs. Danielson, leisurely drawing off her long gloves.
"Really, if you do not set definite hours you never see your friends at
all; this last whirl before Lent has been frightful, hasn't it? I'm worn
to a shred!"

"Yes, I shall be glad of a rest. You must go to things--if for no other
reason than to prove you are asked. I haven't seen any of my family for
over a week. I saw your husband a moment or two at the Opera last night
with the Goodhue Livingstons," returned Mrs. Norman, as she loosened her
veil.

"Oh, did you? Poor Harry--how was he? He has been having the grip or
something, his valet told me a couple of days ago," answered Mrs.
Danielson carelessly. "Well, my dear, to change the subject--are you
going to the Christy's bridge party? I'm simply dying of curiosity to
know! I thought of you the minute I opened the cards and wondered what
you would do--you have said so much about them."

"Don't mention bridge to me!" burst out Mrs. Norman emphatically. "Look
at my hair--did you ever behold such a vision in your life? The
parlor-maid did it, after much persuasion and an ample tip. I'm
perfectly discouraged--Therese has gone!"

"Gone? That maid you brought from Paris! Why you told me that nothing
but fire or the sword would separate you from that girl," ejaculated
Mrs. Danielson in surprise; "wasn't she satisfactory after all?"

"Perfectly satisfactory--perfectly, my love. I never had a maid who so
thoroughly understood my style and what I could and could not wear. I
was forced to let her go; every one of the eleven servants would have
left. The housekeeper told me it was policy to dismiss her," said Mrs.
Norman, thrusting her fork into a soft shell crab with great vehemence.

"Might one ask why they objected to her? Certainly, her nationality
wasn't a ground for such a demand, for half your servants are French,
aren't they?" questioned Mrs. Danielson with much interest.

"Oh, it wasn't that. She didn't play bridge! She just made the twelfth
one, and her not playing spoiled the third table--they would not have
her," explained Mrs. Norman dubiously.

"What are we coming to!" Mrs. Danielson exclaimed in despair; "I don't
wonder you're discouraged--you have to be so careful how you are gotten
up. You look so stunning in some things and so--well, you
understand--one must study one's style! Now tell me, what are you going
to do about the Christy's bridge? Everyone is wild over it! I've heard
nothing else for days--it's to be quite the event of the season. Shall
you go?"

"No. I have thought it all out. It seems to me some of us must take a
stand. If we accept invitations from the Christys' why the harm is
done--they will be in society before we know it! There are enough queer
people in our set already without adding them. I shall not go!" Mrs.
Norman drew herself up haughtily.

"That's just what I think," echoed Ethel Danielson; "we must, as you
say, take some definite position in the matter. If we stand out I am
sure others will. The Christys are simply dying to get in, and they have
loads of money to back them. What was it--blacking? Something
disagreeable, I remember."

"No, ink! Just as black and disgusting. They've squandered hundreds on
this bridge party; all the prizes were bought abroad, I hear, and
Kathryn Van Rensselaer told me there were to be fifty tables," continued
Mrs. Norman.

"It will be one of those horribly vulgar affairs with five times as much
of everything as there is any need of, I suppose," rejoined Ethel
scornfully.

"Do you know, I hear that ballroom is the most magnificent in New
York--done entirely by Garten-Veen."

"Well, we shall at least hear about it," sighed Mrs. Norman, with a
slight tinge of regret in her tone, "we'll telephone--you have one of
course!"

"Have a telephone? Well, I should say! One might as well be out of the
world as try to live without one. Everyone has one now," answered Mrs.
Danielson with a shrug.

"Then do call me up and tell me everything you hear," said Mrs. Norman
eagerly, "and I will call you. Thank Heaven, there are two of us with
conscience enough to block the Christys' social pathway!"

During the week preceding the much talked of function, one heard it on
every hand. Some said the prizes alone mounted up into the hundreds;
others announced that the decorations were to be the floral marvel of
the season; two reporters had been permitted to view Mrs. Christy's gown
and wrote exhaustive descriptions on this monument to the Parisian art.

Mrs. Norman and Ethel Danielson had frequent long gossips over the
telephone, relating each fresh item and exulting that they, at least,
had not lost their heads.

"Elise Thayer says she shall not go if we don't," called Mrs. Norman
with great satisfaction; "I have talked to her very seriously about it
and told her it was her duty to the rest of us to stay away, and she
says she will. No, I haven't sent regrets yet--I shall wait until the
last moment and be as nasty as I can," and Mrs. Norman gave a rippling
laugh.

At last the eventful day of the great bridge party came and among the
early arriving guests was Mrs. Norman. She glanced around her, noting
critically every detail of the luxurious house with its exquisite
appointments. Of course Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer would hear that
she had come and be furious, but she was well prepared with explanations
when next she should meet them. She had planned it all very carefully.

She was sweeping down the staircase to greet her hostess when she
suddenly stopped aghast! From opposite directions--entirely unconscious
of the other's approach--came Ethel Danielson and Elise Thayer. There
was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the stairs and the three
women were brought abruptly face to face.

[Illustration: "_There was no avoiding the collision at the foot of the
stairs and the three women were brought abruptly face to face._"]

"Mrs. Danielson!"

"Elise Thayer!"

"My dear Mrs. Norman!"

Mrs. Norman was the first to speak. She was the only one who had had the
opportunity to summon her story to her tongue's end. She began glibly
and with nervous haste:

"My dears, I positively had to come! Reggie would have it so. He and Mr.
Christy are mixed up in some financial operations, and he said it was
policy: I'm perfectly mortified to be here!"

Nevertheless, she glanced about her in most interested scrutiny.

"It was a pure and simple case of money with me," announced Ethel
Danielson, with suave frankness. "My furs are not paid for, and the
bills for my Palm Beach gowns are pouring in. These trades people are so
loathsomely prompt with their bills and so maddeningly slow every other
way! I wish they would reverse it. So I came to see if I could not get
something out of it--that's between us. If I draw any decent partners I
ought to, for I generally have good luck."

"Now, Elise, you see we were each forced into coming," said Mrs. Norman
accusingly, "for goodness sake, why did you come?"

"Well, I considered it carefully. The Christys are bound to get in--if
not now, later! They have come to stay, and they will hammer away, with
their millions behind them, until they're in. What's the use of standing
out against it? They will only snub me by and by," returned Elise Thayer
with defiant truthfulness.

Mrs. Norman colored and looked uneasily at Ethel Danielson.

Mrs. Danielson eyed Mrs. Norman uncomfortably. Each seemed to hear a
fearless echo of her own secret reasoning.

"Besides," continued Elise, smiling honestly, "you know you each meant
to come all the time, only you won't admit it."

For an instant there was an awkward pause, then Mrs. Norman laughed in
chagrined amusement.

"Well, we won't discuss it now," she said; "run along up and leave your
wraps--both of you--and I'll wait for you. We will go in together."

A few seconds later they were approaching their hostess with
outstretched hands.

"My dear Mrs. Christy," cooed Mrs. Norman, "so good of you to include me
among your guests! I know how many friends you have and one can't invite
them all."

Mrs. Christy took the extended hand murmuring:

"So nice of you to come with your chaos of engagements! Mrs. Danielson,
too!"

"I was delighted to have you think of me, Mrs. Christy," Mrs. Danielson
returned effusively, "and you may be sure yours was the only invitation
I considered for this afternoon--I let all the others go."

Elise Thayer followed with:

"Mrs. Christy, I've so anticipated to-day! I adore bridge and to have
the pleasure of being one of your guests made it additionally
delightful."

The three moved on and glanced over the rapidly crowding rooms.

"Really," whispered Mrs. Norman, "everybody is here. I'm amazed! There
are the Baring De Wolfs and the Wilson Delafields and Mrs. Morgan
Knickerbocker. You know how exclusive they are! And there is Mrs. Cecil
Jerome! I saw her yesterday and she never said a word about coming."

"Let's go and speak to her a moment before they sit down to play,"
suggested Ethel Danielson.

As they drifted in and out of the gathering assembly, varied snatches of
conversation reached them:

"Beautiful house, isn't it?"

"Yes, but overloaded--like the owner's hats! She is awfully bothered
about getting hats, she told me, and recently a French milliner begged
to see 'WHAT SHE COULD DO WITH HER.' Judging from the hat Mrs. Christy
wore at the St. Regis the other day, I guess the woman found out! Any
milliner who can get a patron to step out of the solitude of her boudoir
in such a concoction must have convinced herself that she can do
ANYTHING with her!"

"I don't think much of her gown," murmured another, "hideously
unbecoming!"

"I hope we shall not run into any of those people who 'TAKE A HAND JUST
TO ACCOMMODATE!'" chimed another. "I think there ought to be a law
prohibiting women who haven't taken lessons in the game, going to
parties and helping lose other people's money for them."

"I hate to play with either of those Hartwells--they simply blow your
head off after every hand; they haven't any manners!" put in a blond in
a creation of blue chiffon and silver.

"That girl in white over there ought to be ruled out!" said another
guest. "She is that artist visiting the Hollingsworths. She made it
HEARTS when I played with her once, 'so to lose as little as possible,'
she said."

The calling of the game cut short further comments.

The company was seated, the hands dealt, and the great bridge party was
at last really under way.

"Are they starting? I hope people won't talk--I don't think it's fair.
Is it my make? I haven't a thing! I'll pass it. CLUBS! Heavens! I could
have done better than that myself! What on earth did you have in your
hand? I don't care what Elwell says--I don't think that's enough; of
course we couldn't make it on that hand! It seems a shame to THROW
points away. I am NOT angry--do you think I mind a few dollars? it's
only so unnecessary! How many hands do we have to play with each
partner? I never said I wanted to get rid of you. No, it's NOT the same
thing--I simply asked!"

So the game went on!

Flushed cheeks and glistening eyes were the only indications that much
was at stake; social veneer concealed the real anxiety of the players,
but a hush of nervous tension pervaded the room. It was a relief when
the last hand was concluded. Everyone crowded around the table where the
beautiful prizes were displayed and where the scores were read.

"You don't mean to tell me that that girl who came with the
Hollingsworths and can't play at all, has first choice!" whispered Mrs.
Norman.

"A case of fool's luck, I guess," replied Mrs. Danielson, "let's see
what she takes."

"LOOK! She's going to take that Tiffany glass vase when she might have
had that diamond bracelet--probably thinks they are rhinestones!" burst
out Elise Thayer.

"Prizes never go to the best players," said Mrs. Cecil Jerome in
disgust. "It is never really fair."

Mrs. Cecil Jerome was conceded to be one of the "best players."

After the prizes had been duly admired and the winners congratulated,
the throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about the little gilt
tables in the dining-room, chatting eagerly and comparing scores.

[Illustration: "_The throng of exquisitely gowned women flocked about
the little gilt tables in the dining-room._"]

Mrs. Christy flitted among her guests with a smile and cordial word for
each, but to some favored few she devoted her especial attention. She
stopped beside one group in the corner of the dining-room more than
once.

"Your dining-room is so attractive, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Norman, as
her hostess sat down beside her for an instant.

"It is good of you to say so--you do things so exquisitely yourself that
I'm quite afraid of YOU," returned Mrs. Christy with disarming
frankness.

She glanced at Miss Thayer, Mrs. Danielson and Mrs. Cecil Jerome, who
were also at the table.

"You clever people," she went on, "must be my guides, for New York is
rather new to me--we have lived West so much. You are all such
authorities on social matters that I shall have to depend on you for
many things. You'll help me, won't you?"

What women could resist such delicate flattery?

The four smiled graciously.

"Tell me, Mrs. Danielson," Mrs. Christy continued, "are you going to
Newport this summer--or haven't you decided?"

"Oh, we've decided! We've rented our house and we intend to spend the
summer in Switzerland and the Tyrol," answered Mrs. Danielson. "What are
you going to do, Mrs. Christy?"

"Jack and I expect to take an automobile trip through England and
Scotland--if he can get away," returned Mrs. Christy, "and by the way,
what do you all do with your houses through the summer months? That is
bothering me now! Do you leave your servants in them all summer?"

"Oh, no," exclaimed Mrs. Danielson hastily, "we have had such frightful
experiences doing that! One summer we had fine servants and we wanted to
hold on to them so we kept them in the house all the time we were gone
and we hadn't been back any time at all before they left in a body! So
pleasant to feel you'd only been giving a house-party for them!" she
concluded sarcastically.

"Why my dear, our servants had a dance in our house!" put in Mrs.
Norman.

"I always put a care-taker in ours," said Miss Thayer.

"Don't have a care-taker!" burst out Mrs. Cecil Jerome. "While our
care-taker was living in the basement, burglars got through our scuttle
and robbed all the upper part of the house!"

"You make a great mistake," said Mrs. Danielson.

"Don't you know about the Holmes Company? They have wired our house
every year since that experience with our servants--why, it's ten years
now! It is the only way to leave your house during the summer." I heard
the other day, said a handsome woman joining the group, "that, that
company had opened offices of their own all through the city this year
and they will not hereafter connect houses with the District Telegraph
offices, so you see their service is going to be a hundred per cent.
better than it has ever been before."

"You better wire your house, Mrs. Christy," said Mrs. Danielson, "you'll
feel perfectly safe then. An awfully funny thing happened to me when
ours was first done! Mr. Danielson neglected to have my signature on the
coupon and I came up from Newport and couldn't get into my own house! I
was raging at the time, but when I thought it over afterward it
convinced me how secure the protection is."

"Was it really true that your care-taker took boarders in your house
while you were in Europe a few years ago," asked Mrs. Norman, turning to
a newcomer who had joined them.

"Yes, we had it wired the minute we found it out. It put a stop to that
sort of thing!" returned the woman emphatically.

"I never heard of such things!" gasped Mrs. Christy.

"I didn't know they would dare!"

"Dare? They dare anything!" snapped a tall girl in green.

"Well, I shall have it wired the instant we go," said Mrs. Christy
conclusively. "I did not know there was any company who did that sort of
thing. I am perfectly relieved to solve the problem!"

She went on into the drawing-room and the groups of guests at the tables
gradually broke up and followed making their adieux.

The instant Mrs. Reginald Norman reached home she called Mrs. Danielson
up on the telephone.

"What did you think of it, Ethel?" she asked eagerly.

"It was a lovely party! All in such good taste, didn't you think so?"
returned Ethel Danielson. "Mrs. Christy, too, made a much better
appearance than I expected. She has a good deal of SAVOIR FAIRE
already!"

"Yes, and she'll gain more as time goes on," replied Mrs. Norman. "How
do you suppose she ever got the Schermerhorn's and the De Witts there."

"I can't imagine and it doesn't make much difference now, how she did
it! I got my furs paid for which pleased me into the ground. Wouldn't we
have been idiots to stay away? We should never have forgiven ourselves
for from now on, Mrs. Christy is unquestionably IN SOCIETY. She has
'bridged it' in more senses than one!"



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. CHRISTY'S BRIDGE PARTY***


******* This file should be named 23973.txt or 23973.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/9/7/23973



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

