The Project Gutenberg EBook of Salem Chapel, v.1/2, by Mrs. Oliphant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Salem Chapel, v.1/2

Author: Mrs. Oliphant

Release Date: February 4, 2013 [EBook #42013]
[Last updated July 5, 2013]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALEM CHAPEL, V.1/2 ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)







                               COLLECTION

                                   OF

                            BRITISH AUTHORS

                           TAUCHNITZ EDITION.

                               VOL. 1091.

                     SALEM CHAPEL BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

                            IN TWO VOLUMES.

                                VOL. I.

                           TAUCHNITZ EDITION.

By the same Author,

THE LAST OF THE MORTIMERS               2 vols.

MARGARET MAITLAND                       1 vol.

AGNES                                   2 vols.

MADONNA MARY                            2 vols.

THE MINISTER'S WIFE                     2 vols.

THE RECTOR AND THE DOCTOR'S FAMILY      1 vol.





                       Chronicles of Carlingford

                              SALEM CHAPEL

                                   BY

                             MRS. OLIPHANT.

                          _COPYRIGHT EDITION._

                            IN TWO VOLUMES.

                                VOL. I.

                                LEIPZIG

                           BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ

                                 1870.

               _The Right of Translation is reserved._




                            SALEM CHAPEL.




CHAPTER I.


Towards the west end of Grove Street, in Carlingford, on the shabby side
of the street, stood a red brick building, presenting a pinched gable
terminated by a curious little belfry, not intended for any bell, and
looking not unlike a handle to lift up the edifice by to the public
observation. This was Salem Chapel, the only Dissenting place of worship
in Carlingford. It stood in a narrow strip of ground, just as the little
houses which flanked it on either side stood in their gardens, except
that the enclosure of the chapel was flowerless and sombre, and showed
at the farther end a few sparsely-scattered tombstones--unmeaning slabs,
such as the English mourner loves to inscribe his sorrow on. On either
side of this little tabernacle were the humble houses--little detached
boxes, each two storeys high, each fronted by a little flower-plot--clean,
respectable, meagre, little habitations, which contributed most largely
to the ranks of the congregation in the Chapel. The big houses opposite,
which turned their backs and staircase windows to the street, took
little notice of the humble Dissenting community. Twice in the winter,
perhaps, the Miss Hemmings, mild evangelical women, on whom the late
rector--the Low-Church rector, who reigned before the brief and
exceptional incumbency of the Rev. Mr. Proctor--had bestowed much of his
confidence, would cross the street, when other profitable occupations
failed them, to hear a special sermon on a Sunday evening. But the Miss
Hemmings were the only representatives of anything which could, by the
utmost stretch, be called Society, who ever patronised the Dissenting
interest in the town of Carlingford. Nobody from Grange Lane had ever
been seen so much as in Grove Street on a Sunday, far less in the
chapel. Greengrocers, dealers in cheese and bacon, milkmen, with some
dressmakers of inferior pretensions, and teachers of day-schools of
similar humble character, formed the _elite_ of the congregation. It is
not to be supposed, however, on this account, that a prevailing aspect
of shabbiness was upon this little community; on the contrary, the grim
pews of Salem Chapel blushed with bright colours, and contained both
dresses and faces on the summer Sundays which the Church itself could
scarcely have surpassed. Nor did those unadorned walls form a centre of
asceticism and gloomy religiousness in the cheerful little town.
Tea-meetings were not uncommon occurrences in Salem--tea-meetings which
made the little tabernacle festive, in which cakes and oranges were
diffused among the pews, and funny speeches made from the little
platform underneath the pulpit, which woke the unconsecrated echoes with
hearty outbreaks of laughter. Then the young people had their
singing-class, at which they practised hymns, and did not despise a
little flirtation; and charitable societies and missionary auxiliaries
diversified the congregational routine, and kept up a brisk succession
of "Chapel business," mightily like the Church business which occupied
Mr. Wentworth and his Sisters of Mercy at St. Roque's. To name the two
communities, however, in the same breath, would have been accounted
little short of sacrilege in Carlingford. The names which figured
highest in the benevolent lists of Salem Chapel, were known to society
only as appearing, in gold letters, upon the backs of those mystic
tradesmen's books, which were deposited every Monday in little heaps at
every house in Grange Lane. The Dissenters, on their part, aspired to no
conquests in the unattainable territory of high life, as it existed in
Carlingford. They were content to keep their privileges among
themselves, and to enjoy their superior preaching and purity with a
compassionate complacence. While Mr. Proctor was rector, indeed, Mr.
Tozer, the butterman, who was senior deacon, found it difficult to
refrain from an audible expression of pity for the "Church folks" who
knew no better; but, as a general rule, the congregation of Salem kept
by itself, gleaning new adherents by times at an "anniversary" or the
coming of a new minister, but knowing and keeping "its own place" in a
manner edifying to behold.

Such was the state of affairs when old Mr. Tufton declined in
popularity, and impressed upon the minds of his hearers those
now-established principles about the unfitness of old men for any
important post, and the urgent necessity and duty incumbent upon old
clergymen, old generals, old admirals, &c.--every aged functionary,
indeed, except old statesmen--to resign in favour of younger men, which
have been, within recent years, so much enforced upon the world. To
communicate this opinion to the old minister was perhaps less difficult
to Mr. Tozer and his brethren than it might have been to men more
refined and less practical; but it was an undeniable relief to the
managers of the chapel when grim Paralysis came mildly in and gave the
intimation in the manner least calculated to wound the sufferer's
feelings. Mild but distinct was that undeniable warning. The poor old
minister retired, accordingly, with a purse and a presentation, and
young Arthur Vincent, fresh from Homerton, in the bloom of hope and
intellectualism, a young man of the newest school, was recognised as
pastor in his stead.

A greater change could not possibly have happened. When the interesting
figure of the young minister went up the homely pulpit-stairs, and
appeared, white-browed, white-handed, in snowy linen and glossy clerical
apparel, where old Mr. Tufton, spiritual but homely, had been wont to
impend over the desk and exhort his beloved brethren, it was natural
that a slight rustle of expectation should run audibly through the
audience. Mr. Tozer looked round him proudly to note the sensation, and
see if the Miss Hemmings, sole representatives of a cold and unfeeling
aristocracy, were there. The fact was, that few of the auditors were
more impressed than the Miss Hemmings, who _were_ there, and who talked
all the evening after about the young minister. What a sermon it was!
not much in it about the beloved brethren; nothing very stimulating,
indeed, to the sentiments and affections, except in the youth and good
looks of the preacher, which naturally made a more distinct impression
upon the female portion of his hearers than on the stronger sex. But
then what eloquence! what an amount of thought! what an honest entrance
into all the difficulties of the subject! Mr. Tozer remarked afterwards
that such preaching was food for _men_. It was too closely reasoned out,
said the excellent butterman, to please women or weak-minded persons:
but he did not doubt, for his part, that soon the young men of
Carlingford, the hope of the country, would find their way to Salem. Under
such prognostications, it was fortunate that the young minister
possessed something else besides close reasoning and Homerton eloquence
to propitiate the women too.

Mr. Vincent arrived at Carlingford in the beginning of winter, when
society in that town was reassembling, or at least reappearing, after
the temporary summer seclusion. The young man knew very little of the
community which he had assumed the spiritual charge of. He was almost as
particular as the Rev. Mr. Wentworth of St. Roque's about the cut of his
coat and the precision of his costume, and decidedly preferred the word
clergyman to the word minister, which latter was universally used by his
flock; but notwithstanding these trifling predilections, Mr. Vincent,
who had been brought up upon the 'Nonconformist' and the 'Eclectic
Review,' was strongly impressed with the idea that the Church
Establishment, though outwardly prosperous, was in reality a profoundly
rotten institution; that the Nonconforming portion of the English public
was the party of progress; that the eyes of the world were turned upon
the Dissenting interest; and that his own youthful eloquence and the
Voluntary principle were quite enough to counterbalance all the
ecclesiastical advantages on the other side, and make for himself a
position of the highest influence in his new sphere. As he walked about
Carlingford making acquaintance with the place, it occurred to the young
man, with a thrill of not ungenerous ambition, that the time might
shortly come when Salem Chapel would be all too insignificant for the
Nonconformists of this hitherto torpid place. He pictured to himself
how, by-and-by, those jealous doors in Grange Lane would fly open at his
touch, and how the dormant minds within would awake under his influence.
It was a blissful dream to the young pastor. Even the fact that Mr.
Tozer was a butterman, and the other managers of the chapel equally
humble in their pretensions, did not disconcert him in that flush of
early confidence. All he wanted--all any man worthy of his post
wanted--was a spot of standing-ground, and an opportunity of making the
Truth--and himself--known. Such, at least, was the teaching of Homerton
and the Dissenting organs. Young Vincent, well educated and enlightened
according to his fashion, was yet so entirely unacquainted with any
world but that contracted one in which he had been brought up, that he
believed all this as devoutly as Mr. Wentworth believed in Anglicanism,
and would have smiled with calm scorn at any sceptic who ventured to
doubt. Thus it will be seen he came to Carlingford with elevated
expectations--by no means prepared to circulate among his flock, and say
grace at Mrs. Tozer's "teas," and get up _soirees_ to amuse the
congregation, as Mr. Tufton had been accustomed to do. These secondary
circumstances of his charge had little share in the new minister's
thoughts. Somehow the tone of public writing has changed of late days.
Scarcely a newspaper writer condescends now to address men who are not
free of "society," and learned in all its ways. The 'Times' and the
Magazines take it for granted that all their readers dine out at
splendid tables, and are used to a solemn attendant behind their chair.
Young Vincent was one of those who accept the flattering implication. It
is true, he saw few enough of such celestial scenes in his college-days.
But now that life was opening upon him, he doubted nothing of the
society that must follow; and with a swell of gratification listened
when the advantages of Carlingford were discussed by some chance
fellow-travellers on the railway; its pleasant parties--its nice
people--Mr. Wodehouse's capital dinners, and the charming
breakfasts--such a delightful novelty!--so easy and agreeable!--of the
pretty Lady Western, the young dowager. In imagination Mr. Vincent saw
himself admitted to all these social pleasures; not that he cared for
capital dinners more than became a young man, or had any special
tendencies towards tuft-hunting, but because fancy and hope, and
ignorance of the real world, made him naturally project himself into
the highest sphere within his reach, in the simple conviction that such
was his natural place.

With these thoughts, to be asked to Mrs. Tozer's to tea at six o'clock,
was the most wonderful cold plunge for the young man. He shrugged his
shoulders, smiled to himself over the note of invitation, which,
however, was very prettily written by Phoebe, Mrs. Tozer's blooming
daughter, on paper as pink as Lady Western's, and consented, as he could
not help himself. He went out from his nice lodgings a little after six,
still smiling, and persuading himself that this would be quite a
pleasant study of manners, and that of course he could not do less than
patronise the good homely people in their own way, whatever that might
be. Mr. Vincent's rooms were in George Street, at what the Grange Lane
people called _the other end_, in an imposing house with a large door,
and iron extinguishers fixed in the railing, which had in their day
quenched the links of the last century. To cross the street in his
evening coat, and walk into the butter-shop, where the two white-aproned
lads behind the counter stared, and a humble member of the congregation
turned sharply round, and held out the hand, which had just clutched a
piece of bacon, for her minister to shake, was a sufficiently trying
introduction to the evening's pleasure; but when the young pastor had
been ushered up-stairs, the first aspect of the company there rather
took away his breath, as he emerged from the dark staircase. Tozer
himself, who awaited the minister at the door, was fully habited in the
overwhelming black suit and white tie, which produced so solemnising an
effect every Sunday at chapel; and the other men of the party were, with
a few varieties, similarly attired. But the brilliancy of the female
portion of the company overpowered Mr. Vincent. Mrs. Tozer herself sat
at the end of her hospitable table, with all her best china tea-service
set out before her, in a gown and cap which Grange Lane could not have
furnished any rivals to. The brilliant hue of the one, and the flowers
and feathers of the other, would require a more elaborate description
than this chronicle has space for. Nor indeed in the particular of dress
did Mrs. Tozer do more than hold her own among the guests who surrounded
her. It was scarcely dark, and the twilight softened down the splendours
of the company, and saved the dazzled eyes of the young pastor. He felt
the grandeur vaguely as he came in with a sense of reproof, seeing that
he had evidently been waited for. He said grace devoutly when the tea
arrived and the gas was lighted, and with dumb amaze gazed round him.
Could these be the veritable womankind of Salem Chapel? Mr. Vincent saw
bare shoulders and flower-wreathed heads bending over the laden
tea-table. He saw pretty faces and figures not inelegant, remarkable
among which was Miss Phoebe's, who had written him that pink note, and
who herself was pink all over--dress, shoulders, elbows, cheeks, and
all. Pink--not red--a softened youthful flush, which was by no means
unbecoming to the plump full figure which had not an angle anywhere. As
for the men, the lawful owners of all this feminine display, they
huddled all together, indisputable cheesemongers as they were, quite
transcended and extinguished by their wives and daughters. The pastor
was young and totally inexperienced. In his heart he asserted his own
claim to an entirely different sphere; but, suddenly cast into this
little crowd, Mr. Vincent's inclination was to join the dark group of
husbands and fathers whom he knew, and who made no false pretences. He
was shy of venturing upon those fine women, who surely never could be
Mrs. Brown of the Devonshire Dairy, and Mrs. Pigeon, the poulterer's
wife; whereas Pigeon and Brown themselves were exactly like what they
always were on Sundays, if not perhaps a trifle graver and more
depressed in their minds.

"Here's a nice place for you, Mr. Vincent--quite the place for you,
where you can hear all the music, and see all the young ladies. For I do
suppose ministers, bein' young, are like other young men," said Mrs.
Tozer, drawing aside her brilliant skirts to make room for him on the
sofa. "I have a son myself as is at college, and feel motherlike to
those as go in the same line. Sit you down comfortable, Mr. Vincent.
There ain't one here, sir, I'm proud to say, as grudges you the best
seat."

"Oh, mamma, how could you think of saying such a thing!" said Phoebe,
under her breath; "to be sure, Mr. Vincent never could think there was
anybody anywhere that would be so wicked--and he the minister."

"Indeed, my dear," said Mrs. Pigeon, who was close by, "not to affront
Mr. Vincent, as is deserving of our best respects, I've seen many and
many's the minister I wouldn't have given up my seat to; and I don't
misdoubt, sir, you've heard of such as well as we. There was Mr. Bailey
at Parson's Green, now. He went and married a poor bit of a governess,
as common a looking creature as you could see, that set herself up above
the people, Mr. Vincent, and was too grand, sir, if you'll believe me,
to visit the deacons' wives. Nobody cares less than me about them vain
shows. What's visiting, if you know the vally of your time? Nothing but
a laying up of judgment. But I wouldn't be put upon neither by a chit
that got her bread out of me and my husband's hard earnins; and so I
told my sister, Mrs. Tozer, as lives at Parson's Green."

"Poor thing!" said the gentler Mrs. Tozer, "it's hard lines on a
minister's wife to please the congregation. Mr. Vincent here, he'll have
to take a lesson. That Mrs. Bailey was pretty-looking, I must allow----"

"Sweetly pretty!" whispered Phoebe, clasping her plump pink hands.

"Pretty-looking! I don't say anything against it," continued her mother;
"but it's hard upon a minister when his wife won't take no pains to
please his flock. To have people turn up their noses at you ain't
pleasant----"

"And them getting their livin' off you all the time," cried Mrs. Pigeon,
clinching the milder speech.

"But it seems to me," said poor Vincent, "that a minister can no more
be said to get his living off you than any other man. He works hard
enough generally for what little he has. And really, Mrs. Tozer, I'd
rather not hear all these unfortunate particulars about one of my
brethren----"

"He ain't one of the brethren now," broke in the poulterer's wife. "He's
been gone out o' Parson's Green this twelvemonths. Them stuck-up ways
may do with the Church folks as can't help themselves, but they'll never
do with us Dissenters. Not that we ain't as glad as can be to see you,
Mr. Vincent, and I hope you'll favour my poor house another night like
you're favouring Mrs. Tozer's. Mr. Tufton always said that was the
beauty of Carlingford in our connection. Cheerful folks and no display.
No display, you know--nothing but a hearty meetin', sorry to part, and
happy to meet again. Them's our ways. And the better you know us, the
better you'll like us, I'll be bound to say. We don't put it all on the
surface, Mr. Vincent," continued Mrs. Pigeon, shaking out her skirts and
expanding herself on her chair, "but it's all real and solid; what we
say we mean--and we don't say no more than we mean--and them's the kind
of folks to trust to wherever you go."

Poor Vincent made answer by an inarticulate murmur, whether of assent or
dissent it was impossible to say; and, inwardly appalled, turned his
eyes towards his deacons, who, more fortunate than himself, were
standing all in a group together discussing chapel matters, and wisely
leaving general conversation to the fairer portion of the company. The
unlucky minister's secret looks of distress awoke the interest and
sympathy of Phoebe, who sat in an interesting manner on a stool at her
mother's side. "Oh, mamma," said that young lady, too bashful to address
himself directly, "I wonder if Mr. Vincent plays or sings? There are
some such nice singers here. Perhaps we might have some music, if Mr.
Vincent----"

"I don't perform at all," said that victim,--"not in any way; but I am
an exemplary listener. Let me take you to the piano."

The plump Phoebe rose after many hesitations, and, with a simper and a
blush and pretty air of fright, took the minister's arm. After all, even
when the whole company is beneath a man's level, it is easier to play
the victim under the _supplice_ inflicted by a pretty girl than by two
mature matrons. Phoebe understood pretty well about her _h_'s, and did
not use the double negative; and when she rose up rustling from her low
seat, the round, pink creature, with dimples all about her, was not an
unpleasant object of contemplation. Mr. Vincent listened to her song
with decorous interest. Perhaps it was just as well sung as Lucy
Wodehouse, in Grange Lane, would have sung it. When Phoebe had
concluded, the minister was called to the side of Mrs. Brown of the
Devonshire Dairy, who had been fidgeting to secure him from the moment
he approached the piano. She was fat and roundabout, good woman, and had
the aspect of sitting upon the very edge of her chair. She held out to
the distressed pastor a hand covered with a rumpled white glove, which
did not fit, and had never been intended to fit, and beckoned to him
anxiously. With the calmness of despair Mr. Vincent obeyed the call.

"I have been looking so anxious to catch your eye, Mr. Vincent," said
Mrs. Brown; "do sit you down, now there's a chance, and let me talk to
you a minnit. Bless the girl! there's Miss Polly Pigeon going to play,
and everybody can use their freedom in talking. For my part," said Mrs.
Brown, securing the vacant chair of the performer for her captive,
"that's why I like instrumental music best. When a girl sings, why, to
be sure, it's only civil to listen--ain't it now, Mr. Vincent? but
nobody expects it of you, don't you see, when she only plays. Now do you
sit down. What I wanted to speak to you was about that poor creetur in
Back Grove Street--that's the lane right behind the chapel. She do
maunder on so to see the minister. Mr. Tozer he's been to see her, and I
sent Brown, but it wasn't a bit of use. It's you, Mr. Vincent, she's
awanting of. If you'll call in to-morrow, I'll show you the place
myself, as you're a stranger; for if you'll excuse me saying it, I am as
curious as can be to hear what she's got to say."

"If she has got anything to say, she might prefer that it was not
heard," said Vincent, with an attempt at a smile. "Is she ill--and who
is she? I have never heard of her before."

"Well, you see, sir, she doesn't belong rightly to Salem. She's a
stranger here, and not a joined member; and she ain't ill either, as I
can see--only something on her mind. You ministers," said Mrs. Brown,
with a look of awe, "must have a deal of secrets confided to you. Folks
may stand out against religion as long as things go on straight with
them, but they're sure to want the minister as soon as they've got
something on their mind; and a deal better to have it out, and get a
little comfort, than to bottle it all up till their latter end, like old
Mrs. Thompson, and let it out in their will, to drive them as was
expecting different distracted. It's a year or two since that happened.
I don't suppose you've heerd tell of it yet. But that's what makes old
Mrs. Christian--I dare to say you've seen her at chapel--so
uncomfortable in her feelins. She's never got over it, sir, and never
will to her dying day."

"Some disappointment about money?" said Mr. Vincent.

"Poor old folks! their daughter did very well for herself--and very well
for them too," said Mrs. Brown; "but it don't make no difference in Mrs.
Christian's feelins: they're living, like, on Mr. Brown the solicitor's
charity, you see, sir, instead of their own fortin, which makes a deal
o' difference. It would have been a fine thing for Salem too," added
Mrs. Brown, reflectively, "if they had had the old lady's money; for
Mrs. Christian was always one that liked to be first, and stanch to her
chapel, and would never have been wanting when the collecting-books went
round. But it wasn't to be, Mr. Vincent--that's the short and the long
of it; and we never have had nobody in our connection worth speaking of
in Carlingford but's been in trade. And a very good thing too, as I tell
Brown. For if there's one thing I can't abear in a chapel, it's one set
setting up above the rest. But bein' all in the way of business, except
just the poor folks, as is all very well in their place, and never
interferes with nothing, and don't count, there's nothing but brotherly
love here, which is a deal more than most ministers can say for their
flocks. I've asked a few friends to tea, Mr. Vincent, on next Thursday,
at six. As I haven't got no daughters just out of a boarding-school to
write notes for me, will you take us in a friendly way, and just come
without another invitation? All our own folks, sir, and a comfortable
evening; and prayers, if you'll _be_ so good, at the end. I don't like
the new fashion," said Mrs. Brown, with a significant glance towards
Mrs. Tozer, "of separatin' like heathens, when all's of one connection.
We might never meet again, Mr. Vincent. In the midst of life, you know,
sir. You'll not forget Thursday, at six."

"But, my dear Mrs. Brown, I am very sorry: Thursday is one of the days I
have specially devoted to study," stammered forth the unhappy pastor.
"What with the Wednesday meeting and the Friday committee----"

Mrs. Brown drew herself up as well as the peculiarities of her form
permitted, and her roseate countenance assumed a deeper glow. "We've
been in the chapel longer than Tozer," said the offended deaconess.
"We've never been backward, in takin' trouble, nor spendin' our
substance, nor puttin' our hands to every good work; and as for makin' a
difference between one member and another, it's what we ain't been
accustomed to, Mr. Vincent. I'm a plain woman, and speak my mind. Old
Mr. Tufton was very particular to show no preference. He always said, it
never answered in a flock to show more friendship to one nor another;
and if it had been put to me, I wouldn't have said, I assure you, sir,
that it was us as was to be made the first example of. If I haven't a
daughter fresh out of a boarding-school, I've been a member of Salem
five-and-twenty year, and had ministers in my house many's the day, and
as friendly as if I were a duchess; and for charities and such things,
we've never been known to fail, though I say it; and as for trouble----"

"But I spoke of my study," said the poor minister, as she paused, her
indignation growing too eloquent for words: "you want me to preach on
Sunday, don't you? and I must have some time, you know, to do my work."

"Sir," said Mrs. Brown, severely, "I know it for a fact that Mr.
Wentworth of St. Roque's dines out five days in the week, and it don't
do _his_ sermons no injury; and when you go out to dinner, it stands to
reason it's a different thing from a friendly tea."

"Ah, yes, most likely!" said Mr. Vincent, with a heavy sigh. "I'll come,
since you wish it so much; but," added the unlucky young man, with a
melancholy attempt at a smile, "you must not be too kind to me. Too much
of this kind of thing, you know, might have an effect----" Here he
paused, inclined to laugh at his own powers of sarcasm. As chance would
have it, as he pointed generally to the scene before them, the little
wave of his hand seemed to Mrs. Brown to indicate the group round the
piano, foremost in which was Phoebe, plump and pink, and full of
dimples. The good mistress of the Devonshire Dairy gave her head a
little toss.

"Ah!" said Mrs. Brown, with a sigh, "you don't know, you young men, the
half of the tricks of them girls that look so innocent. But I don't deny
it's a pleasant party," added the deaconess, looking round on the
company in general with some complacency. "But just you come along our
way on Thursday, at six, and judge for yourself if mine ain't quite as
good; though I have not got no daughters, Mr. Vincent," she concluded,
with severe irony, elevating her double chin and nodding her flowery
head.

The subdued minister made no reply; only deeper and deeper humiliation
seemed in store for him. Was it he, the first prize-man of Homerton, who
was supposed to be already smitten by the pink charms of Phoebe Tozer?
The unfortunate young man groaned in spirit, and, seizing a sudden
opportunity, plunged into the black group of deacons, and tried to
immerse himself in chapel business. But vain was the attempt. He was
recaptured and led back in triumph to Mrs. Tozer's sofa. He had to
listen to more singing, and accept another invitation to tea. When he
got off at last, it was with a sensation of dreadful dwindlement that
poor Vincent crossed the street again to his lonely abode. He knocked
quite humbly at the big door, and, with a sensation of unclerical rage,
wondered to himself whether the policeman who met him knew he had been
out to tea. Ah, blessed Mr. Wentworth of St. Roque's! The young
Nonconformist sighed as he put on his slippers, and kicked his boots
into a corner of his sitting-room. Somehow he had come down in the world
all at once, and without expecting it. Such was Salem Chapel and its
requirements: and such was Mr. Vincent's first experience of social life
in Carlingford.




CHAPTER II.


It was with a somewhat clouded aspect that the young pastor rose from
his solitary breakfast-table next morning to devote himself to the
needful work of visiting his flock. The minister's breakfast, though
lonely, had not been without alleviations. He had the "Carlingford
Gazette" at his elbow, if that was any comfort, and he had two letters
which were more interesting; one was from his mother, a minister's
widow, humbly enough off, but who had brought up her son in painful
gentility, and had done much to give him that taste for good society
which was to come to so little fruition in Carlingford. Mr. Vincent
smiled sardonically as he read his good mother's questions about his
"dear people," and her anxious inquiry whether he had found a "pleasant
circle" in Salem. Remembering the dainty little household which it took
her so much pains and pinching to maintain, the contrast made present
affairs still more and more distasteful to her son. He could fancy her
trim little figure in that traditionary black silk gown which never wore
out, and the whitest of caps, gazing aghast at Mrs. Brown and Mrs.
Tozer. But, nevertheless, Mrs. Vincent understood all about Mrs. Brown
and Mrs. Tozer, and had been very civil to such, and found them very
serviceable in her day, though her son, who knew her only in that
widowed cottage where she had her own way, could not have realised it.
The other letter was from a Homerton chum, a young intellectual and
ambitious Nonconformist like himself, whose epistle was full of
confidence and hope, triumph in the cause, and its perpetual advance.
"We are the priests of the poor," said the Homerton enthusiast,
encouraging his friend to the sacrifices and struggles which he presumed
to be already surrounding him. Mr. Vincent bundled up this letter with a
sigh. Alas! there were no grand struggles or sacrifices in Carlingford.
"The poor" were mostly church-goers, as he had already discovered. It
was a tolerably comfortable class of the community, that dreadful
"connection" of Browns, Pigeons, and Tozers. Amid their rude luxuries
and commonplace plenty, life could have no heroic circumstances. The
young man sighed, and did not feel so sure as he once did of the grand
generalities in which his friend was still confident. If Dissenters led
the van of progress generally, there was certainly an exception to be
made in respect to Carlingford. And the previous evening's entertainment
had depressed the young minister's expectations even of what he himself
could do--a sad blow to a young man. He was less convinced that
opportunity of utterance was all that was necessary to give him
influence in the general community. He was not half so sure of success
in opening the closed doors and sealed hearts of Grange Lane. On the
whole, matters looked somewhat discouraging that particular morning,
which was a morning in October, not otherwise depressing or
disagreeable. He took his hat and went down-stairs with a kind of
despairing determination to do his duty. There an encounter occurred
which did not raise his spirits. The door was open, and his landlady,
who was a member of Salem Chapel, stood there in full relief against the
daylight outside, taking from the hands of Miss Phoebe Tozer a little
basket, the destination of which she was volubly indicating. Mr. Vincent
appearing before Phoebe had half concluded her speech, that young lady
grew blushingly embarrassed, and made haste to relinquish her hold of
the basket. Her conscious looks filled the unwitting minister with
ignorant amaze.

"Oh, to think Mr. Vincent should catch me here! What ever will he think?
and what ever will Ma say?" cried Miss Phoebe. "Oh, Mr. Vincent, Ma
thought, please, you might perhaps like some jelly, and I said I would
run over with it myself, as it's so near, and the servant might have
made a mistake, and Ma hopes you'll enjoy it, and that you liked the
party last night!"

"Mrs. Tozer is very kind," said the minister, with cloudy looks. "Some
what, did you say, Miss Phoebe?"

"La! only some jelly--nothing worth mentioning--only a shape that was
over supper last night, and Ma thought you wouldn't mind," cried the
messenger, half alarmed by the unusual reception of her offering. Mr.
Vincent turned very red, and looked at the basket as if he would like
nothing better than to pitch it into the street; but prudence for once
restrained the young man. He bit his lips, and bowed, and went upon his
way, without waiting, as she intended he should, to escort Miss Phoebe
back again to her paternal shop. Carrying his head higher than usual,
and thrilling with offence and indignation, the young pastor made his
way along George Street. It was a very trifling circumstance, certainly;
but just when an enthusiastic companion writes to you about the advance
of the glorious cause, and your own high vocation as a soldier of the
Cross, and the undoubted fact that the hope of England is in you, to
have a shape of jelly, left over from last night's tea-party, sent
across the street with complacent kindness, for your refreshment----! It
_was_ trying. To old Mrs. Tufton, indeed, who had an invalid daughter,
it might have seemed a Christian bounty; but to Arthur Vincent,
five-and-twenty, a scholar and a gentleman--ah me! If he had been a
Christchurch man, or even a Fellow of Trinity, the chances are he would
have taken it much more graciously; for then he would have had the
internal consciousness of his own dignity to support him; whereas the
sting of it all was, that poor young Vincent had no special right to his
own pretensions, but had come to them he could not tell how; and, in
reality, had his mind been on a level with his fortunes, ought to have
found the Tozers and Pigeons sufficiently congenial company. He went
along George Street with troubled haste, pondering his sorrows--those
sorrows which he could confide to nobody. Was he actually to live among
these people for years--to have no other society--to circulate among
their tea-parties, and grow accustomed to their finery, and perhaps "pay
attention" to Phoebe Tozer; or, at least, suffer that young lady's
attentions to him? And what would become of him at the end? To drop into
a shuffling old gossip, like good old Mr. Tufton, seemed the best thing
he could hope for; and who could wonder at the mild stupor of
paralysis--disease not tragical, only drivelling--which was the last
chapter of all?

The poor young man accordingly marched along George Street deeply
disconsolate. When he met the perpetual curate of St. Roque's at the
door of Masters's bookshop--where, to be sure, at that hour in the
morning, it was natural to encounter Mr. Wentworth--the young
Nonconformist gazed at him with a certain wistfulness. They looked at
each other, in fact, being much of an age, and not unsimilar in worldly
means just at the present moment. There were various points of
resemblance between them. Mr. Vincent, too, wore an Anglican coat, and
assumed a high clerical aspect--sumptuary laws forbidding such
presumption being clearly impracticable in England; and the Dissenter
was as fully endowed with natural good looks as the young priest. How
was it, then, that so vast a world of difference and separation lay
between them? For one compensating moment Mr. Vincent decided that it
was because of his more enlightened faith, and felt himself persecuted.
But even that pretence did not serve the purpose. He began to divine
faintly, and with a certain soreness, that external circumstances do
stand for something, if not in the great realities of a man's career, at
least in the comforts of his life. A poor widow's son, educated at
Homerton, and an English squire's son, public school and university
bred, cannot begin on the same level. To compensate that disadvantage
requires something more than a talent for preaching. Perhaps genius
would scarcely do it without the aid of time and labour. The conviction
fell sadly upon poor Arthur Vincent as he went down the principal street
of Carlingford in the October sunshine. He was rapidly becoming
disenchanted, and neither the 'Nonconformist' nor the 'Patriot,' nor
Exeter Hall itself, could set him up again.

With these feelings the young pastor pursued his way to see the poor
woman who, according to Mrs. Brown's account, was so anxious to see the
minister. He found this person, whose desire was at present shared by
most of the female members of Salem without the intervention of the
Devonshire Dairy, in a mean little house in the close lane dignified by
the name of Back Grove Street. She was a thin, dark, vivacious-looking
woman, with a face from which some forty years of energetic living had
withdrawn all the colour and fulness which might once have rendered it
agreeable, but which was, nevertheless, a remarkable face, not to be
lightly passed over. Extreme thinness of outline and sharpness of line
made the contrast between this educated countenance and the faces which
had lately surrounded the young minister still more remarkable. It was
not a profound or elevated kind of education, perhaps, but it was very
different from the thin superficial lacker with which Miss Phoebe was
coated. Eager dark eyes, with dark lines under them--thin eloquent
lips, the upper jaw projecting slightly, the mouth closing fast and
firm--a well-shaped small head, with a light black lace handkerchief
fastened under the chin--no complexion or softening of tint--a dark,
sallow, colourless face, thrilling with expression, energy, and thought,
was that on which the young man suddenly lighted as he went in, somewhat
indifferent, it must be confessed, and expecting to find nothing that
could interest him. She was seated in a shabby room, only half-carpeted,
up two pair of stairs, which looked out upon no more lively view than
the back of Salem Chapel itself, with its few dismal scattered
graves--and was working busily at men's clothing of the coarsest kind,
blue stuff which had transferred its colour to her thin fingers. Meagre
as were her surroundings, however, Mr. Vincent, stumbling listlessly up
the narrow bare stair of the poor lodging-house, suddenly came to
himself as he stood within this humble apartment. If this was to be his
penitent, the story she had to tell might be not unworthy of serious
listening. He stammered forth a half apology and explanation of his
errand, as he gazed surprised at so unexpected a figure, wondering
within himself what intense strain and wear of life could have worn to
so thin a tissue the outer garment of this keen and sharp-edged soul.

"Come in," said the stranger, "I am glad to see you. I know you, Mr.
Vincent, though I can't suppose you've observed me. Take a seat. I have
heard you preach ever since you came--so, knowing in a manner how your
thoughts run, I've a kind of acquaintance with you: which, to be sure,
isn't the same on your side. I daresay the woman at the Dairy sent you
to me?"

"I understood--from Mrs. Brown certainly--that you wanted to see me,"
said the puzzled pastor.

"Yes, it was quite true. I have resources in myself, to be sure, as much
as most people," said his new acquaintance, whom he had been directed to
ask for as Mrs. Hilyard, "but still human relations are necessary; and
as I don't know anybody here, I thought I'd join the Chapel. Queer set
of people, rather, don't you think?" she continued, glancing up from her
rapid stitching to catch Vincent's conscious eye; "they thought I was in
spiritual distress, I suppose, and sent me the butterman. Lord bless us!
if I had been, what could he have done for me, does anybody imagine? and
when he didn't succeed, there came the Dairy person, who, I daresay,
would have understood what I wanted had I been a cow. Now I can make out
what I'm doing when I have you, Mr. Vincent. I know your line a little
from your sermons. That was wonderfully clever on Sunday morning about
confirmation. I belong to the Church myself by rights, and was
confirmed, of course, at the proper time, like other people, but I am a
person of impartial mind. That was a famous downright blow. I liked you
there."

"I am glad to have your approbation," said the young minister, rather
stiffly; "but excuse me--I was quite in earnest in my argument."

"Yes, yes; that was the beauty of it," said his eager interlocutor, who
went on without ever raising her eyes, intent upon the rough work which
he could not help observing sometimes made her scarred fingers bleed as
it passed rapidly through them. "No argument is ever worth listening to
if it isn't used in earnest. I've led a wandering life, and heard an
infinity of sermons of late years. When there are any brains in them at
all, you know, they are about the only kind of mental stimulant a poor
woman in my position can come by, for I've no time for reading lately.
Down here, in these regions, where the butterman comes to inquire after
your spiritual interests, and is a superior being," added this singular
new adherent of Salem, looking full for a single moment in her visitor's
eyes, with a slight movement of the muscles of her thin face, and making
a significant pause, "the air's a trifle heavy. It isn't pure oxygen we
breathe in Back Grove Street, by any means."

"I assure you it surprises me more than I can explain, to find," said
Vincent, hesitating for a proper expression, "to find----"

"Such a person as I am in Back Grove Street," interrupted his companion,
quickly; "yes--and thereby hangs a tale. But I did not send for you to
tell it. I sent for you for no particular reason, but a kind of yearning
to talk to somebody. I beg your pardon sincerely--but you know," she
said, once more with a direct sudden glance and that half-visible
movement in her face which meant mischief, "you are a minister, and are
bound to have no inclinations of your own, but to give yourself up to
the comfort of the poor."

"Without any irony, that is the aim I propose to myself," said Vincent;
"but I fear you are disposed to take rather a satirical view of such
matters. It is fashionable to talk lightly on those subjects; but I find
life and its affairs sufficiently serious, I assure you----"

Here she stopped her work suddenly, and looked up at him, her dark sharp
eyes lighting up her thin sallow face with an expression which it was
beyond his power to fathom. The black eyelashes widened, the dark
eyebrows rose, with a full gaze of the profoundest tragic sadness, on
the surface of which a certain gleam of amusement seemed to hover. The
worn woman looked over the dark world of her own experience, of which
she was conscious in every nerve, but of which he knew nothing, and
smiled at his youth out of the abysses of her own life, where volcanoes
had been, and earthquakes. He perceived it dimly, without understanding
how, and faltered and blushed, yet grew angry with all the
self-assertion of youth.

"I don't doubt you know that as well as I do--perhaps better; but
notwithstanding, I find my life leaves little room for laughter," said
the young pastor, not without a slight touch of heroics.

"Mr. Vincent," said Mrs. Hilyard, with a gleam of mirth in her eye, "in
inferring that I perhaps know better, you infer also that I am older
than you, which is uncivil to a lady. But for my part, I don't object to
laughter. Generally it's better than crying, which in a great many cases
I find the only alternative. I doubt, however, much whether life, from
the butterman's point of view, wears the same aspect. I should be
inclined to say not; and I daresay your views will brighten with your
company," added the aggravating woman, again resuming, with eyes fixed
upon it, her laborious work.

"I perceive you see already what is likely to be my great trial in
Carlingford," said young Vincent. "I confess that the society of my
office-bearers, which I suppose I must always consider myself bound
to----"

"That was a very sad sigh," said the rapid observer beside him; "but
don't confide in me, lest I should be tempted to tell somebody. I can
speak my mind without prejudice to anybody; and if you agree with me, it
may be a partial relief to your feelings. I shall be glad to see you
when you can spare me half an hour. I can't look at you while I talk,
for that would lose me so much time, but at my age it doesn't matter.
Come and see me. It's your business to do me good--and it's possible I
might even do some good to you."

"Thank you. I shall certainly come," said the minister, rising with the
feeling that he had received his dismissal for to-day. She rose, too,
quickly, and but for a moment, and held out her hand to him.

"Be sure you don't betray to the dairywoman what I had on my mind, and
wanted to tell you, though she is dying to know," said his singular new
acquaintance, without a smile, but with again a momentary movement in
her thin cheeks. When she had shaken hands with him, she seated herself
again immediately, and without a moment's pause proceeded with her work,
apparently concentrating all her faculties upon it, and neither hearing
nor seeing more of her visitor, though he still stood within two steps
of her, overshadowing the table. The young man turned and left the room
with involuntary quietness, as if he had been dismissed from the
presence of a princess. He went straight down-stairs without ever
pausing, and hastened through the narrow back-street with still the
impulse communicated by that dismissal upon him. When he drew breath, it
was with a curious mixture of feelings. Who she was or what she was--how
she came there, working at those "slops" till the colour came off upon
her hands, and her poor thin fingers bled--she so strangely superior to
her surroundings, yet not despising or quarrelling with them, or even
complaining of them, so far as he could make out--infinitely perplexed
the inexperienced minister. He came away excited and bewildered from the
interview, which had turned out so different from his expectations.
Whether she had done him good, was extremely doubtful; but she had
changed the current of his thoughts, which was in its way an immediate
benefit. Marvelling over such a mysterious apparition, and not so sure
as in the morning that nothing out of the most vulgar routine ever could
occur in Carlingford, Mr. Vincent turned with meditative steps towards
the little house at the extreme end of Grove Street, where his
predecessor still lingered. A visit to old Mr. Tufton was a periodical
once a-week duty, to be performed with the utmost regularity. Tozer and
Pigeon had agreed that it would be the making of the young minister to
draw thus from the experience of the old one. Whether Mr. Vincent agreed
with them, may be apprehended from the scene which follows.




CHAPTER III.


Mr. Tufton's house was at the extremity of Grove Street--at the
extremity, consequently, in that direction, of Carlingford, lying
parallel with the end of Grange Lane, and within distant view of St.
Roque's. It was a little old-fashioned house, with a small garden in
front and a large garden behind, in which the family cabbages, much less
prosperous since the old minister became unable to tend them,
flourished. The room into which Mr. Vincent, as an intimate of the
house, was shown, was a low parlour with two small windows, overshadowed
outside by ivy, and inside by two large geraniums, expanded upon a
Jacob's ladder of props, which were the pride of Mrs. Tufton's heart,
and made it almost impossible to see anything clearly within, even at
the height of day. Some prints, of which one represented Mr. Tufton
himself, and the rest other ministers of "the connection," in mahogany
frames, hung upon the green walls. The furniture, though it was not
unduly abundant, filled up the tiny apartment, so that quite a
dislocation and rearrangement of everything was necessary before a chair
could be got for the visitor, and he got into it. Though it was rather
warm for October out of doors, a fire, large for the size of the room,
was burning in the fireplace, on either side of which was an easy-chair
and an invalid. The one fronting the light, and consequently fronting
the visitor, was Adelaide Tufton, the old minister's daughter, who had
been confined to that chair longer than Phoebe Tozer could remember;
and who, during that long seclusion, had knitted, as all Salem Chapel
believed, without intermission, nobody having ever yet succeeded in
discovering where the mysterious results of her labour went to. She was
knitting now, reclining back in the cushioned chair which had been made
for her, and was her shell and habitation. A very pale, emaciated,
eager-looking woman, not much above thirty, but looking, after half a
lifetime spent in that chair, any age that imagination might suggest; a
creature altogether separated from the world--separated from life, it
would be more proper to say--for nobody more interested in the world and
other people's share of it than Adelaide Tufton existed in Carlingford.
She had light-blue eyes, rather prominent, which lightened without
giving much expression to her perfectly colourless face. Her very hair
was pale, and lay in braids of a clayey yellow, too listless and dull to
be called brown, upon the thin temples, over which the thin white skin
seemed to be strained like an over-tight bandage. Somehow, however,
people who were used to seeing her, were not so sorry as they might have
been for Adelaide Tufton. No one could exactly say why; but she somehow
appeared, in the opinion of Salem Chapel, to indemnify herself for her
privations, and was treated, if without much sympathy, at least without
that ostentatious pity which is so galling to the helpless. Few people
could afford to be sorry for so quick-sighted and all-remembering an
observer; and the consequence was, that Adelaide, almost without knowing
it, had managed to neutralise her own disabilities, and to be
acknowledged as an equal in the general conflict, which she could enter
only with her sharp tongue and her quick eye.

It was Mr. Tufton himself who sat opposite--his large expanse of face,
with the white hair which had been apostrophised as venerable at so many
Salem tea-parties, and which Vincent himself had offered homage to,
looming dimly through the green shade of the geraniums, as he sat with
his back to the window. He had a green shade over his eyes besides, and
his head moved with a slight palsied tremor, which was now the only
remnant of that "visitation" which had saved his feelings, and dismissed
more benignly than Tozer and his brother deacons the old pastor from his
old pulpit. He sat very contentedly doing nothing, with his large feet
in large loose slippers, and his elbows supported on the arms of his
chair. By the evidence of Mrs. Tufton's spectacles, and the newspaper
lying on the table, it was apparent that she had been reading the
'Carlingford Gazette' to her helpless companions; and that humble
journal, which young Vincent had kicked to the other end of his room
before coming out, had made the morning pass very pleasantly to the
three secluded inmates of Siloam Cottage, which was the name of the old
minister's humble home. Mr. Tufton said "'umble 'ome," and so did his
wife. They came from storied Islington, both of them, and were of
highly respectable connections, not to say that Mrs. Tufton had a little
property as well; and, acting in laudable opposition to the general
practice of poor ministers' wives, had brought many dividends and few
children to the limited but comfortable fireside. Mr. Vincent could not
deny that it was comfortable in its way, and quite satisfied its owners,
as he sat down in the shade of the geraniums in front of the fire,
between Adelaide Tufton and her father; but, oh heavens! to think of
such a home as all that, after Homerton and high Nonconformist hopes,
could come to himself! The idea, however, was one which did not occur to
the young minister. He sat down compassionately, seeing no analogy
whatever between his own position and theirs; scarcely even seeing the
superficial contrast, which might have struck anybody, between his
active youth and their helplessness and suffering. He was neither
hard-hearted nor unsympathetic, but somehow the easy moral of that
contrast never occurred to him. Adelaide Tufton's bloodless countenance
conveyed an idea of age to Arthur Vincent; her father was really old.
The young man saw no grounds on which to form any comparison. It was
natural enough for the old man and ailing woman to be as they were, just
as it was natural for him, in the height of his early manhood, to
rejoice in his strength and youth.

"So there was a party at Mr. Tozer's last night--and you were there, Mr.
Vincent," said old Mrs. Tufton, a cheerful active old lady, with pink
ribbons in her cap, which asserted their superiority over the doubtful
light and the green shade of the geraniums. "Who did you have? The
Browns and the Pigeons, and--everybody else, of course. Now tell me, did
Mrs. Tozer make tea herself, or did she leave it to Phoebe?"

"As well as I can remember, she did it herself," said the young pastor.

"Exactly what I told you, mamma," said Adelaide, from her chair. "Mrs.
Tozer doesn't mean Phoebe to make tea this many a year. I daresay she
wants her to marry somebody, the little flirting thing. I suppose she
wore her pink, Mr. Vincent--and Mrs. Brown that dreadful red-and-green
silk of hers; and didn't they send you over a shape of jelly this
morning? Ha, ha! I told you so, mamma; that was why it never came to
me."

"Pray let me send it to you," cried Vincent, eagerly.

The offer was not rejected, though coquetted with for a few minutes.
Then Mr. Tufton broke in, in solemn bass.

"Adelaide, we shouldn't talk, my dear, of pinks and green silks.
Providence has laid you aside, my love, from temptations; and you
remember how often I used to say in early days, No doubt it was a
blessing, Jemima, coming when it did, to wean our girl from the world;
she might have been as fond of dress as other girls, and brought us to
ruin, but for her misfortune. Everything is for the best."

"Oh, bother!" said Adelaide, sharply--"I don't complain, and never did;
but everybody else finds my misfortune, as they call it, very easy to be
borne, Mr. Vincent--even papa, you see. There is a reason for
everything, to be sure; but how things that are hard and disagreeable
are always to be called for the best, I can't conceive. However, let us
return to Phoebe Tozer's pink dress. Weren't you rather stunned with
all their grandeur? You did not think we could do as much in Salem, did
you? Now tell me, who has Mrs. Brown taken in hand to do good to now? I
am sure she sent you to somebody; and you've been to see somebody this
morning," added the quick-witted invalid, "who has turned out different
from your expectations. Tell me all about it, please."

"Dear Adelaide does love to hear what's going on. It is almost the only
pleasure she has--and we oughtn't to grudge it, ought we?" said
Adelaide's mother.

"Stuff!" muttered Adelaide, in a perfectly audible aside. "Now I think
of it, I'll tell you who you've been to see. That woman in Back Grove
Street--there! What do you think of that for a production of Salem, Mr.
Vincent? But she does not really belong to Carlingford. She married
somebody who turned out badly, and now she's in hiding that he mayn't
find her; though most likely, if all be true, he does not want to find
her. That's her history. I never pretend to tell more than I know. Who
she was to begin with, or who he is, or whether Hilyard may be her real
name, or why she lives there and comes to Salem Chapel, I can't tell;
but that's the bones of her story, you know. If I were a clever romancer
like some people, I could have made it all perfect for you, but I prefer
the truth. Clever and queer, isn't she? So I have guessed by what
people say."

"Indeed, you seem to know a great deal more about her than I do," said
the astonished pastor.

"I daresay," assented Adelaide, calmly. "I have never seen her, however,
though I can form an idea of what she must be like, all the same. I put
things together, you see; and it is astonishing the number of scraps of
news I get. I shake them well down, and then the broken pieces come
together; and I never forget anything, Mr. Vincent," she continued,
pausing for a moment to give him a distinct look out of the pale-blue
eyes, which for the moment seemed to take a vindictive feline gleam.
"She's rather above the Browns and the Tozers, you understand. Somehow
or other, she's mixed up with Lady Western, whom they call the Young
Dowager, you know. I have not made that out yet, though I partly guess.
My lady goes to see her up two pairs of stairs in Back Grove Street. I
hope it does her ladyship good to see how the rest of the world manage
to live and get on."

"I am afraid, Adelaide, my dear," said Mr. Tufton, in his bass tones,
"that my young brother will not think this very improving conversation.
Dear Tozer was speaking to me yesterday about the sermon to the
children. I always preached them a sermon to themselves about this time
of the year. My plan has been to take the congregation in classes; the
young men--ah, and they're specially important, are the young men! Dear
Tozer suggested that some popular lectures now would not come amiss.
After a long pastorate like mine," said the good man, blandly,
unconscious that dear Tozer had already begun to suggest a severance of
that tie before gentle sickness did it for him, "a congregation may be
supposed to be a little unsettled,--without any offence to you, my dear
brother. If I could appear myself and show my respect to your ministry,
it would have a good effect, no doubt; but I am laid aside, laid aside,
brother Vincent! I can only help you with my prayers."

"But dear, dear Mr. Tufton!" cried his wife, "bless you, the chapel is
twice as full as it was six months ago--and natural too, with a nice
young man."

"My dear!" said the old minister in reproof. "Yes, quite
natural--curiosity about a stranger; but my young brother must not be
elated; nor discouraged when they drop off. A young pastor's start in
life is attended by many trials. There is always a little excitement at
first, and an appearance of seats letting and the ladies very polite to
you. Take it easily, my dear brother! Don't expect too much. In a year
or two--by-and-by, when things settle down--then you can see how it's
going to be."

"But don't you think it possible that things may never settle down, but
continue rising up instead?" said Mr. Vincent, making a little venture
in the inspiration of the moment.

Mr. Tufton shook his head and raised his large hands slowly, with a
deprecating regretful motion, to hold them over the fire. "Alas! he's
got the fever already," said the old minister. "My dear young brother,
you shall have my experience to refer to always. You're always welcome
to my advice. Dear Tozer said to me just yesterday, 'You point out the
pitfalls to him, Mr. Tufton, and give him your advice, and I'll take
care that he shan't go wrong outside,' says dear Tozer. Ah, an
invaluable man!"

"But a little disposed to interfere, I think," said Vincent, with an
irrestrainable inclination to show his profound disrelish of all the
advice which was about to be given him.

Mr. Tufton raised his heavy forefinger and shook it slowly. "No--no. Be
careful, my dear brother. You must keep well with your deacons. You must
not take up prejudices against them. Dear Tozer is a man of a
thousand--a man of a thousand! Dear Tozer, if you listen to him, will
keep you out of trouble. The trouble he takes and the money he spends
for Salem Chapel is, mark my words, unknown--and," added the old pastor,
awfully syllabling the long word in his solemn bass, "in-con-ceiv-able."

"He is a bore and an ass for all that," said the daring invalid
opposite, with perfect equanimity, as if uttering the most patent and
apparent of truths. "Don't you give in to him, Mr. Vincent. A pretty
business you will have with them all," she continued, dropping her
knitting-needles and lifting her pale-blue eyes, with their sudden green
gleam, to the face of the new-comer with a rapid perception of his
character, which, having no sympathy in it, but rather a certain
mischievous and pleased satisfaction in his probable discomfiture, gave
anything but comfort to the object of her observation. "You are
something new for them to pet and badger. I wonder how long they'll be
of killing Mr. Vincent. Papa's tough; but you remember, mamma, they
finished off the other man before us in two years."

"Oh, hush, Adelaide, hush! you'll frighten Mr. Vincent," cried the kind
little mother, with uneasy looks: "when he comes to see us and cheer us
up--as I am sure is very kind of him--it is a shame to put all sorts of
things in his head, as papa and you do. Never mind Adelaide, Mr.
Vincent, dear. Do your duty, and never fear anybody; that's always been
my maxim, and I've always found it answer. Not going away, are you?
Dear, dear! and we've had no wise talk at all, and never once asked for
your poor dear mother--quite well, I hope?--and Miss Susan? You should
have them come and see you, and cheer you up. Well, good morning, if you
must go; don't be long before you come again."

"And, my dear young brother, don't take up any prejudices," interposed
Mr. Tufton, in tremulous bass, as he pressed Vincent's half-reluctant
fingers in that large soft flabby ministerial hand. Adelaide added
nothing to these valedictions; but when she too had received his
leave-taking, and he had emerged from the shadow of the geraniums, the
observer paused once more in her knitting. "This one will not hold out
two years," said Adelaide, calmly, to herself, no one else paying any
attention; and she returned to her work with the zest of a spectator at
the commencement of an exciting drama. She did double work all the
afternoon under the influence of this refreshing stimulant. It was
quite a new interest in her life.

Meanwhile young Vincent left the green gates of Siloam Cottage with no
very comfortable feelings--with feelings, indeed, the reverse of
comfortable, yet conscious of a certain swell and elevation in his mind
at the same moment. It was for him to show the entire community of
Carlingford the difference between his reign and the old _regime_. It
was for him to change the face of affairs--to reduce Tozer into his due
place of subordination, and to bring in an influx of new life,
intelligence, and enlightenment over the prostrate butterman. The very
sordidness and contraction of the little world into which he had just
received so distinct a view, promoted the revulsion of feeling which now
cheered him. The aspiring young man could as soon have consented to lose
his individuality altogether as to acknowledge the most distant
possibility of accepting Tozer as his guide, philosopher, and friend. He
went back again through Grove Street, heated and hastened on his way by
those impatient thoughts. When he came as far as Salem, he could not but
pause to look at it with its pinched gable and mean little belfry,
innocent of a bell. The day was overclouded, and no clearness of
atmosphere relieved the aspect of the shabby chapel, with its black
railing, and locked gates, and dank flowerless grass inside. To see
anything venerable or sacred in the aspect of such a place, required an
amount of illusion and glamour which the young minister could not summon
into his eyes. It was not the centre of light in a dark place, the
simple tribune from which the people's preacher should proclaim, to the
awe and conviction of the multitude, that Gospel once preached to the
poor, of which he flattered himself he should be the truest messenger in
Carlingford. Such had been the young man's dreams in Homerton--dreams
mingled, it is true, with personal ambition, but full notwithstanding of
generous enthusiasm. No--nothing of the kind. Only Salem Chapel, with so
many pews let, and so many still to be disposed of, and Tozer a guardian
angel at the door. Mr. Vincent was so far left to himself as to give
vent to an impatient exclamation as he turned away. But still matters
were not hopeless. He himself was a very different man from Mr. Tufton.
Kindred spirits there must surely be in Carlingford to answer to the
call of his. Another day might dawn for the Nonconformists, who were not
aware of their own dignity. With this thought he retraced his steps a
little, and, with an impulse which he did not explain to himself,
threaded his way up a narrow lane and emerged into Back Grove Street,
about the spot where he had lately paid his pastoral visit, and made so
unexpected an acquaintance. This woman--or should he not say lady?--was
a kind of first-fruits of his mission. The young man looked up with a
certain wistful interest at the house in which she lived. She was
neither young nor fair, it is true, but she interested the youthful
Nonconformist, who was not too old for impulses of chivalry, and who
could not forget her poor fingers scarred with her rough work. He had no
other motive for passing the house but that of sympathy and compassion
for the forlorn brave creature who was so unlike her surroundings; and
no throbbing pulse or trembling nerve forewarned Arthur Vincent of the
approach of fate.

At that moment, however, fate was approaching in the shape of a handsome
carriage, which made quite an exaggeration of echo in this narrow
back-street, which rang back every jingle of the harness and dint of the
hoofs from every court and opening. It drew up before Mrs. Hilyard's
door--at the door of the house, at least, in which Mrs. Hilyard was a
humble lodger; and while Vincent slowly approached, a brilliant vision
suddenly appeared before him, rustling forth upon the crowded pavement,
where the dirty children stood still to gape at her. A woman--a lady--a
beautiful dazzling creature, resplendent in the sweetest English roses,
the most delicate bewildering bloom. Though it was but for a moment, the
bewildered young minister had time to note the dainty foot, the daintier
hand, the smiling sunshiny eyes, the air of conscious supremacy, which
was half command and half entreaty--an ineffable combination. That
vision descended out of the heavenly chariot upon the mean pavement just
as Mr. Vincent came up; and at the same moment a ragged boy, struck
speechless, like the young minister, by the apparition, planted himself
full in her way with open mouth and staring eyes, too much overpowered
by sudden admiration to perceive that he stopped the path. Scarcely
aware what he was doing, as much beauty-struck as his victim, Vincent,
with a certain unconscious fury, seized the boy by the collar, and
swung him impatiently off the pavement, with a feeling of positive
resentment against the imp, whose rags were actually touching those
sacred splendid draperies. The lady made a momentary pause, turned half
round, smiled with a gracious inclination of her head, and entered at
the open door, leaving the young pastor in an incomprehensible ecstasy,
with his hat off, and all his pulses beating loud in his ears, riveted,
as the romancers say, to the pavement. When the door shut he came to
himself, stared wildly into the face of the next passenger who came
along the narrow street, and then, becoming aware that he still stood
uncovered, grew violently red, put on his hat, and went off at a great
pace. But what was the use of going off? The deed was done. The world on
the other side of these prancing horses was a different world from that
on this side. Those other matters, of which he had been thinking so
hotly, had suddenly faded into a background and accessories to the one
triumphant figure which occupied all the scene. He scarcely asked
himself who was that beautiful vision? The fact of her existence was at
the moment too overpowering for any secondary inquiries. He had seen
her--and lo! the universe was changed. The air tingled softly with the
sound of prancing horses and rolling wheels, the air breathed an
irresistible soft perfume, which could nevermore die out of it, the air
rustled with the silken thrill of those womanly robes. There she had
enthroned herself--not in his startled heart, but in the palpitating
world, which formed in a moment's time into one great background and
framework for that beatific form.

What the poor young man had done to be suddenly assailed and carried off
his feet by this wonderful and unexpected apparition, we are unable to
say. He seemed to have done nothing to provoke it: approaching quietly
as any man might do, pondering grave thoughts of Salem Chapel, and how
he was to make his post tenable, to be transfixed all at once and
unawares by that fairy lance, was a spite of fortune which nobody could
have predicted. But the thing was done. He went home to hide his
stricken head, as was natural; tried to read, tried to think of a
popular series of lectures, tried to lay plans for his campaign and
heroic desperate attempts to resuscitate the shopkeeping Dissenterism of
Carlingford into a lofty Nonconformist ideal. But vain were the efforts.
Wherever he lifted his eyes, was not She there, all-conquering and
glorious? when he did not lift his eyes, was not she everywhere Lady
Paramount of the conscious world? Womankind in general, which had never,
so to speak, entered his thoughts before, had produced much trouble to
poor Arthur Vincent since his arrival in Carlingford. But Phoebe
Tozer, pink and blooming--Mrs. Hilyard, sharp and strange--Adelaide
Tufton, pale spectator of a life with which she had nothing to do--died
off like shadows, and left no sign of their presence. Who was She?




CHAPTER IV.


After the remarkable encounter which had thus happened to the young
minister, life went on with him in the dullest routine for some days.
Thursday came, and he had to go to Mrs. Brown's tea-party, where, in the
drawing-room up-stairs, over the Devonshire Dairy, after tea, and music,
and the diversions of the evening, he conducted prayers to the great
secret satisfaction of the hostess, who felt that the superior piety of
her entertainment entirely made up for any little advantage in point of
gentility which Mrs. Tozer, with a grown-up daughter fresh from a
boarding-school, might have over her. On Friday evening there was the
singing-class at the chapel, which Mr. Vincent was expected to look in
upon, and from which he had the privilege of walking home with Miss
Tozer. When he arrived with his blooming charge at the private door, the
existence of which he had not hitherto been aware of, Tozer himself
appeared, to invite the young pastor to enter. This time it was the
butterman's unadorned domestic hearth to which Mr. Vincent was
introduced. This happy privacy was in a little parlour, which, being on
the same floor with the butter-shop, naturally was not without a
reminiscence of the near vicinity of all those hams and cheeses--a room
nearly blocked up by the large family-table, at which, to the disgust
of Phoebe, the apprentices sat at meal-times along with the family.
One little boy, distinguished out of doors by a red worsted comforter,
was, besides Phoebe, the only member of the family itself now at home;
the others being two sons, one in Australia, and the other studying for
a minister, as Mrs. Tozer had already informed her pastor, with motherly
pride. Mrs. Tozer sat in an easy-chair by the fire darning stockings on
this October night; her husband, opposite to her, had been looking over
his greasy books, one of which lay open upon a little writing-desk,
where a bundle of smaller ones in red leather, with "Tozer,
Cheesemonger," stamped on them in gilt letters, lay waiting Phoebe's
arrival to be made up. The Benjamin of the house sat half-way down the
long table with his slate working at his lessons. The margin of space
round this long table scarcely counted in the aspect of the room. There
was space enough for chairs to be set round it, and that was all: the
table with its red-and-blue cover and the faces appearing above it,
constituted the entire scene. Mr. Vincent stood uneasily at a corner
when he was brought into the apartment, and distinctly placed himself at
table, as if at a meal, when he sat down.

"Do you now take off your greatcoat, and make yourself comfortable,"
said Mrs. Tozer; "there's a bit of supper coming presently. This is just
what I like, is this. A party is very well in its way, Mr. Vincent, sir;
but when a gen'leman comes in familiar, and takes us just as we are,
that's what I like. We never can be took wrong of an evening, Tozer and
me; there's always a bit of something comfortable for supper; and after
the shop's shut in them long evenings, time's free. Phoebe, make haste
and take off your things. What a colour you've got, to be sure, with the
night air! I declare, Pa, somebody must have been saying something to
her, or she'd never look so bright."

"I daresay there's more things than music gets talked of at the
singing," said Tozer, thus appealed to. "But she'd do a deal better if
she'd try to improve her mind than take notice what the young fellows
says."

"Oh, Pa, the idea! and before Mr. Vincent too," cried Phoebe--"to think
I should ever dream of listening to anything that _anybody_ might choose
to say!"

Vincent, to whom the eyes of the whole family turned, grinned a feeble
smile, but, groaning in his mind, was totally unequal to the effort of
saying anything. After a moment's pause of half-disappointed
expectation, Phoebe disappeared to take off her bonnet; and Mrs.
Tozer, bestirring herself, cleared away the desk and books, and went
into the kitchen to inquire into the supper. The minister and the deacon
were accordingly left alone.

"Three more pews applied for this week--fifteen sittings in all," said
Mr. Tozer; "that's what I call satisfactory, that is. We mustn't let the
steam go down--not on no account. You keep well at them of Sundays, Mr.
Vincent, and trust to the managers, sir, to keep 'em up to their dooty.
Me and Mr. Tufton was consulting the other day. He says as we oughtn't
to spare you, and you oughtn't to spare yourself. There hasn't been such
a opening not in our connection for fifteen year. We all look to you to
go into it, Mr. Vincent. If all goes as I expect, and you keep up as
you're doing, I see no reason why we shouldn't be able to put another
fifty to the salary next year."

"Oh!" said poor Vincent, with a miserable face. He had been rather
pleased to hear about the "opening," but this matter-of-fact
encouragement and stimulus threw him back into dismay and disgust.

"Yes," said the deacon, "though I wouldn't advise you, as a young man
settin' out in life, to calculate upon it, yet we all think it more than
likely; but if you was to ask my advice, I'd say to give it 'em a little
more plain--meaning the Church folks. It's expected of a new man. I'd
touch 'em up in the State-Church line, Mr. Vincent, if I was you. Give
us a coorse upon the anomalies, and that sort of thing--the bishops in
their palaces, and the fisherman as was the start of it all; there's a
deal to be done in that way. It always tells; and my opinion is as you
might secure the most part of the young men and thinkers, and them as
can see what's what, if you lay it on pretty strong. Not," added the
deacon, remembering in time to add that necessary salve to the
conscience--"not as I would have you neglect what's more important; but,
after all, what is more important, Mr. Vincent, than freedom of opinion
and choosing your own religious teacher? You can't put gospel truth in a
man's mind till you've freed him out of them bonds. It stands to
reason--as long as he believes just what he's told, and has it all made
out for him the very words he's to pray, there may be feelin', sir, but
there can't be no spiritual understandin' in that man."

"Well, one can't deny that there have been enlightened men in the Church
of England," said the young Nonconformist, with lofty candour. "The
inconsistencies of the human mind are wonderful; and it is coming to be
pretty clearly understood in the intellectual world, that a man may show
the most penetrating genius, and even the widest liberality, and yet be
led a willing slave in the bonds of religious rite and ceremony. One
cannot understand it, it is true; but in our clearer atmosphere we are
bound to exercise Christian charity. Great as the advantages are on our
side of the question, I would not willingly hurt the feelings of a
sincere Churchman, who, for anything I know, may be the best of men."

Mr. Tozer paused with a "humph!" of uncertainty; rather dazzled with the
fine language, but doubtful of the sentiment. At length light seemed to
dawn upon the excellent butterman. "Bless my soul! that's a new view,"
said Tozer; "that's taking the superior line over them! My impression is
as that would tell beautiful. Eh! it's famous, that is! I've heard a
many gentlemen attacking the Church, like, from down below, and giving
it her about her money and her greatness, and all that; but our clearer
atmosphere--there's the point! I always knew as you was a clever young
man, Mr. Vincent, and expected a deal from you; but that's a new view,
that is!"

"Oh, Pa, dear! don't be always talking about chapel business," said Miss
Phoebe, coming in. "I am sure Mr. Vincent is sick to death of Salem. I
am sure his heart is in some other place now; and if you bore him always
about the chapel, he'll never, _never_ take to Carlingford. Oh, Mr.
Vincent, I am sure you know it is quite true!"

"Indeed," said the young minister, with a sudden recollection, "I can
vouch for my heart being in Carlingford, and nowhere else;" and as he
spoke his colour rose. Phoebe clapped her hands with a little
semblance of confusion.

"Oh, la!" cried that young lady, "that is _quite_ as good as a
confession that you have lost it, Mr. Vincent. Oh, I _am_ so interested!
I wonder who it can be!"

"Hush, child; I daresay we shall know before long," said Mrs. Tozer, who
had also rejoined the domestic party; "and don't you colour up or look
ashamed, Mr. Vincent. Take my word, it's the very best a young minister
can do. To be sure, where there's a quantity of young ladies in a
congregation, it sometimes makes a little dispeace; but there ain't to
say many to choose from in Salem."

"La, mamma, how _can_ you think it's a lady in Salem?" cried Phoebe,
in a flutter of consciousness.

"Oh, you curious thing!" cried Mrs. Tozer: "she'll never rest, Mr.
Vincent, till she's found it all out. She always was, from a child, a
dreadful one for finding out a secret. But don't you trouble yourself;
it's the very best thing a young minister can do."

Poor Vincent made a hasty effort to exculpate himself from the soft
impeachment, but with no effect. Smiles, innuendoes, a succession of
questions asked by Phoebe, who retired, whenever she had made her
remark, with conscious looks and pink blushes, perpetually renewed this
delightful subject. The unlucky young man retired upon Tozer. In
desperation he laid himself open to the less troublesome infliction of
the butterman's advice. In the mean time the table was spread, and
supper appeared in most substantial and savoury shape; the only drawback
being, that whenever the door was opened, the odours of bacon and cheese
from the shop came in like a musty shadow of the boiled ham and hot
sausages within.

"I am very partial to your style, Mr. Vincent," said the deacon;
"there's just one thing I'd like to observe, sir, if you'll excuse _me_.
I'd give 'em a coorse; there's nothing takes like a coorse in our
connection. Whether it's on a chapter or a book of Scripture, or on a
perticklar doctrine, I'd make a pint of giving 'em a coorse if it was
me. There was Mr. Bailey, of Parson's Green, as was so popular before he
married--he had a historical coorse in the evenings, and a coorse upon
the eighth of Romans in the morning; and it was astonishing to see how
they took. I walked over many and many's the summer evening myself, he
kep' up the interest so. There ain't a cleverer man in our body, nor
wasn't a better liked as he was then."

"And now I understand he's gone away--what was the reason?" asked Mr.
Vincent.

Tozer shrugged his shoulders and shook his head. "All along of the
women: they didn't like his wife; and my own opinion is, he fell off
dreadful. Last time I heard him, I made up my mind I'd never go back
again--me that was such an admirer of his; and the managers found the
chapel was falling off, and a deputation waited on him; and, to be sure,
he saw it his duty to go."

"And, oh, she was so sweetly pretty!" cried Miss Phoebe: "but pray,
pray, Mr. Vincent, don't look so pale. If you marry a pretty lady, we'll
all be so kind to her! We shan't grudge her our minister; we shall----"

Here Miss Phoebe paused, overcome by her emotions.

"I do declare there never was such a child," said Mrs. Tozer: "it's none
of your business, Phoebe. She's a great deal too feelin', Mr. Vincent.
But I don't approve, for my part, of a minister marrying a lady as is
too grand for her place, whatever Phoebe may say. It's her that should
teach suchlike as us humility and simple ways; and a fine lady isn't no
way suitable. Not to discourage you, Mr. Vincent, I haven't a doubt, for
my part, that you'll make a nice choice."

"I have not the least intention of trying the experiment," said poor
Vincent, with a faint smile; then, turning to his deacon, he plunged
into the first subject that occurred to him. "Do you know a Mrs. Hilyard
in Back Grove Street?" asked the young minister. "I went to see her the
other day. Who is she, or where does she belong to, can you tell
me?--and which of your great ladies in Carlingford is it," he added,
with a little catching of his breath after a momentary pause, "who
visits that poor lady? I saw a carriage at her door."

"Meaning the poor woman at the back of the chapel?" said Tozer--"I don't
know nothing of her, except that I visited there, sir, as you might do,
in the way of dooty. Ah! I fear she's in the gall of bitterness, Mr.
Vincent; she didn't take my 'umble advice, sir, not as a Christian
ought. But she comes to the chapel regular enough; and you may be the
means of putting better thoughts into her mind; and as for our great
ladies in Carlingford," continued Mr. Tozer, with the air of an
authority, "never a one of them, I give you my word, would go out of her
way a-visiting to one of the chapel folks. They're a deal too bigoted
for that, especially them at St. Roque's."

"Oh, Pa, how can you say so," cried Phoebe, "when it's very well known
the ladies go everywhere, where the people are very, very poor? but then
Mr. Vincent said a poor _lady_. Was it a nice carriage? The Miss
Wodehouses always walk, and so does Mrs. Glen, and all the Strangeways.
Oh, I know, it was the young Dowager--that pretty, pretty lady, you
know, mamma, that gives the grand parties, and lives in Grange Lane. I
saw her carriage going up the lane by the chapel once. Oh, Mr. Vincent,
wasn't she very, _very_ pretty, with blue eyes and brown hair?"

"I could not tell you what kind of eyes and hair they were," said Mr.
Vincent, trying hard to speak indifferently, and quite succeeding so far
as Phoebe Tozer was concerned; for who could venture to associate the
minister of Salem, even as a victim, with the bright eyes of Lady
Western? "I thought it strange to see her there, whoever she was."

"Oh, how insensible you are!" murmured Phoebe, across the table.
Perhaps, considering all things, it was not strange that Phoebe should
imagine her own pink bloom to have dimmed the young pastor's
appreciation of other beauty.

"But it was Mrs. Hilyard I inquired about, and not this Lady--Lady what,
Miss Phoebe?" asked the reverend hypocrite; "I don't profess to be
learned in titles, but hers is surely a strange one. I thought dowager
was another word for an old woman."

"She's a beautiful young creature," broke in the butterman. "I mayn't
approve of such goings-on, but I can't shut my eyes. She deals with me
regular, and I can tell you the shop looks like a different place when
them eyes of hers are in it. She's out of our line, and she's out of
your line, Mr. Vincent," added Tozer, apologetically, coming down from
his sudden enthusiasm, "or I mightn't say as much as I do say, for she's
gay, and always a-giving parties, and spending her life in company, as I
don't approve of; but to look in her face, you couldn't say a word
against her--nor I couldn't. She might lead a man out of his wits, and I
wouldn't not to say blame him. If the angels are nicer to look at, it's
a wonder to me!" Having reached to this pitch of admiration, the
alarmed butterman came to a sudden pause, looked round him somewhat
dismayed, wiped his forehead, rubbed his hands, and evidently felt that
he had committed himself, and was at the mercy of his audience. Little
did the guilty Tozer imagine that never before--not when giving counsel
upon chapel business in the height of wisdom, or complimenting the
sermon as only a chapel-manager, feeling in his heart that the seats
were letting, could--had he spoken so much to the purpose in young
Vincent's hearing, or won so much sympathy from the minister. As for the
female part of the company, they were at first too much amazed for
speech. "Upon my word, Papa!" burst from the lips of the half-laughing,
half-angry Phoebe. Mrs. Tozer, who had been cutting bread with a large
knife, hewed at her great loaf in silence, and not till that occupation
was over divulged her sentiments.

"Some bread, Mr. Vincent?" said at last that injured woman: "that's how
it is with all you men. Niver a one, however you may have been brought
up, nor whatever pious ways you may have been used to, can stand out
against a pretty face. Thank goodness, _we_ know better. Beauty's but
skin-deep, Mr. Vincent; and, for my part, I can't see the difference
between one pair o' eyes and another. I daresay I see as well out of
mine as Lady Western does out o' hers, though Tozer goes on about 'em.
It's a mercy for the world, women ain't carried away so; and to hear a
man as is the father of a family, and ought to set an example, a-talking
like this in his own house! What is the minister to think, Tozer? and
Phoebe, a girl as is as likely to take up notions about her looks as
most? It's what I didn't expect from you."

"La, mamma! as if there was any likeness between Lady Western and me!"
cried Phoebe, lifting a not-unexpectant face across the table. But Mr.
Vincent was not equal to the occasion. In that _locale_, and under these
circumstances, a tolerable breadth of compliment would not have shocked
anybody's feelings; but the pastor neglected his opportunities. He sat
silent, and made no reply to Phoebe's look. He even at this moment, if
truth must be told, devoted himself to the well-filled plate which Mrs.
Tozer's hospitality had set before him. He would fain have made a
diversion in poor Tozer's favour had anything occurred to him in the
thrill of sudden excitement which Tozer's declaration had surprised him
into. As it was, tingling with anxiety to hear more of that unknown
enchantress, whose presence made sunshine even in the butterman's shop,
no indifferent words would find their way to Vincent's lips. So he
bestowed his attentions instead upon the comfortable supper to which
everybody around him, quite unexcited by this little interlude, was
doing full justice, and, not venturing to ask, listened with a
palpitating heart.

"You see, Mr. Vincent," resumed Mrs. Tozer, "that title of 'the young
Dowager' has been given to Lady Western by them as is her chief friends
in Carlingford. Such little things comes to our knowledge as they
mightn't come to other folks in our situation, by us serving the best
families. There's but two families in Grange Lane as don't deal with
Tozer, and one of them's a new-comer as knows no better, and the other a
stingy old bachelor, as we wouldn't go across the road to get his
custom. A well-kept house must have its butter, and its cheese, and its
ham regular; but when there's but a man and a maid, and them nigh as
bilious as the master, and picking bits of cheese as one never heard the
name of, and as has to be sent to town for, or to the Italian shop, it
stands to reason neither me nor Tozer cares for a customer like that."

"Oh, Ma, what _does_ Mr. Vincent care about the customers?" cried
Phoebe, in despair.

"He might, then, before all's done," said the deaconess. "We couldn't be
as good friends to the chapel, nor as serviceable, nor as well thought
on in our connection, if it wasn't for the customers. So you see, sir,
Lady Western, she's a young lady not a deal older than my Phoebe, but
by reason of having married an old man, she has a step-son twice as old
as herself, and he's married; and so this gay pretty creature here,
she's the Dowager Lady Western. I've seen her with _young_ Lady Western,
her step-daughter-in-law, and young Lady Western was a deal older, and
more serious-looking, and knew twenty times more of life than the
Dowager--and you may be sure she don't lose the opportunity to laugh at
it neither--and so that's how the name arose."

"Thank you for the explanation; and I suppose, of course, she lives in
Grange Lane," said the pastor, still bending with devotion over his
plate.

"Dear, dear, you don't eat nothink, Mr. Vincent," cried his benevolent
hostess; "that comes of study, as I'm always a-telling Tozer. A deal
better, says I, to root the minister out, and get him to move about for
the good of his health, than to put him up to sermons and coorses, when
we're all as pleased as Punch to start with. She lives in Grange Lane,
to be sure, as they most all do as is anything in Carlingford. Fashion's
all--but I like a bit of stir and life myself, and couldn't a-bear them
close walls. But it would be news in Salem that we was spending our
precious time a-talking over a lady like Lady Western; and as for the
woman at the back of the chapel, don't you be led away to go to
everybody as Mrs. Brown sends you to, Mr. Vincent. She's a good soul,
but she's always a-picking up somebody. Tozer's been called up at twelve
o'clock, when we were all a-bed, to see somebody as was dying; and there
was no dying about it, but only Mrs. Brown's way. My son, being at his
eddication for a minister, makes me feel mother-like to a young pastor,
Mr. Vincent. I'd be grateful to anybody as would give my boy warning
when it comes to be his time."

"I almost wonder," said Vincent, with a little natural impatience, "that
you did not struggle on with Mr. Tufton for a little longer, till your
son's education was finished."

Mrs. Tozer held up her head with gratified pride. "He'll be two years
before he's ready, and there's never no telling what may happen in that
time," said the pleased mother, forgetting how little favourable to her
guest was any anticipated contingency. The words were very innocently
spoken, but they had their effect upon Vincent. He made haste to
extricate himself from the urgent hospitality which surrounded him. He
was deafer than ever to Miss Phoebe's remarks, and listened with a
little impatience to Tozer's wisdom. As soon as he could manage it, he
left them, with abundant material for his thoughts. "There's never no
telling what may happen in that time," rang in his ears as he crossed
George Street to his lodging, and the young minister could scarcely
check the disgust and impatience which were rising in his mind. In all
the pride of his young intellect, to be advised by Tozer--to have
warning stories told him of that unfortunate brother in Parson's Green,
whose pretty wife made herself obnoxious to the deacons' wives--to have
the support afforded by the butterman to the chapel thrown in his face
with such an undisguised claim upon his gratitude--oh heaven, was this
what Homerton was to come to? Perhaps he had been brought here, in all
the young flush of his hopes, only to have the life crushed out of him
by those remorseless chapel-managers, and room made over his tarnished
fame and mortified expectations--over his body, as the young man said to
himself in unconscious heroics--for young Tozer's triumphant entrance.
On the whole, it was not to be supposed that to see himself at the mercy
of such a limited and jealous coterie--people proud of their liberality
to the chapel, and altogether unable to comprehend the feelings of a
sensitive and cultivated mind--could be an agreeable prospect to the
young man. Their very approbation chafed him; and if he went beyond
their level, or exceeded their narrow limit, what mercy was he to
expect, what justice, what measure of comprehension? He went home with a
bitterness of disgust in his mind far more intense and tragical than
appeared to be at all necessary in the circumstances, and which only the
fact that this was his first beginning in real life, and that his
imagination had never contemplated the prominent position of the
butter-shop and the Devonshire Dairy, in what he fondly called his new
sphere, could have justified. Perhaps no new sphere ever came up to the
expectations of the neophyte; but to come, if not with too much gospel,
yet with an intellectual Christian mission, an evangelist of refined
nonconformity, an apostle of thought and religious opinion, and to sink
suddenly into "coorses" of sermons and statistics of seat-letting in
Salem--into tea-parties of deacons' wives, and singing-classes--into the
complacent society of those good people who were conscious of doing so
much for the chapel and supporting the minister--that was a downfall not
to be lightly thought of. Salem itself, and the new pulpit, which had a
short time ago represented to poor Vincent that tribune from which he
was to influence the world, that point of vantage which was all a true
man needed for the making of his career, dwindled into a miserable scene
of trade before his disenchanted eyes--a preaching shop, where his
success was to be measured by the seat-letting, and his soul decanted
out into periodical issue under the seal of Tozer & Co. Such, alas! were
the indignant thoughts with which, the old Adam rising bitter and
strong within him, the young Nonconformist hastened home.

And She was Lady Western--the gayest and brightest and highest luminary
in all the society of Carlingford. As well love the moon, who no longer
descends to Endymion, as lift presumptuous eyes to that sweeter planet
which was as much out of reach of the Dissenting minister. Poor fellow!
his room did not receive a very cheerful inmate when he shut the door
upon the world and sat down with his thoughts.




CHAPTER V.


It was about this time, when Mr. Vincent was deeply cast down about his
prospects, and saw little comfort before or around him, and when,
consequently, an interest apart from himself, and which could detach his
thoughts from Salem and its leading members, was of importance, that his
mother's letters began to grow specially interesting. Vincent could not
quite explain how it was, but unquestionably those female epistles had
expanded all at once; and instead of the limited household atmosphere
hitherto breathing in them--an atmosphere confined by the strait cottage
walls, shutting in the little picture which the absent son knew so well,
and in which usually no figure appeared but those of his pretty sister
Susan, and their little servant, and a feminine neighbour or
two--instead of those strict household limits, the world, as we have
said, had expanded round the widow's pen; the cottage walls or windows
seemed to have opened out to disclose the universe beyond: life itself,
and words the symbols of life, seemed quickened and running in a fuller
current; and the only apparent reason for all this revolution was that
one new acquaintance had interrupted Mrs. Vincent's seclusion,--one only
visitor, who, from an unexpected call, recorded with some wonderment a
month or two before, had gained possession of the house apparently, and
was perpetually referred to--by Susan, in her gradually shortening
letters, with a certain timidity and reluctance to pronounce his name;
by the mother with growing frequency and confidence. Vincent, a little
jealous of this new influence, had out of the depths of his own
depression written with some impatience to ask who this Mr. Fordham was,
and how he had managed to establish himself so confidentially in the
cottage, when his mother's letter astounded him with the following piece
of news:--

"MY DEAREST BOY,--Mr. Fordham is, or at least will be--or, if I must be
cautious, as your poor dear papa always warned me I should--wishes very
much, and I hope will succeed in being--your brother, my own Arthur.
This is sudden news, but you know, and I have often told you, that a
crisis always does seem to arrive suddenly; however much you may have
been looking for it, or making up your mind to it, it does come like a
blow at the time; and no doubt there is something in human nature to
account for it, if I was a philosopher, like your dear papa and you.
Yes, my dear boy, that is how it is. Of course, I have known for some
time past that he must have had a motive--no mother could long remain
ignorant of that; and I can't say but what, liking Mr. Fordham so much,
and seeing him _every way so unexceptionable_, except, perhaps, in the
way of means, which we know nothing about, and which I have always
thought a secondary consideration to character, as I always brought up
my children to think, I was very much pleased. For you know, my dear
boy, life is uncertain with the strongest; and I am becoming an old
woman, and you will marry no doubt, and what is to become of Susan
unless she does the same? So I confess I was pleased to see Mr.
Fordham's inclinations showing themselves. And now, dear Arthur, I've
given them my blessing, and they are as happy as ever they can be, and
nothing is wanting to Susan's joy but your sympathy. I need not suggest
to my dear boy to write a few words to his sister to make her feel that
he shares our happiness; for Providence has blessed me in affectionate
children, and I can trust the instincts of my Arthur's heart; and oh! my
dear son, how thankful I ought to be, and how deeply I ought to feel
God's blessings! He has been a father to the fatherless, and the
strength of the widow. To think that before old age comes upon me, and
while I am still able to enjoy the sight of your prosperity, I should
have the happiness of seeing you comfortably settled, and in the way to
do your Master's work, and make yourself a good position, and Susan so
happily provided for, and instead of losing her, a new son to
love--indeed, I am overpowered, and can scarcely hold up my head under
my blessings.

"Write immediately, my dearest boy, that we may have the comfort of your
concurrence and sympathy, and I am always, with much love,

"My Arthur's loving mother,

"E. S. VINCENT.

"_P. S._--Mr. Fordham's account of his circumstances seems quite
satisfactory. He is not in any profession, but has enough, he says, to
live on very comfortably, and is to give me more particulars afterwards;
which, indeed, I am ashamed to think he could imagine necessary, as it
looks like want of trust, and as if Susan's happiness was not the first
thing with us--but indeed I must learn to be prudent and
_self-interested_ for your sakes."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was with no such joyful feelings as his mother's that Vincent read
this letter. Perhaps it was the jealousy with which he had heard of this
unknown Mr. Fordham suddenly jumping into the friendship of the cottage,
which made him contemplate with a most glum and suspicious aspect the
stranger's promotion into the love of Susan, and the motherly regard of
Mrs. Vincent. Hang the fellow! who was he? the young minister murmured
over his spoiled breakfast: and there appeared to him in a halo of sweet
memories, as he had never seen them in reality, the simple graces of his
pretty sister, who was as much above the region of the Phoebe Tozers
as that ineffable beauty herself who had seized with a glance the vacant
throne of poor Arthur Vincent's heart. There was nothing ineffable about
Susan--but her brother had seen no man even in Homerton whom he would
willingly see master of her affections; and he was equally startled,
dissatisfied, and alarmed by this information. Perhaps his mother's
unworldliness was excessive. He imagined that _he_ would have exacted
more positive information about the fortunes of a stranger who had
suddenly appeared without any special business there, who had no
profession, and who might disappear lightly as he came, breaking poor
Susan's heart. Mr. Vincent forgot entirely the natural process by which,
doubtless, his mother's affections had been wooed and won as well as
Susan's. To him it was a stranger who had crept into the house, and
gained ascendancy there. Half in concern for Susan, half in jealousy for
Susan's brother eclipsed, but believing himself to be entirely actuated
by the former sentiment, the young minister wrote his mother a hurried,
anxious, not too good-tempered note, begging her to think how important
a matter this was, and not to come to too rapid a conclusion; and after
he had thus relieved his feelings, went out to his day's work in a more
than usually uncomfortable frame of mind. Mrs. Vincent congratulated
herself upon her son's happy settlement, as well as upon her daughter's
engagement. What if Mr. Fordham should turn out as unsatisfactory as
Salem Chapel? His day's work was a round of visits, which were not very
particularly to Mr. Vincent's mind. It was the day for his weekly call
upon Mr. Tufton and various other members of the congregation not more
attractive; and at Siloam Cottage he was reminded of Mrs. Hilyard, whom
he had not seen again. Here at least was something to be found different
from the ordinary level. He went up to Back Grove Street, not without a
vague expectation in his mind, wondering if that singular stranger would
look as unlike the rest of his flock to-day as she had done on the
former occasion. But when Vincent emerged into the narrow street, what
was that unexpected object which threw the young man into such sudden
agitation? His step quickened unconsciously into the rapid silent stride
of excitement. He was at the shabby door before any of the onlookers had
so much as perceived him in the street. For once more the narrow
pavement owned a little tattered crowd gazing at the pawing horses, the
big footman, the heavenly chariot; and doubtless the celestial visitor
must be within.

Mr. Vincent did not pause to think whether he ought to disturb the
interview which, no doubt, was going on up-stairs. He left himself no
time to consider punctilios, or even to think what was right in the
matter. He went up with that swell of excitement somehow winging his
feet and making his footsteps light. How sweet that low murmur of
conversation within as he reached the door? Another moment, and Mrs.
Hilyard herself opened it, looking out with some surprise, her dark thin
head, in its black lace kerchief, standing out against the bit of shabby
drab-coloured wall visible through the opening of the door. A look of
surprise for one moment, then a gleam of something like mirth lighted in
the dark eyes, and the thin lines about her mouth moved, though no smile
came. "It is you, Mr. Vincent?--come in," she said. "I should not have
admitted any other visitor, but you shall come in, as you are my ghostly
adviser. Sit down. My dear, this gentleman is my minister and spiritual
guide."

And She, sitting there in all her splendour, casting extraordinary
lights of beauty round her upon the mean apartment, perfuming the air
and making it musical with that rustle of woman's robes which had never
been out of poor Vincent's ears since he saw her first;--She lifted her
lovely face, smiled, and bowed her beautiful head to the young man, who
could have liked to go down on his knees, not to ask anything, but
simply to worship. As he dared not do that, he sat down awkwardly upon
the chair Mrs. Hilyard pointed to, and said, with embarrassment, that he
feared he had chosen a wrong time for his visit, and would return
again--but nevertheless did not move from where he was.

"No, indeed; I am very glad to see you. My visitors are not so many,
nowadays, that I can afford to turn one from the door because another
chooses to come the same day. My dear, you understand Mr. Vincent has
had the goodness to take charge of my spiritual affairs," said the
mistress of the room, sitting down, in her dark poor dress, beside her
beautiful visitor, and laying her thin hands, still marked with traces
of the coarse blue colour which rubbed off her work, and of the scars of
the needle, upon the table where that work lay. "Thank heaven that's a
luxury the poorest of us needs not deny herself. I liked your sermon
last Sunday, Mr. Vincent. That about the fashion of treating serious
things with levity, was meant for me. Oh, I didn't dislike it, thank
you! One is pleased to think one's self of so much consequence. There
are more ways of keeping up one's _amour propre_ than _your_ way, my
lady. Now, don't you mean to go? You see I cannot possibly unburden my
mind to Mr. Vincent while you are here."

"Did you ever hear anything so rude?" said the beauty, turning
graciously to the young minister. "You call me a great lady, and all
sorts of things, Rachel; but I never could be as rude as you are, and as
you always were as long as I remember."

"My dear, the height of good-breeding is to be perfectly ill-bred when
one pleases," said Mrs. Hilyard, taking her work upon her knee and
putting on her thimble: "but though you are wonderfully pretty, you
never had the makings of a thorough fine lady in you. You can't help
trying to please everybody--which, indeed, if there were no women in the
world," added that sharp observer, with a sudden glance at Vincent, who
saw the thin lines again move about her mouth, "you might easily do
without giving yourself much trouble. Mr. Vincent, if this lady won't
leave us, might I trouble you to talk? For two strains of thought,
carried on at the same moment, now that I'm out of society, are too
exhausting for me."

With which speech she gravely pinned her work to her knee, threaded her
needle with a long thread of blue cotton, and began her work with the
utmost composure, leaving her two visitors in the awkward _tete-a-tete_
position which the presence of a third person, entirely absorbed in her
own employment, with eyes and face abstracted, naturally produces. Never
in his life had Vincent been so anxious to appear to advantage--never
had he been so totally deprived of the use of his faculties. His eager
looks, his changing colour, perhaps interceded for him with the
beautiful stranger, who was not ignorant of those signs of subjugation
which she saw so often.

"I think it was you that were so good as to clear the way for me the
last time I was here," she said, with the sweetest grace, raising those
lovely eyes, which put even Tozer beside himself, to the unfortunate
pastor's face. "I remember fancying you must be a stranger here, as I
had not seen you anywhere in society. Those wonderful little wretches
never seem to come to any harm. They always appear to me to be
scrambling among the horses' feet. Fancy, Rachel, one of those boys who
flourish in the back streets, with such rags--oh, such rags!--you could
not possibly _make_ them, if you were to try, with scissors--such
perfection must come of itself;--had just pushed in before me, and I
don't know what I should have done, if Mr. ---- (I beg your pardon)--if
_you_ had not cleared the way."

"Mr. Vincent," said Mrs. Hilyard breaking in upon Vincent's deprecation.
"I am glad to hear you had somebody to help you in such a delicate
distress. We poor women can't afford to be so squeamish. What! are you
going away? My dear, be sure you say down-stairs that you brought that
poor creature some tea and sugar, and how grateful she was. That
explains everything, you know, and does my lady credit at the same time.
Good-bye. Well, I'll kiss you if you insist upon it; but what can Mr.
Vincent think to see such an operation performed between us? There! my
love, you can make the men do what you like, but you know of old you
never could conquer me."

"Then you will refuse over and over again--and you don't mind what I
say--and you know he's in Lonsdale, and why he's there, and all about
him----"

"Hush," said the dark woman, looking all the darker as she stood in that
bright creature's shadow. "I know, and always will know, wherever he
goes, and that he is after evil wherever he goes; and I refuse, and
always will refuse--and my darling pretty Alice," she cried, suddenly
going up with rapid vehemence to the beautiful young woman beside her,
and kissing once more the delicate rose-cheek to which her own made so
great a contrast, "I _don't_ mind in the least what you say."

"Ah, Rachel, I don't understand you," said Lady Western, looking at her
wistfully.

"You never did, my dear; but don't forget to mention about the tea and
sugar as you go down-stairs," said Mrs. Hilyard, subsiding immediately,
not without the usual gleam in her eyes and movement of her mouth, "else
it might be supposed you came to have your fortune told, or something
like that; and I wish your ladyship _bon voyage_, and no encounter with
ragged boys in your way. Mr. Vincent," she continued, with great
gravity, standing in the middle of the room, when Vincent, trembling
with excitement, afraid, with the embarrassing timidity of inferior
position, to offer his services, yet chafing in his heart to be obliged
to stay, reluctantly closed the door, which he had opened for Lady
Western's exit, "tell me why a young man of your spirit loses such an
opportunity of conducting the greatest beauty in Carlingford to her
carriage? Suppose she should come across another ragged boy, and faint
on the stairs?"

"I should have been only too happy; but as I am not so fortunate as to
know Lady Western," said the young minister, hesitating, "I feared to
presume----"

With an entirely changed aspect his strange companion interrupted him.
"Lady Western could not think that any man whom she met in _my_ house
presumed in offering her a common civility," said Mrs. Hilyard, with the
air of a duchess, and an imperious gleam out of her dark eyes. Then she
recollected herself, gave her startled visitor a comical look, and
dropped into her chair, before which that coarsest of poor needlewoman's
work was lying. "_My_ house! it does look like a place to inspire
respect, to be sure," she continued, with a hearty perception of the
ludicrous, which Vincent was much too preoccupied to notice. "What fools
we all are! but, my dear Mr. Vincent, you are too modest. My Lady
Western could not frown upon anybody who honoured her with such a rapt
observation. Don't fall in love with her, I beg of you. If she were
merely a flirt, I shouldn't mind, but out of her very goodness she's
dangerous. She can't bear to give pain to anybody, which of course
implies that she gives double and treble pain when the time comes.
There! I've warned you; for of course you'll meet again."

"Small chance of that," said Vincent, who had been compelling himself
to remain quiet, and restraining his impulse, now that the vision had
departed, to rush away out of the impoverished place. "Small chance of
that," he repeated, drawing a long breath, as he listened with intent
ears to the roll of the carriage which carried Her away; "society in
Carlingford has no room for a poor Dissenting minister."

"All the better for him," said Mrs. Hilyard, regarding him with curious
looks, and discerning with female acuteness the haze of excitement and
incipient passion which surrounded him. "Society's all very well for
people who have been brought up in it; but for a young recluse like you,
that don't know the world, it's murder. Don't look affronted. The reason
is, you expect too much--twenty times more than anybody ever finds. But
you don't attend to my philosophy. Thinking of your sermon, Mr. Vincent?
And how is our friend the butterman? I trust life begins to look more
cheerful to you under his advice."

"Life?" said the preoccupied minister, who was gazing at the spot where
that lovely apparition had been; "I find it change its aspects
perpetually. You spoke of Lonsdale just now, did you not? Is it possible
that you know that little place? My mother and sister live there."

"I am much interested to know that you have a mother and sister," said
the poor needlewoman before him, looking up with calm, fine-lady
impertinence in his face. "But you did not hear me speak of Lonsdale; it
was her ladyship who mentioned it. As for me, I interest myself in what
is going on close by, Mr. Vincent. I am quite absorbed in the chapel; I
want to know how you get on, and all about it. I took that you said on
Sunday about levity deeply to heart. I entertain a fond hope that you
will see me improve under your ministrations, even though I may never
come up to the butterman's standard. Some people have too high an ideal.
If you are as much of an optimist as your respected deacon, I fear it
will be ages before I can manage to make you approve of me."

Vincent's wandering thoughts were recalled a little by this attack. "I
hope," he said, rousing himself, "that you don't think me so
inexperienced as not to know that you are laughing at me? But indeed I
should be glad to believe that the services at the chapel might
sometimes perhaps be some _comfort_ to you," added the young pastor,
assuming the dignity of his office. He met his penitent's eyes at the
moment, and faltered, moon-struck as he was, wondering if she saw
through and through him, and knew that he was neither thinking of
consolation nor of clerical duties, but only of those lingering echoes
which, to any ears but his own, were out of hearing. There was little
reason to doubt the acute perceptions of that half-amused,
half-malicious glance.

"_Comfort!_" she cried; "what a very strange suggestion to make! Why,
all the old churches in all the old ages have offered comfort. I thought
you new people had something better to give us; enlightenment," she
said, with a gleam of secret mockery, throwing the word like a
stone--"religious freedom, private judgment. Depend upon it, that is
the _role_ expected from you by the butterman. Comfort! one has that in
Rome."

"You never can have that but in conjunction with truth, and truth is not
to be found in Rome," said Vincent, pricking up his ears at so familiar
a challenge.

"We'll not argue, though you do commit yourself by an assertion," said
Mrs. Hilyard; "but oh, you innocent young man, where is the comfort to
come from? Comfort will not let your seats and fill your chapel, even
granting that you knew how to communicate it. I prefer to be instructed,
for my part. You are just at the age, and in the circumstances, to do
that."

"I fear you still speak in jest," said the minister, with some doubt,
yet a little gratification; "but I shall be only too happy to have been
the means of throwing any light to you upon the doctrines of our faith."

For a moment the dark eyes gleamed with something like laughter. But
there was nothing ill-natured in the amusement with which his strange
new friend contemplated the young pastor in the depressions and
confidences of his youth. She answered with a mock gravity which, at
that moment, he was by no means clear-sighted enough to see through.

"Yes," she said, demurely, "be sure you take advantage of your
opportunities, and instruct us as long as you have any faith in
instruction. Leave consolation to another time: but you don't attend to
me, Mr. Vincent; come another day: come on Monday, when I shall be able
to criticise your sermons, and we shall have no Lady Western to put us
out. These beauties are confusing, don't you think? Only, I entreat you,
whatever you do, don't fall in love with her; and now, since I know you
wish it, you may go away."

Vincent stammered a faint protest as he accepted his dismissal, but rose
promptly, glad to be released. Another thought, however, seemed to
strike Mrs. Hilyard as she shook hands with him.

"Do your mother and sister in Lonsdale keep a school?" she said. "Nay,
pray don't look affronted. Clergymen's widows and daughters very often
do in the Church. I meant no impertinence in this case. They don't?
well, that is all I wanted to know. I daresay they are not likely to be
in the way of dangerous strangers. Good-bye; and you must come again on
Monday, when I shall be alone."

"But--dangerous strangers--may I ask you to explain?" said Vincent, with
a little alarm, instinctively recurring to his threatened
brother-in-law, and the news which had disturbed his composure that
morning before he came out.

"I can't explain; and you would not be any the wiser," said Mrs.
Hilyard, peremptorily. "Now, good morning. I am glad they don't keep a
school; because, you know," she added, looking full into his eyes, as if
defying him to make any meaning out of her words, "it is very tiresome,
tedious work, and wears poor ladies out. There!--good-bye; next day you
come I shall be very glad to see you, and we'll have no fine ladies to
put us out."

Vincent had no resource but to let himself out of the shabby little room
which this strange woman inhabited as if it had been a palace. The
momentary alarm roused by her last words, and the state of half offence,
half interest, into which, notwithstanding his pre-occupation, she had
managed to rouse him, died away, however, as he re-entered the poor
little street, which was now a road in Fairyland instead of a lane in
Carlingford, to his rapt eyes. Golden traces of those celestial wheels
surely lingered still upon the way, they still went rolling and echoing
over the poor young minister's heart, which he voluntarily threw down
before that heavenly car of Juggernaut. Every other impression faded out
of his mind, and the infatuated young man made no effort of resistance,
but hugged the enchanted chain. He had seen Her--spoken with
Her--henceforward was of her acquaintance. He cast reason to the winds,
and probability, and every convention of life. Did anybody suppose that
all the world leagued against him could prevent him from seeing her
again? He went home with an unspeakable elation, longing, and
excitement, and at the same time with a vain floating idea in his mind
that, thus inspired, no height of eloquence was impossible to him, and
that triumph of every kind was inevitable. He went home, and got his
writing-desk, and plunged into his lecture, nothing doubting that he
could transfer to his work that glorious tumult of his thoughts; and,
with his paper before him, wrote three words, and sat three hours
staring into the roseate air, and dreaming dreams as wild as any Arabian
tale. Such was the first effort of that chance encounter, in which the
personages were not Lady Western and the poor Dissenting minister, but
Beauty and Love, perennial hero and heroine of the romance that never
ends.




CHAPTER VI.


It was only two days after this eventful meeting that Vincent, idling
and meditative as was natural in such a condition of mind, strayed into
Masters's shop to buy some books. It would have been difficult for him
to have explained why he went there, except, perhaps, because it was the
last place in the world which his masters at the chapel would have
advised him to enter. For there was another bookseller in the town, an
evangelical man, patronised by Mr. Bury, the whilom rector, where all
the Tract Society's publications were to be had, not to speak of a
general range of literature quite wide enough for the minister of Salem.
Masters's was a branch of the London Master's, and, as might be supposed,
was equally amazed and indignant at the intrusion of a Dissenter among
its consecrated book-shelves. He was allowed to turn over all the
varieties of the 'Christian Year' on a side-table before any of the
attendants condescended to notice his presence; and it proved so
difficult to find the books he wanted, and so much more difficult to
find anybody who would take the trouble of looking for them, that the
young Nonconformist, who was sufficiently ready to take offence, began
to get hot and impatient, and had all but strode out of the shop, with a
new mortification to record to the disadvantage of Carlingford. But
just as he began to get very angry, the door swung softly open, and a
voice became audible, lingering, talking to somebody before entering.
Vincent stopped speaking, and stared in the shopman's astonished face
when these tones came to his ear. He fell back instantly upon the
side-table and the 'Christian Year,' forgetting his own business, and
what he had been saying--forgetting everything except that She was
there, and that in another moment they would stand again within the same
walls. He bent over the much-multiplied volume with a beating heart,
poising in one hand a tiny miniature copy just made to slip within the
pocket of an Anglican waistcoat, and in the other the big red-leaved and
morocco-bound edition, as if weighing their respective merits--put
beside himself, in fact, if the truth must be told, oblivious of his
errand, his position--of everything but the fact that She was at the
door. She came in with a sweet flutter and rustle of sound, a perfumed
air entering with her, as the unsuspected enthusiast thought, and began
to lavish smiles, for which he would have given half his life, upon the
people of the place, who flew to serve her. She had her tablets in her
hand, with a list of what she wanted, and held up a dainty forefinger as
she stood reading the items. As one thing after another was mentioned,
Masters and his men darted off in search of it. There were fortunately
enough to give each of them a separate errand, and the principal ranged
his shining wares upon the counter before her, and bathed in her smiles,
while all his satellites kept close at hand, listening with all their
ears for another commission. Blessed Masters! happy shopmen! that one
who looked so blank when Vincent stopped short at the sound of her voice
and stared at him, had forgotten all about Vincent. _She_ was there; and
if a little impromptu litany would have pleased her ladyship, it is
probable that it could have been got up on the spot after the best
models, and that even the Nonconformist would have waived his objections
to liturgical worship and led the responses. But Masters's establishment
offered practical homage--only the poor Dissenting minister, divided
between eagerness and fear, stood silent, flushed with excitement,
turning wistful looks upon her, waiting till perhaps she might turn
round and see him, and letting fall out of his trembling fingers those
unregarded editions of the Anglican lyre.

"And two copies of the 'Christian Year,'" said Lady Western, suddenly.
"Oh, thank you _so_ much! but I know they are all on the side-table, and
I shall go and look at them. Not the very smallest copy, Mr. Masters,
and not that solemn one with the red edges; something pretty, with a
little ornament and gilding: they are for two little _protegees_ of
mine. Oh, here is exactly what I want! another one like this, please.
How very obliging all your people are," said her ladyship, benignly, as
the nearest man dashed off headlong to bring what she wanted--"but I
think it is universal in Carlingford; and indeed the manners of our
country people in general have improved very much of late. Don't you
think so? oh, there can't be a question about it!"

"I beg your ladyship's pardon, I am sure; but perhaps, my lady, it is
not safe to judge the general question from your ladyship's point of
view," said the polite bookseller, with a bow.

"Oh, pray don't say so; I should be wretched if I thought you took more
trouble for me than for other people," said the young Dowager, with a
sweetness which filled Vincent's heart with jealous pangs. She was close
by his side--so close that those sacred robes rustled in his very ear,
and her shawl brushed his sleeve. The poor young man took off his hat in
a kind of ecstasy. If she did not notice him, what did it
matter?--silent adoration, speechless homage, could not affront a queen.

And it was happily very far from affronting Lady Western. She turned
round with a little curiosity, and looked up in his face. "Oh, Mr.--Mr.
Vincent," cried the beautiful creature, brightening in recognition. "How
do you do? I suppose you are a resident in Carlingford now, are not you?
Pardon me, that I did not see you when I came in. How very, very good it
is of you to go and see my--my friend! Did you ever see anything so
dreadful as the place where she lives? and isn't she an extraordinary
creature? Thank you, Mr. Masters; that's exactly what I want. I do
believe she might have been Lord Chancellor, or something, if she had
not been a woman," said the enchantress, once more lifting her lovely
eyes with an expression of awe to Vincent's face.

"She seems a very remarkable person," said Vincent. "To see her where
she is, makes one feel how insignificant are the circumstances of
life."

"Really! now, how do you make out that?" said Lady Western; "for, to
tell the truth, I think, when I see her, oh, how important they are! and
that I'd a great deal rather die than live so. But you clever people
take such strange views of things. Now tell me how you make that out?"

"Nay," said Vincent, lowering his voice with a delicious sense of having
a subject to be confidential upon, "you know what conditions of
existence all her surroundings imply; yet the most ignorant could not
doubt for a moment her perfect superiority to them--a superiority so
perfect," he added, with a sudden insight which puzzled even himself,
"that it is not necessary to assert it."

"Oh, to be sure," said Lady Western, colouring a little, and with a
momentary hauteur, "of course a Russell---- I mean a gentlewoman--must
always look the same to a certain extent; but, alas! I am only a very
commonplace little woman," continued the beauty, brightening into those
smiles which perhaps might be distributed too liberally, but which
intoxicated for the moment every man on whom they fell. "I think those
circumstances which you speak of so disrespectfully are everything! I
have not a great soul to triumph over them. I should break down, or they
would overcome me--oh, you need not shake your head! I know I am right
so far as I myself am concerned."

"Indeed I cannot think so," said the intoxicated young man; "you would
make any circumstances--"

"What?"

But the bewildered youth made no direct reply. He only gazed at her,
grew very red, and said, suddenly, "I beg your pardon," stepping back in
confusion, like the guilty man he was. The lady blushed, too, as her
inquiring eyes met that unexpected response. Used as she was to
adoration, she felt the silent force of the compliment withheld--it was
a thousand times sweeter in its delicate suggestiveness and reserve of
incense than any effusion of words. They were both a little confused for
the moment, poor Vincent's momentary betrayal of himself having somehow
suddenly dissipated the array of circumstances which surrounded and
separated two persons so far apart from each other in every conventional
aspect. The first to regain her place and composure was of course Lady
Western, who made him a pretty playful curtsy, and broke into a low,
sweet ring of laughter.

"Now I shall never know whether you meant to be complimentary or
contemptuous," cried the young Dowager, "which is hard upon a creature
with such a love of approbation as our friend says I have. However, I
forgive you, if you meant to be very cutting, for her sake. It is so
very kind of you to go to see her, and I am sure she enjoys your visits.
Thank you, Mr. Masters, that is all. Have you got the two copies of the
'Christian Year'? Put them into the carriage, please. Mr. Vincent, I am
going to have the last of my summer-parties next Thursday--twelve
o'clock; will you come?--only a cup of coffee, you know, or tea if you
prefer it, and talk _au discretion_. I shall be happy to see you, and I
have some nice friends, and one or two good pictures; so there you have
an account of all the attractions my house can boast of. Do come: it
will be my last party this season, and I rather want it to be a great
success," said the syren, looking up with her sweet eyes.

Vincent could not tell what answer he made in his rapture; but the next
thing he was properly conscious of was the light touch of her hand upon
his arm as he led her to her carriage, some sudden courageous impulse
having prompted him to secure for himself that momentary blessedness. He
walked forth in a dream, conducting that heavenly vision: and there,
outside, stood the celestial chariot with those pawing horses, and the
children standing round with open mouth to watch the lovely lady's
progress. It was he who put her in with such pride and humbleness as
perhaps only a generous but inexperienced young man, suddenly surprised
into passion, could be capable of--ready to kiss the hem of her garment,
or do any other preposterous act of homage--and just as apt to blaze up
into violent self-assertion should any man attempt to humble him who had
been thus honoured. While he stood watching the carriage out of sight,
Masters himself came out to tell the young Nonconformist, whose presence
that dignified tradesman had been loftily unconscious of a few minutes
before, that they had found the book he wanted; and Vincent, thrilling
in every pulse with the unlooked-for blessedness which had befallen
him, was not sorry, when he dropped out of the clouds at the
bookseller's accost, to re-enter that place where this enchantment still
hovered, by way of calming himself down ere he returned to those prose
regions which were his own lawful habitation. He saw vaguely the books
that were placed on the counter before him--heard vaguely the polite
purling of Masters's voice, all-solicitous to make up for the momentary
incivility with which he had treated a friend of Lady Western's--and was
conscious of taking out his purse and paying something for the volume,
which he carried away with him. But the book might have been Sanscrit
for anything Mr. Vincent cared--and he would have paid any fabulous
price for it with the meekest resignation. His attempt to appear
moderately interested, and to conduct this common transaction as if he
had all his wits about him, was sufficient occupation just at this
moment. His head was turned. There should have been roses blossoming all
along the bare pavement of George Street to account for the sweet gleams
of light which warmed the entire atmosphere as he traversed that
commonplace way. Not only the interview just passed, but the meeting to
come, bewildered him with an intoxicating delight. Here, then, was the
society he had dreamed of, opening its perfumed doors to receive him.
From Mrs. Tozer's supper-table to the bowery gates of Grange Lane was a
jump which, ten days ago, would of itself have made the young minister
giddy with satisfaction and pleasure. Now these calm emotions had ceased
to move him; for not society, but a sweeter syren, had thrown chains of
gold round the unsuspecting Nonconformist. With Her, Back Grove Street
was Paradise. Where her habitation was, or what he should see there, was
indifferent to Vincent. He was again to meet Herself.




CHAPTER VII.


The days which intervened between this meeting and Lady Western's party
were spent in a way which the managers of Salem would have been far from
approving of. Mr. Vincent, indeed, was rapt out of himself, out of his
work, out of all the ordinary regions of life and thought. When he sat
down to his sermons, his pen hung idly in his hand, and his mind,
wilfully cheating itself by that semblance of study, went off into long
delicious reveries, indescribable, intangible--a secret sweet
intoxication which forbade labour, yet nourished thought. Though he
sometimes did not write a word in an hour, so deep was the aspect of
studiousness displayed by the young pastor at his writing-desk, and so
entire the silence he maintained in his room, shut up in that world of
dreams which nobody knew anything of, that his landlady, who was one of
his hearers, communicated the fact to Tozer, and expatiated everywhere
upon the extreme devotion to study displayed by the new minister. Old
Mr. Tufton, who had been in the habit of putting together the disjointed
palaver which he called a sermon on the Saturday morning, shook his head
over the information, and doubted that his young brother was resorting
more to carnal than to spiritual means of filling his chapel; but the
members of Salem generally heard the rumour with pride, and felt a
certain distinction accrue to themselves from the possibility that their
pastor might ruin his health by over-study. It was a new sensation in
Salem; and the news, as it was whispered about, certainly came to the
ears of a few of those young men and thinkers, principally poor lawyers'
clerks and drapers' assistants, whom Tozer was so anxious to reach, and
drew two or three doubtful, genteel hearers to the chapel, where Mr.
Vincent's sermon, though no better than usual, and in reality dashed off
at the last moment in sheer desperation, when necessity momentarily
thrust the dreams away, was listened to with a certain awe and devout
attention, solely due to the toil it was reported to have cost. The
young minister himself came out of the pulpit remorseful and ashamed,
feeling that he had neglected his duty, and thoroughly disgusted with
the superficial production, just lighted up with a few fiery sentences
of that eloquence which belongs to excitement and passion, which he had
just delivered. But Tozer and all the deacons buzzed approbation. They
were penetrated with the conviction that he had worked hard at his
sermon, and given them his best, and were not to be undeceived by the
quality of the work itself, which was a secondary matter. More deeply
disgusted and contemptuous than ever was the young pastor at the end of
that Sunday--disgusted with himself to have done his work so
poorly--contemptuous of those who were pleased with it--his heart
swelling with mortified pride to think that what he thought so unworthy
of him was more appreciated than his best efforts. For he did not know
the report that had gone abroad; he did not know that, while brooding
over his own rising passion, and absorbed in dreams with which Salem had
nothing to do, the little world around him was complacently giving him
credit for a purpose of wearing himself out in its behalf. The sermons
so hastily written, thrust into a corner by the overpowering enchantment
of those reveries, were not the only sin he had to charge against
himself. He could not bring himself to bear the irksome society that
surrounded him, in the state of elevation and excitement he was in.
Tozer was unendurable, and Phoebe to be avoided at all costs. He did
not even pay his promised visit to Mrs. Hilyard, nor go to Siloam
Cottage as usual. In short, he spent the days in a kind of dream,
avoiding all his duties, paying no visits, doing no pastoral work,
neglecting the very sermon over which his landlady saw him hanging so
many silent hours, without knowing that all the vacant atmosphere
between him and that blank sheet of paper, in which she saw nothing, was
peopled with fairy visitants and unreal scenes to the dreamy eyes of her
lodger. Such were the first effects of Circe's cup upon the young
minister. He indulged himself consciously, with apologetic
self-remonstrances, as Thursday approached. After that day, life was to
go on as usual. No--not as usual--with a loftier aim and a higher
inspiration; but the season of dreams was to be over when he had real
admittance into that Eden garden, where the woman of all women wandered
among her flowers. He thought what he was to say to her on that
eventful day--how he should charm her into interest in his difficulties,
and beautify his office, and the barren spot in which he exercised it,
with her sympathy. He imagined himself possessed of her ear, certain of
a place by her side, a special guest of her own election. He was not
vain, nor deeply persuaded of his own importance; yet all this seemed
only natural to his excited imagination. He saw himself by her side in
that garden of beatitudes, disclosing to her all that was in his heart;
instinctively he recalled all that the poets have said of woman the
consoler--woman the inspirer. When he had gained that priceless
sympathy, what glorious amends he should make for the few days'
indolence to which he now gave way! Thus in his inexperience he went on,
preparing for himself, as any one a little wiser could have seen at a
glance, one of the bitterest disappointments of early life.

Thursday came, a day of days--such a day as people reckon by, months
after; a soft and bright autumnal morning, breathing like spring. As
Vincent issued from his own door and took his way along George Street to
Grange Lane, he saw the curate of St. Roque's walking before him in the
same direction; but Mr. Wentworth himself was not more orthodoxly
clerical in every detail of his costume than was the young
Nonconformist, who was going, not to Lady Western's breakfast-party, but
into the Bower of Bliss, the fool's paradise of his youth. Mr.
Wentworth, it is true, was to see Lucy Wodehouse there, and was a true
lover; but he walked without excitement to the green gate which
concealed from him no enchanted world of delights, but only a familiar
garden, with every turn of which he was perfectly acquainted, and which,
even when Lucy was by his side, contained nothing ineffable or ecstatic.
It was, to tell the truth, an autumnal garden, bright enough still with
scarlet gleams of geranium and verbena, with a lawn of velvet
smoothness, and no great diminution as yet in the shade of the acacias
and lime-trees, and everything in the most perfect order in the trim
shrubberies, through the skilful mazes of which some bright groups were
already wandering, when Vincent passed through to the sunny open door.
At the open windows within he could see other figures in a pleasant
flutter of gay colour and light drapery, as he advanced breathless to
take his own place in that unknown world. He heard his own name
announced, and went in, with a chill of momentary doubt upon his high
expectations, into the airy sunshiny room, with its gay, brilliant,
rustling crowd, the ladies all bright and fresh in their pretty
morning-dresses, and the din of talk and laughter confusing his
unaccustomed ears. For a moment the stranger stood embarrassed, looking
round him, eagerly investigating the crowd for that one face, which was
not only the sole face of woman in the world so far as he was concerned,
but in reality the only face he knew in the gay party, where everybody
except himself knew everybody else. Then he saw her, and his doubts were
over. When she perceived him, she made a few steps forward to meet him
and held out her hand.

"I am so glad to see you--how kind of you to come!" said Lady Western;
"and such a beautiful day--just what I wanted for my last fete. Have you
seen my friend again since I saw you, Mr. Vincent--quite well, I hope?
Now, do have some coffee.--How do you do, Mr. Wentworth? You have been
here full five minutes, and you have never paid your respects to me.
Even under the circumstances, you know, one cannot overlook such
neglect."

"I am too deeply flattered that your ladyship should have observed my
entrance to be able to make any defence," said the curate of St.
Roque's, who could speak to her as to any ordinary woman; "but as for
circumstances----"

"Oh dear, yes, we all know," cried Lady Western, with her sweet laugh.
"Was it you, Mr. Vincent, who were saying that circumstances were
everything in life?--oh, no, I beg your pardon, quite the reverse. I
remember it struck me as odd and clever. Now, I daresay, you two could
quite settle that question. I am such an ignoramus. So kind of you to
come!"

Vincent was about to protest his delight in coming, and to deprecate the
imputation of kindness, but ere he had spoken three words, he suddenly
came to a stop, perceiving that not only Lady Western's attention but
her ear was lost, and that already another candidate for her favour had
possession of the field. He stepped back into the gay assembly,
disturbing one group, the members of which all turned to look at him
with well-bred curiosity. He stood quite alone and silent for some time,
waiting if, perhaps, he could catch the eye of Lady Western. But she
was surrounded, swept away, carried off even from his neighbourhood,
while he stood gazing. And here was he left, out of the sunshine of her
presence in the midst of Carlingford society, knowing nobody, while
every face smiled and every tongue was busy but his own: talk _au
discretion!_ such there certainly was--but Vincent had never in his life
felt so preposterously alone, so dismally silent, so shut up in himself.
If he had come to woo society, doubtless he could have plucked up a
spirit, and made a little effort for his object. But he had come to see
Her, flattering himself with vain dreams of securing her to himself--of
wandering by her side through those garden-paths, of keeping near her
whenever she moved--and the dream had intoxicated him more deeply than
even he himself was aware of. Now he woke to his sober wits with a chill
of mortification and disappointment not to be expressed. He stood
silent, following her with his eyes as she glided about from one corner
to the other of the crowded room. He had neither eyes nor ears for
anything else. Beautiful as she had always been, she was lovelier than
ever to-day, with her fair head uncovered and unadorned, her beautiful
hair glancing in the gleams of sunshine, her tiny hands ungloved. Poor
Vincent drew near a window, when it dawned upon his troubled perception
that he was standing amidst all those chattering, laughing people, a
silent statue of disappointment and dismay, and from that little refuge
watched her as she made her progress. And, alas! Lady Western assured
everybody that they were "_so_ kind" to come--she distributed her
smiles, her kind words, everywhere. She beamed upon the old men and the
young, the handsome and the stupid, with equal sweetness. After a while,
as he stood watching, Vincent began to melt in his heart. She was
hostess--she had the party's pleasure to think of, not her own. If he
could but help her, bring himself to her notice again in some other way!
Vincent made another step out of his window, and looked out eagerly with
shy scrutiny. Nobody wanted his help. They stared at him, and whispered
questions who he was. When he at length nerved himself to speak to his
next neighbour, he met with a courteous response and no more. Society
was not cruel, or repulsive, or severely exclusive, but simply did not
know him, could not make out who he was, and was busy talking that
conversation of a limited sphere full of personal allusions into which
no stranger could enter. Instead of the ineffable hour he expected, an
embarrassing, unbearable tedium was the lot of the poor Dissenting
minister by himself among the beauty, wit, and fashion of Carlingford.
He would have stolen away but for the forlorn hope that things might
mend--that Lady Western might return, and that the sunshine he had
dreamed of would yet fall upon him. But no such happiness came to the
unfortunate young minister. After a while, a perfectly undistinguished
middle-aged individual charitably engaged Mr. Vincent in conversation;
and as they talked, and while the young man's eager wistful eyes
followed into every new combination of the little crowd that one fair
figure which had bewitched him, it became apparent that the company was
flowing forth into the garden. At last Vincent stopped short in the
languid answer he was making to his respectable interlocutor with a
sudden start and access of impatience. The brilliant room had suddenly
clouded over. She had joined her guests outside. With bitterness, and a
sharp pang at his heart, Vincent looked round and wondered to find
himself in the house, in the company, from which she had gone. What
business had he there? No link of connection existed between him and
this little world of unknown people except herself. She had brought him
here; she alone knew even so much of him as his name. He had not an inch
of ground to stand on in the little alien assembly when she was not
there. He broke off his conversation with his unknown sympathiser
abruptly, and rushed out, meaning to leave the place. But somehow,
fascinated still, in a hundred different moods a minute, when he got
outside, he too lingered about the paths, where he continually met with
groups and stray couples who stared at him, and wondered again,
sometimes not inaudibly, who he was. He met her at last under the shadow
of the lime-trees with a train of girls about her, and a following of
eager male attendants. When he came forward lonely to make his farewell,
with a look in which he meant to unite a certain indignation and
reproach with still chivalrous devotion, the unconscious beauty met him
with unabated sweetness, held out her hand as before, and smiled the
most radiant of smiles.

"Are you going to leave us already?" she said, in a tone which half
persuaded the unlucky youth to stay till the last moment, and swallow
all his mortifications. "So sorry you must go away so soon! and I wanted
to show you my pictures too. Another time, I hope, we may have better
fortune. When you come to me again, you must really be at leisure, and
have no other engagements. Good-bye! It was _so_ kind of you to come,
and I am so sorry you can't stay!"

In another minute the green door had opened and closed, the fairy vision
was gone, and poor Vincent stood in Grange Lane between the two blank
lines of garden-wall, come back to the common daylight after a week's
vain wandering in the enchanted grounds, half stupefied, half maddened
by the disappointment and downfall. He made a momentary pause at the
door, gulped down the big indignant sigh that rose in his throat, and,
with a quickened step and a heightened colour, retraced his steps along
a road which no longer gleamed with any rosy reflections, but was
harder, more real, more matter-of-fact than ever it had looked before.
What a fool he had been, to be led into such a false position!--to be
cheated of his peace, and seduced from his duty, and intoxicated into
such absurdities of hope, all by the gleam of a bright eye, and the
sound of a sweet voice! He who had never known the weakness before, to
cover himself with ridicule, and compromise his dignity so entirely for
the sake of the first beautiful woman who smiled upon him! Poor Vincent!
He hurried to his rooms thrilling with projects, schemes, and sudden
vindictive ambition. That fair creature should learn that the young
Nonconformist was worthy of her notice. Those self-engrossed simperers
should yet be startled out of their follies by the new fame rising up
amongst them. Who was he, did they ask? One day they should know.

That the young man should despise himself for this outbreak of injured
feeling, as soon as he had cooled down, was inevitable; but it took some
considerable time to cool down; and in the mean time his resolution rose
and swelled into that heroic region which youth always attains so
easily. He thought himself disenchanted for ever. That night, in bitter
earnest, he burned the midnight oil--that night his pen flew over the
paper with outbreaks, sometimes indignant, sometimes pathetic, on
subjects as remote as possible from Lady Western's breakfast-party; and
with a sudden revulsion he bethought himself of Salem and its oligarchy,
which just now prophesied so much good of their new minister. He
accepted Salem with all the heat of passion at that moment. His be the
task to raise it and its pastor into a common fame!




CHAPTER VIII.


The events above narrated were all prefatory of the great success
accomplished by Mr. Vincent in Carlingford. Indeed, the date of the
young minister's fame--fame which, as everybody acquainted with that
town must be aware, was widely diffused beyond Carlingford itself, and
even reached the metropolis, and gladdened his _Alma Mater_ at
Homerton--might almost be fixed by a reference to Lady Western's
housekeeping book, if she kept any, and the date of her last
summer-party. That event threw the young Nonconformist into just the
state of mind which was wanted to quicken all the prejudices of his
education, and give individual force to all the hereditary limits of
thought in which he had been born. An attempt on the part of the
Government to repeal the Toleration Act, or reinstate the Test, could
scarcely have produced a more permanent and rapid effect than Lady
Western's neglect, and the total ignorance of Mr. Vincent displayed by
polite society in Carlingford. No shame to him. It was precisely the
same thing in private life which the other would have been in public.
Repeal of the Toleration Act, or re-enactment of the Test, are things
totally impossible; and when persecution is not to be apprehended or
hoped for, where but in the wrongs of a privileged class can the true
zest of dissidence be found? Mr. Vincent, who had received his
dissenting principles as matters of doctrine, took up the familiar
instruments now with a rush of private feeling. He was not conscious of
the power of that sentiment of injury and indignation which possessed
him. He believed in his heart that he was but returning, after a
temporary hallucination, to the true duties of his post; but the fact
was, that this wound in the tenderest point--this general slight and
indifference--pricked him forward in all that force of personal
complaint which gives warmth and piquancy to a public grievance. The
young man said nothing of Lady Western even to his dearest friend--tried
not to think of her except by way of imagining how she should one day
hear of him, and know his name when it possessed a distinction which
neither the perpetual curate of St. Roque's, nor any other figure in
that local world, dared hope for. But with fiery zeal he flew to the
question of Church and State, and set forth the wrongs which
Christianity sustained from endowment, and the heinous evils of rich
livings, episcopal palaces, and spiritual lords. It was no mean or
ungenerous argument which the young Nonconformist pursued in his fervour
of youth and wounded self-regard. It was the natural cry of a man who
had entered life at disadvantage, and chafed, without knowing it, at all
the phalanx of orders and classes above him, standing close in order to
prevent his entrance. With eloquent fervour he expatiated upon the
kingdom that was not of this world. If these words were true, what had
the Church to do with worldly possessions, rank, dignities, power? Was
his Grace of Lambeth more like Paul the tentmaker than his Holiness of
Rome? Mr. Vincent went into the whole matter with genuine conviction,
and confidence in his own statements. He believed and had been trained
in it. In his heart he was persuaded that he himself, oft disgusted and
much misunderstood in his elected place at Salem Chapel, ministered the
gospel more closely to his Master's appointment than the rector of
Carlingford, who was nominated by a college; or the curate of St.
Roque's, who had his forty pounds a-year from a tiny ancient endowment,
and was spending his own little fortune on his church and district.
These men had joined God and mammon--they were in the pay of the State.
Mr. Vincent thundered forth the lofty censures of an evangelist whom the
State did not recognise, and with whom mammon had little enough to do.
He brought forth all the weapons out of the Homerton armoury, new,
bright, and dazzling; and he did not know any more than his audience
that he never would have wielded them so heartily--perhaps would
scarcely have taken them off the wall--but for the sudden sting with
which his own inferior place, and the existence of a privileged class
doubly shut against his entrance, had quickened his personal
consciousness. Such, however, was the stimulus which woke the minister
of Salem Chapel into action, and produced that series of lectures on
Church and State which, as everybody knows, shook society in Carlingford
to its very foundation.

"Now we've got a young man as is a credit to us," said Tozer; "and now
he's warming to his work, as I was a little afraid of at first; for
somehow I can't say as I could see to my satisfaction, when he first
come, that his heart was in it,--I say, now as we've got a pastor as
does us credit, I am not the man to consider a bit of expense. My
opinion is as we should take the Music Hall for them lectures. There's
folks might go to the Music Hall as would never come to Salem, and we're
responsible for our advantages. A clever young man like Mr. Vincent
ain't to be named along with Mr. Tufton; we're the teachers of the
community, that's what we are. I am for being public-spirited--I always
was; and I don't mind standing my share. My opinion is as we should take
the Music Hall."

"If we was charging sixpence a-head or so----" said prudent Pigeon, the
poulterer.

"That's what I'll never give my consent to--never!" said Tozer. "If we
was amusin' the people, we might charge sixpence a-head; but mark my
words," continued the butterman, "there ain't twenty men in Carlingford,
nor in no other place, as would give sixpence to have their minds
enlightened. No, sir, we're conferring of a boon; and let's do it
handsomely, I say--let's do it handsomely; and here's my name down for
five pound to clear expenses: and if every man in Salem does as well,
there ain't no reason for hesitating. I'm a plain man, but I don't make
no account of a little bit of money when a principle's at stake."

This statement was conclusive. When it came to the sacrifice of a little
bit of money, neither Mrs. Pigeon nor Mrs. Brown could have endured
life had their husbands yielded the palm to Tozer. And the Music Hall
was accordingly taken; and there, every Wednesday for six weeks, the
young Nonconformist mounted his _cheval de bataille_, and broke his
impetuous spear against the Church. Perhaps Carlingford was in want of a
sensation at the moment; and the town was virgin soil, and had never yet
been invaded by sight or sound of heresy. Anyhow, the fact was, that
this fresh new voice attracted the ear of the public. That personal
impetuosity and sense of wrong which gave fire to the discourse, roused
the interest of the entire community. Mr. Vincent's lectures became the
fashion in Carlingford, where nobody in the higher levels of society had
ever heard before of the amazing evils of a Church Establishment. Some
of the weaker or more candid minds among the audience were even upset by
the young minister's arguments. Two or three young people of both sexes
declared themselves converted, and were persecuted to their hearts'
desire when they intimated their intention of henceforward joining the
congregation of Salem. The two Miss Hemmings were thrown into a state of
great distress and perplexity, and wrung their hands, and looked at each
other, as each new enormity was brought forth. A very animated
interested audience filled the benches in the Music Hall for the three
last lectures. It was Mr. Tozer's conviction, whispered in confidence to
all the functionaries at Salem, that the rector himself, in a muffler
and blue spectacles, listened in a corner to the voice of rebellion; but
no proof of this monstrous supposition ever came before the public.
Notwithstanding, the excitement was evident. Miss Wodehouse took
tremulous notes, her fingers quivering with anger, with the intention of
calling upon Mr. Wentworth to answer and deny these assertions. Dr.
Marjoribanks, the old Scotchman, who in his heart enjoyed a hit at the
Episcopate, cried "Hear, hear," with his sturdy northern _r_ rattling
through the hall, and clapped his large brown hands, with a broad grin
at his daughter, who was "high," and one of Mr. Wentworth's sisters of
mercy. But poor little Rose Lake, the drawing-master's daughter, who was
going up for confirmation next time the bishop came to Carlingford,
turned very pale under Mr. Vincent's teaching. All the different phases
of conviction appeared in her eager little face--first indignation, then
doubt, lastly horror and intense determination to flee out from Babylon.
Her father laughed, and told her to attend to her needlework, when Rose
confided to him her troubles. Her needlework! She who had just heard
that the Church was rotten, and tottering on its foundations; that it
was choked with filthy lucre and State support; that Church to which she
had been about to give in her personal adhesion. Rose put away her
catechism and confirmation good-books, and crossed to the other side of
the street that she might not pass Masters's, that emporium of evil. She
looked wistfully after the young Nonconformist as he passed her on the
streets, wondering what high martyr-thoughts must be in the apostolic
mind which entertained so high a contempt for all the honours and
distinctions of this world. Meanwhile Mr. Vincent pursued his own way,
entirely convinced, as was natural for a young man, that he was "doing a
great work" in Carlingford. He was still in that stage of life when
people imagine that you have only to state the truth clearly to have it
believed, and that to convince a man of what is right is all that is
necessary to his immediate reformation. But it was not with any very
distinct hopes or wishes of emptying the church in Carlingford, and
crowding Salem Chapel, that the young man proceeded. Such expectations,
high visions of a day to come when not a sitting could be had in Salem
for love or money, did indeed glance into the souls of Tozer and his
brother deacons; but the minister did not stand up and deliver his blow
at the world--his outcry against things in general--his warm youthful
assertion that he too had a right to all the joys and privileges of
humanity,--as, by means of sermons, lectures, poems, or what not, youth
and poverty, wherever they have a chance, do proclaim their protest
against the world.

On the last night of the lectures, just as Vincent had taken his place
upon his platform, a rustle, as of some one of importance entering,
thrilled the audience. Looking over the sea of heads before him, the
breath almost left the young minister's lips when he saw the young
Dowager, in all the glory of full-dress, threading her way through the
crowd, which opened to let her pass. Mr. Vincent stood watching her
progress, unaware that it was time for him to begin, and that his
hearers, less absorbed than he, were asking each other what it was which
had so suddenly paled his face and checked his utterance. He watched
Lady Western and her companion come slowly forward; he saw Tozer, in a
delighted bustle, leading the way to one of the raised seats of the
orchestra close to the platform. When they were seated, and not till
then, the lecturer, drawing a long gasping breath, turned to his
audience. But the crowd was hazy to his eyes. He began, half
mechanically, to speak--then made a sudden pause, his mind occupied with
other things. On the very skirts of the crowd, far back at the door,
stood his friend of Back Grove Street. In that momentary pause, he saw
her standing alone, with the air of a person who had risen up
unconsciously in sudden surprise and consternation. Her pale dark face
looked not less confused and startled than Vincent himself was conscious
of looking, and her eyes were turned in the same direction as his had
been the previous moment. The crowd of Carlingford hearers died off from
the scene for the instant, so far as the young Nonconformist was
concerned. He knew but of that fair creature in all her sweet bloom and
blush of beauty--the man who accompanied her--Mrs. Hilyard, a thin,
dark, eager shadow in the distance--and himself standing, as it were,
between them, connecting all together. What could that visionary link be
which distinguished and separated these four, so unlike each other, from
all the rest of the world? But Mr. Vincent had no leisure to follow out
the question, even had his mind been sufficiently clear to do it. He saw
the pale woman at the end of the hall suddenly drop into her seat, and
draw a thick black veil over her face; and the confused murmur of
impatience in the crowd before him roused the young man to his own
position. He opened the eyes which had been hazing over with clouds of
imagination and excitement. He delivered his lecture. Though he never
was himself aware what he had said, it was received with just as much
attention and applause as usual. He got through it somehow; and, sitting
down at last, with parched lips and a helpless feeling of excitement,
watched the audience dispersing, as if they were so many enemies from
whom he had escaped. Who was this man with Her? Why did She come to
bewilder him in the midst of his work? It did not occur to the poor
young fellow that Lady Western came to his lecture simply as to a
"distraction." He thought she had a purpose in it. He pretended not to
look as she descended daintily from her seat in the orchestra, drawing
her white cloak with a pretty shiver over her white shoulders. He
pretended to start when her voice sounded in his expectant ear.

"Oh, Mr. Vincent, how very clever and wicked of you!" cried Lady
Western. "I am so horrified, and charmed. To think of you attacking the
poor dear old Church, that we all ought to support through everything!
And I am such a stanch churchwoman, and so shocked to hear all this; but
you won't do it any more."

Saying this, Lady Western leaned her beautiful hand upon Mr. Vincent's
table, and looked in his face with a beseeching insinuating smile. The
poor minister did all he could to preserve his virtue. He looked aside
at Lady Western's companion to fortify himself, and escape the
enervating influence of that smile.

"I cannot pretend to yield the matter to your ladyship," said Vincent,
"for it had been previously arranged that this was to be the last of my
lectures at present. I am sorry it did not please you."

"But it did please me," said the young Dowager; "only that it was so
very wicked and wrong. Where did you learn such dreadful sentiments? I
am so sorry I shan't hear you again, and so glad you are finished. You
never came to see me after my little fete. I am afraid you thought us
stupid. Good-night: but you really must come to me, and I shall convert
you. I am sure you never can have looked at the Church in the right way:
why, what would become of us if we were all Dissenters? What a frightful
idea! Thank you for such a charming evening. Good-night."

And Lady Western held out that "treasured splendour, her hand," to the
bewildered Nonconformist, who only dared touch it, and let it fall,
drawing back from the smile with which the syren beguiled him back again
into her toils. But Mr. Vincent turned round hastily as he heard a
muttered exclamation, "By Jove!" behind him, and fixed the gaze of angry
and instinctive repugnance upon the tall figure which brushed past.
"Make haste, Alice--do you mean to stay here all night?" said this
wrathful individual, fixing his eyes with a defiant stare upon the
minister; and he drew the beauty's arm almost roughly into his own, and
hurried her away, evidently remonstrating in the freest and boldest
manner upon her civility. "By Jove! the fellow will think you are in
love with him," Vincent, with his quickened and suspicious ears, could
hear the stranger say, with that delightful indifference to being
overheard which characterises some Englishmen of the exalted classes;
and the strain of reproof evidently continued as they made their way to
the door. Vincent, for his part, when he had watched them out of sight,
dropped into his chair, and sat there in the empty hall, looking over
the vacant benches with the strangest mixture of feelings. Was it
possible that his eager fervour and revolutionary warmth were diminished
by these few words and that smile?--that the wrongs of Church and State
looked less grievous all at once, and that it was an effort to return to
the lofty state of feeling with which he had entered the place two hours
ago? As he sat there in his reverie of discomfiture, he could see Tozer,
a single black figure, come slowly up the hall, an emissary from the
group at the door of "chapel people," who had been enjoying the defeat
of the enemy, and were now waiting for the conqueror. "Mr. Vincent,"
shouted Tozer, "shall we turn off the gas, and leave you to think it all
over till the morning, sir? They're all as pleased as Punch and as
curious as women down below here, and my Phoebe will have it you're
tired. I must say as it is peculiar to see you a-sitting up there all by
yourself, and the lights going out, and not another soul in the place,"
added the butterman, looking round with a sober grin; and in reality the
lights diminished every moment as Mr. Vincent rose and stumbled down
from his platform into the great empty hall with its skeleton benches.
If they _had_ left him there till the morning, it would have been a
blessed exchange from that walk home with the party, that invitation to
supper, and all the applauses and inquiries that followed. They had the
Pigeons to supper that night at the butter-shop, and the whole matter
was discussed in all its bearings--the flutter of the "Church folks,"
the new sittings let during the week, the triumphant conviction of the
two deacons that Salem would soon be overflowing.

    "Oh, why were 'deacons' made so coarse,
      Or parsons made so fine?"

Mr. Vincent did not bethink himself of that touching ditty. He could not
see the serio-comic lights in which the whole business abounded. It was
all the saddest earnest to the young pastor, who found so little
encouragement or support even in the enthusiasm of his flock.

"And, oh, Mr. Vincent," said the engaging Phoebe, in a half-whisper
aside, "how _did_ you come to be so friendly with Lady Western? How she
did listen, to be sure! and smiled at you _so_ sweetly. Ah, I don't
wonder now that you can't see anything in the Carlingford young ladies;
but do tell us, please, how you came to know her so well?"

Insensibly to himself, a gleam of gratification lighted up Mr. Vincent's
face. He was gracious to Phoebe. "I can't pretend to know her _well_,"
he said, with a little mock humility; whereupon the matrons of the party
took up their weapons immediately.

"And all the better, Mr. Vincent--all the better!" cried Mrs. Tozer;
"she didn't come there for no good, you may be sure. Them great ladies,
when they're pretty-looking, as I don't deny she's pretty-looking----"

"Oh, mamma, beautiful!" exclaimed Phoebe.

"When they're pretty-looking, as I say," continued Mrs. Tozer, "they're
no better nor evil spirits--that's what I tell you, Phoebe. They'll go
out o' their way, they will, for to lay hold on a poor silly young man
(which was not meaning you, Mr. Vincent, that knows better, being a
minister), and when they've got him fast, they'll laugh at him--that's
their sport. A minister of our connection as was well acquainted among
them sort of folks would be out o' nature. My boy shall never make no
such acquaintances as long as I'm here."

"I saw her a-speaking to the minister," said Mrs Pigeon, "and the
thought crossed my mind as it wasn't just what I expected of Mr.
Vincent. Painted ladies, that come out of a night with low necks and
flowers in their hair, to have all Carlingford a-staring at them, ain't
fit company for a good pastor. _Them's_ not the lambs of the flock--not
so far as I understand; they're not friends as Salem folks would approve
of, Mr. Vincent. I'm always known for a plain speaker, and I don't
deceive you. It's a deal better to draw back in time."

"I have not the least reason to believe that Lady Western means to
honour me with her friendship," said Vincent, haughtily--"so it is
premature to discuss the matter. As I feel rather tired, perhaps you'll
excuse me to-night. Come over to my rooms, Mr. Tozer, to-morrow, if you
can spare a little time and we will discuss our business there. I hope
Mrs. Tozer will pardon me withdrawing so early, but I am not very
well--rather tired--out of sorts a little to-night."

So saying, the young pastor extricated himself from the table, shook
hands, regardless of all remonstrances, and made his way out with some
difficulty from the little room, which was choke-full, and scarcely
permitted egress. When he was gone, the three ladies looked at each
other in dumb amazement. Phoebe, who felt herself aggrieved, was the
first to break silence.

"Ma and Mrs. Pigeon," cried the aggravated girl, "you've been and hurt
his feelings. I knew you would. He's gone home angry and disappointed;
he thinks none of us understand him; he thinks we're trying to humble
him and keep him down, when, to tell the truth----"

Here Phoebe burst into tears.

"Upon _my_ word," said Mrs. Pigeon, "dear, deary me! It's just what I
said whenever I knew you had made up your minds to a _young_ minister.
He'll come a-dangling after our girls, says I, and a-trifling with their
affections. Bless my heart, Phoebe! if it had been my Maria now that's
always a-crying about something--but you! Don't take on,
dear--fretting's no good--it'll spoil your colour and take away your
appetite, and that ain't the way to mend matters: and to think of his
lifting his eyes to my Lady Dowager! Upon _my_ word! but there ain't no
accounting for young men's ways no more than for girls--and being a
minister don't make a bit of difference, so far as I can see."

"Why, what's the matter?" cried Tozer: "the pastor's gone off in a huff,
and Phoebe crying. What's wrong? You've been saying somethin'--you
women with your sharp tongues."

"It's Phoebe and Mr. Vincent have had some words. Be quiet,
Tozer--don't you see the child's hurt in her feelings?" said his wife.

Mr. and Mrs. Pigeon exchanged looks. "I'll tell you what it is," said
the latter lady, solemnly. "It's turned his head. I never approved of
the Music Hall myself. It's a deal of money to throw away, and it's not
like as if it was mercy to poor souls. And such a crush, and the
cheering, and my Lady Western to shake hands with him, has turned the
minister's head. Now, just you mark my words. He hasn't been here three
month yet, and he's a-getting high already. You men'll have your own
adoes with him. Afore a year's over our heads, he'll be a deal too high
for Salem. His head's turned--that's what it is."

"Oh, Mrs. Pigeon, how unkind of you!" cried Phoebe, "when he's as good
as good--and not a bit proud, nor ever was--and always such a
gentleman!--and never neglects the very poorest whenever he's sent
for--oh, it's _so_ unkind of you."

"I can't see as his head isn't straight enough on his shoulders," said
Tozer himself, with authority. "He's tired, that's what it is--and
excited a bit, I shouldn't wonder: a man can't study like he does, and
make hisself agreeable at the same time--no, no--by a year's time he'll
be settling down, and we'll know where we are; and as for Salem and our
connection, they never had a chance, I can tell you, like what they're
a-going to have now."

But Mrs. Pigeon shook her head. It was the first cloud that had risen on
the firmament of Salem Chapel, so far as Mr. Vincent was concerned.




CHAPTER IX.


It was a January night on which Vincent emerged abruptly from Tozer's
door, the evening of that lecture--a winter night, not very cold, but
very dark, the skies looking not blue, but black overhead, and the light
of the lamps gleaming dismally on the pavement, which had received a
certain squalid power of reflection from the recent rain; for a sharp,
sudden shower had fallen while Vincent had been seated at the hospitable
table of the butterman, which had chased everybody from the darkling
streets. All the shops were closed, a policeman marched along with heavy
tread, and the wet pavement glimmered round his solitary figure. Nothing
more uncomfortable could be supposed after the warmth and light of a
snug interior, however humble; and the minister turned his face hastily
in the direction of his lodging. But the next moment he turned back
again, and looked wistfully in the other direction. It was not to gaze
along the dark length of street to where the garden-walls of Grange
Lane, undiscernible in the darkness, added a far-withdrawing perspective
of gentility and aristocratic seclusion to the vulgar pretensions of
George Street; it was to look at a female figure which came slowly up,
dimming out the reflection on the wet stones as it crossed one streak of
lamplight after another. Vincent was excited and curious, and had
enough in his own mind to make him wistful for sympathy, if it were to
be had from any understanding heart. He recognised Mrs. Hilyard
instinctively as she came forward, not conscious of him, walking,
strange woman as she was, with the air of a person walking by choice at
that melancholy hour in that dismal night. She was evidently not going
anywhere: her step was firm and distinct, like the step of a person
thoroughly self-possessed and afraid of nothing--but it lingered with a
certain meditative sound in the steady firm footfall. Vincent felt a
kind of conviction that she had come out here to think over some problem
of that mysterious life into which he could not penetrate, and he
connected this strange walk involuntarily with the appearance of Lady
Western and her careless companion. To his roused fancy, some
incomprehensible link existed between himself and the equally
incomprehensible woman before him. He turned back almost in spite of
himself, and went to meet her. Mrs. Hilyard looked up when she heard his
step. She recognised him also on the spot. They approached each other
much as if they had arranged a meeting at eleven o'clock of that wet
January night in the gleaming, deserted streets.

"It is you, Mr. Vincent!" she said. "I wonder why I happen to meet you,
of all persons in the world, to-night. It is very odd. What, I wonder,
can have brought us both together at such an hour and in such a place?
You never came to see me that Monday--nor any Monday. You went to see
my beauty instead, and you were so lucky as to be affronted with the
syren at the first glance. Had you been less fortunate, I think I might
have partly taken you into my confidence to-night."

"Perhaps I _am_ less fortunate, if that is all that hinders," said
Vincent; "but it is strange to see you out here so late in such a dismal
night. Let me go with you, and see you safe home."

"Thank you. I am perfectly safe--nobody can possibly be safer than such
a woman as I am, in poverty and middle age," said his strange
acquaintance. "It is an immunity that women don't often prize, Mr.
Vincent, but it is very valuable in its way. If anybody saw you talking
to an equivocal female figure at eleven o'clock in George Street, think
what the butterman would say; but a single glimpse of my face would
explain matters better than a volume. I am going down towards Grange
Lane, principally because I am restless to-night, and don't know what to
do with myself. I shall tell you what I thought of your lecture if you
will walk with me to the end of the street."

"Ah, my lecture?--never mind," said the hapless young minister; "I
forget all about that. What is it that brings you here, and me to your
side?--what is there in that dark-veiled house yonder that draws your
steps and mine to it? It is not accidental, our meeting here."

"You are talking romance and nonsense, quite inconceivable in a man who
has just come from the society of deacons," said Mrs. Hilyard, glancing
up at him with that habitual gleam of her eyes. "We have met, my dear
Mr. Vincent, because, after refreshing my mind with your lecture, I
thought of refreshing my body by a walk this fresh night. One saves
candles, you know, when one does one's exercise at night: whereas
walking by day one wastes everything--time, tissue, daylight, invaluable
treasures: the only light that hurts nobody's eyes, and costs nobody
money, is the light of day. That illustration of yours about the clouds
and the sun was very pretty. I assure you I thought the whole
exceedingly effective. I should not wonder if it made a revolution in
Carlingford."

"Why do you speak to me so? I know you did not go to listen to my
lecture," said the young minister, to whom sundry gleams of
enlightenment had come since his last interview with the poor
needle-woman of Back Grove Street.

"Ah! how can you tell that?" she said, sharply, looking at him in the
streak of lamplight. "But to tell the truth," she continued, "I did
actually go to hear you, and to look at other people's faces, just to
see whether the world at large--so far as that exists in
Carlingford--was like what it used to be; and if I confess I saw
something there more interesting than the lecture, I say no more than
the lecturer could agree in, Mr. Vincent. You, too, saw something that
made you forget the vexed question of Church and State."

"Tell me," said Vincent, with an earnestness he was himself surprised
at, "who was that man?"

His companion started as if she had received a blow, turned round upon
him with a glance in her dark eyes such as he had never seen there
before, and in a sudden momentary passion drew her breath hard, and
stopped short on the way. But the spark of intense and passionate
emotion was as shortlived as it was vivid. "I do not suppose he is
anything to interest you," she answered the next moment, with a movement
of her thin mouth, letting the hands that she had clasped together drop
to her side. "Nay, make yourself quite easy; he is not a lover of my
lady's. He is only a near relation:--and," she continued, lingering on
the words with a force of subdued scorn and rage, which Vincent dimly
apprehended, but could not understand, "a very fascinating fine
gentleman--a man who can twist a woman round his fingers when he likes,
and break all her heartstrings--if she has any--so daintily afterwards,
that it would be a pleasure to see him do it. Ah, a wonderful man!"

"You know him then? I saw you knew him," said the young man, surprised
and disturbed, thrusting the first commonplace words he could think of
into the silence, which seemed to tingle with the restrained meaning of
this brief speech.

"I don't think we are lucky in choosing our subjects to-night," said the
strange woman. "How about the ladies in Lonsdale, Mr. Vincent? They
don't keep a school? I am glad they don't keep a school. Teaching, you
know, unless when one has a vocation for it, as you had a few weeks ago,
is uphill work. I am sorry to see you are not so sure about your work as
you were then. Your sister is pretty, I suppose? and does your mother
take great care of her and keep her out of harm's way? Lambs have a
silly faculty of running directly in the wolf's road. Why don't you take
a holiday and go to see them, or have them here to live with you?"

"You know something about them," said Vincent, alarmed. "What has
happened?--tell me. It will be the greatest kindness to say it out at
once."

"Hush," said Mrs. Hilyard; "now you are absurd. I speak out of my own
thoughts, as most persons do, and you, like all young people, make
personal applications. How can I possibly know about them? I am not a
fanciful woman, but there are some things that wake one's imagination.
In such a dark night as this, with such wet gleams about the streets,
when I think of people at a distance, I always think of something
uncomfortable happening. Misfortune seems to lie in wait about those
black corners. I think of women wandering along dismal solitary roads
with babies in their shameful arms--and of dreadful messengers of evil
approaching unconscious houses, and looking in at peaceful windows upon
the comfort they are about to destroy; and I think," she continued,
crossing the road so rapidly (they were now opposite Lady Western's
house) that Vincent, who had not anticipated the movement, had to
quicken his pace suddenly to keep up with her, "of evil creatures
pondering in the dark vile schemes against the innocent----" Here she
broke off all at once, and, looking up in Vincent's face with that gleam
of secret mockery in her eyes and movement of her mouth to which he was
accustomed, added, suddenly changing her tone, "Or of fine gentlemen,
Mr. Vincent, profoundly bored with their own society, promenading in a
dreary garden and smoking a disconsolate cigar. Look there!"

The young minister, much startled and rather nervous, mechanically
looked, as she bade him, through the little grated loophole in Lady
Western's garden-door. He saw the lights shining in the windows, and a
red spark moving about before the house, as, with a little shame for his
undignified position, he withdrew his eyes from that point of vantage.
But Mrs. Hilyard was moved by no such sentiment. She planted herself
opposite the door, and, bending her head to the little grating, gazed
long and steadfastly. In the deep silence of the night, standing with
some uneasiness at her side, and not insensible to the fact that his
position, if he were seen by anybody who knew him, would be rather
absurd and slightly equivocal, Vincent heard the footsteps of the man
inside, the fragrance of whose cigar faintly penetrated the damp air.
The stranger was evidently walking up and down before the house in
enjoyment of that luxury which the feminine arrangements of the young
Dowager's household would not permit indoors; but the steady eagerness
with which this strange woman gazed--the way in which she had managed to
interweave Mrs. Vincent and pretty Susan at Lonsdale into the
conversation--the suggestions of coming danger and evil with which her
words had invested the very night, all heightened by the instinctive
repugnance and alarm of which the young man had himself been conscious
whenever he met the eye of Lady Western's companion--filled him with
discomfort and dread. His mind, which had been lately too much occupied
in his own concerns to think much of Susan, reverted now with sudden
uneasiness to his mother's cottage, from which Susan's betrothed had
lately departed to arrange matters for their speedy marriage. But how
Lady Western's "near relation"--this man whom Mrs. Hilyard watched with
an intense regard which looked like hatred, but might be dead
love--could be connected with Lonsdale, or Susan, or himself, or the
poor needlewoman in Back Grove Street, Vincent could not form the
remotest idea. He stood growing more and more impatient by that dark
closed door, which had once looked a gate of paradise--which, he felt in
his heart, half-a-dozen words or a single smile could any day make again
a gate of the paradise of fools to his bewildered feet--the steps of the
unseen stranger within, and the quick breath of agitation from the
watcher by his side, being the only sounds audible in the silence of the
night. At last some restless movement he made disturbed Mrs. Hilyard in
her watch. She left the door noiselessly and rapidly, and turned to
recross the wet road. Vincent accompanied her without saying a word. The
two walked along together half the length of Grange Lane without
breaking silence, without even looking at each other, till they came to
the large placid white lamp at Dr. Marjoribanks's gate, which cleared a
little oasis of light out of the heart of the gloom. There she looked up
at him with a face full of agitated life and motion--kindled eyes,
elevated head, nostril and lips swelling with feelings which were
totally undecipherable to Vincent; her whole aspect changed by an
indescribable inspiration which awoke remnants of what might have been
beauty in that thin, dark, middle-aged face.

"You are surprised at me and my curiosity," she said, "and indeed you
have good reason; but it is astonishing, when one is shut up in one's
self and knows nobody, how excited one gets over the sudden apparition
of a person one has known in the other world. Some people die two or
three times in a lifetime, Mr. Vincent. There is a real transmigration
of souls, or bodies, or both if you please. This is my third life I am
going through at present. I knew that man, as I was saying, in the other
world."

"The world _does_ change strangely," said Vincent, who could not tell
what to say; "but you put it very strongly--more strongly than I----"

"More strongly than you can understand; I know that very well," said
Mrs. Hilyard; "but you perceive you are speaking to a woman who has died
twice. Coming to life is a bitter process, but one gets over it. If you
ever should have such a thing to go through with--and survive it," she
added, giving him a wistful glance, "I should like to tell you my
experiences. However, I hope better things. You are very well looked
after at Salem Chapel, Mr. Vincent. I think of you sometimes when I look
out of my window and see your tabernacle. It is not so pretty as Mr.
Wentworth's at St. Roque's, but you have the advantage of the curate
otherwise. So far as I can see, he never occupies himself with anything
higher than his prayer-book and his poor people. I doubt much whether
he would ever dream of replying to what you told us to-night."

"Probably he holds a Dissenting minister in too much contempt," said
Vincent, with an uncomfortable smile on his lips.

"Don't sneer--never sneer--no gentleman does," said his companion. "I
like you, though you are only a Dissenting minister. You know me to be
very poor, and you have seen me in very odd circumstances to-night; yet
you walk home with me--I perceive you are steering towards Back Grove
Street, Mr. Vincent--without an illusion which could make me feel myself
an equivocal person, and just as if this was the most reasonable thing
in the world which I have been doing to-night. Thank you. You are a
paladin in some things, though in others only a Dissenting minister. If
I were a fairy, the gift I would endow you with would be just that same
unconsciousness of your own disadvantages, which courtesy makes you show
of mine."

"Indeed," said Vincent, with natural gratification, "it required no
discrimination on my part to recognise at once that I was
addressing----"

"Hush! you have never even insinuated that an explanation was necessary,
which is the very height and climax of fine manners," said Mrs. Hilyard;
"and I speak who am, or used to be, an authority in such matters. I
don't mean to give you any explanation either. Now, you must turn back
and go home. Good-night. One thing I may tell you, however," she
continued, with a little warmth; "don't mistake me. There is no reason
in this world why you might not introduce me to the ladies in Lonsdale,
if any accident brought it about that we should meet. I say this to make
your mind easy about your penitent; and now, my good young father in the
faith, good-night."

"Let me see you to your door first," said the wondering young man.

"No--no farther. Good-night," she said, hastily, shaking hands, and
leaving him. The parting was so sudden that it took Vincent a minute to
stop short, under way and walking quickly as he was. When she had made
one or two rapid steps in advance, Mrs. Hilyard turned back, as if with
a sudden impulse.

"Do you know I have an uneasiness about these ladies in Lonsdale?" she
said; "I know nothing whatever about them--not so much as their names;
but you are their natural protector; and it does not do for women to be
as magnanimous and generous in the reception of strangers as you are.
There! don't be alarmed. I told you I knew nothing. They may be as safe,
and as middle-aged, and as ugly as I am; instead of a guileless widow
and a pretty little girl, they may be hardened old campaigners like
myself; but they come into my mind, I cannot tell why. Have them here to
live beside you, and they will do you good."

"My sister is about to be married," said Vincent, more and more
surprised, and looking very sharply into her face in the lamplight, to
see whether she really did not know anything more than she said.

A certain expression of relief came over her face.

"Then all is well," she said, with strange cordiality, and again held
out her hand to him. Then they parted, and pursued their several ways
through the perfectly silent and dimly-lighted streets. Vincent walked
home with the most singular agitation in his mind. Whether to give any
weight to such vague but alarming suggestions--whether to act
immediately upon the indefinite terror thus insinuated into his
thoughts--or to write, and wait till he heard whether any real danger
existed--or to cast it from him altogether as a fantastic trick of
imagination, he could not tell. Eventful and exciting as the evening had
been, he postponed the other matters to this. If any danger threatened
Susan, his simple mother could suffer with her, but was ill qualified to
protect her: but what danger could threaten Susan? He consoled himself
with the thought that these were not the days of abductions or violent
love-making. To think of an innocent English girl in her mother's house
as threatened with mysterious danger, such as might have surrounded a
heroine of the last century, was impossible. If there are Squire
Thornhills nowadays, their operations are of a different character.
Walking rapidly home, with now and then a blast of chill rain in his
face, and the lamplight gleaming in the wet streets, Vincent found less
and less reason for attaching any importance to Mrs. Hilyard's hints and
alarms. It was the sentiment of the night, and her own thoughts, which
had suggested such fears to her mind--a mind evidently experienced in
paths more crooked than any which Vincent himself, much less simple
Susan, had ever known. When he reached home, he found his little fire
burning brightly, his room arranged with careful nicety, which was his
landlady's appropriate and sensible manner of showing her appreciation
of the night's lecture, and her devotion to the minister; and, lastly,
on the table a letter from that little house in Lonsdale, round which
such fanciful fears had gathered. Never was there a letter which
breathed more of the peaceful security and tranquillity of home. Mrs.
Vincent wrote to her Arthur in mingled rejoicing and admonition, curious
and delighted to hear of his lectures, but not more anxious about his
fame and success than about his flannels and precautions against wet
feet; while Susan's postscript--a half longer than the letter to which
it was appended--furnished her affectionate brother with sundry details,
totally incomprehensible to him, of her wedding preparations, and, more
shyly, of her perfect girlish happiness. Vincent laughed aloud as he
folded up that woman's letter. No mysterious horror, no whispering
doubtful gloom, surrounded that house from which the pure, full daylight
atmosphere, untouched by any darkness, breathed fresh upon him out of
these simple pages. Here, in this humble virtuous world, were no
mysteries. It was a deliverance to a heart which had begun to falter.
Wherever fate might be lingering in the wild darkness of that January
night, it was not on the threshold of his mother's house.




CHAPTER X.


On the next evening after this there was a tea-meeting in Salem Chapel.
In the back premises behind the chapel were all needful accommodations
for the provision of that popular refreshment--boilers, tea-urns,
unlimited crockery and pewter. In fact, it was one of Mr. Tozer's
boasts, that owing to the liberality of the "connection" in Carlingford,
Salem was fully equipped in this respect, and did not need to borrow so
much as a spoon or teapot, a very important matter under the
circumstances. This, however, was the first tea-meeting which had taken
place since that one at which Mr. Tufton's purse had been presented to
him, and the old pastor had taken leave of his flock. The young pastor,
indeed, had set his face against tea-meetings. He was so far behind his
age as to doubt their utility, and declared himself totally unqualified
to preside over such assemblies; but, in the heat of his recent
disappointment, when, stung by other people's neglect, he had taken up
Salem and all belonging to it into his bosom, a cruel use had been made
of the young minister's compliance. They had wrung a reluctant consent
from him in that unguarded moment, and the walls of Carlingford had been
for some days blazing with placards of the tea-meeting, at which the now
famous (in Carlingford) lecturer on Church and State was to speak. Not
Tozer, with all his eloquence, had been able to persuade the pastor to
preside; but at least he was to appear, to take tea at that table
elevated on the platform, where Phoebe Tozer, under the matronly care
of Mrs. Brown (for it was necessary to divide these honours, and guard
against jealousy), dispensed the fragrant lymph, and to address the
meeting. There had been thoughts of a grand celebration in the Music
Hall to do more honour to the occasion; but as that might have
neutralised the advantages of having all the needful utensils within
themselves, convenience and economy carried the day, and the scene of
these festivities, as of all the previous festivities of Salem, was the
large low room underneath the chapel, once intended for a school, but
never used, except on Sundays, in that capacity. Thither for two or
three days all the "young ladies" of the chapel had streamed to and fro,
engaged in decorations. Some manufactured festoons of evergreens, some
concocted pink and white roses in paper to embellish the same. The
printed texts of the Sunday school were framed, and in some cases
obliterated, in Christmas garlands. Christmas, indeed, was past, but
there were still holly and red berries and green smooth laurel leaves.
The Pigeon girls, Phoebe Tozer, Mrs. Brown's niece from the country,
and the other young people in Salem who were of sufficiently advanced
position, enjoyed the preparations greatly--entering into them with even
greater heartiness than Lucy Wodehouse exhibited in the adornment of St.
Roque's, and taking as much pleasure in the task as if they had been
picturesque Italians adorning the shrine of their favourite saint.
Catterina and Francesca with their flower-garlands are figures worthy of
any picture, and so is Lucy Wodehouse under the chancel arch at St.
Roque's; but how shall we venture to ask anybody's sympathy for Phoebe
and Maria Pigeon as they put up their festoons round the four square
walls of the low schoolroom in preparation for the Salem tea-party?
Nevertheless it is a fact that the two last mentioned had very much the
same intentions and sensations, and amid the coils of fresh ivy and
laurel did not look amiss in their cheerful labour--a fact which, before
the work was completed, had become perceptible to various individuals of
the Carlingford public. But Mr. Vincent was, on this point, as on
several others, unequal to the requirements of his position. When he did
glance in for a moment of the afternoon of the eventful day, it was in
company with Tozer and the Rev. Mr. Raffles of Shoebury, who was to take
the chair. Mr. Raffles was very popular in Carlingford, as everywhere.
To secure him for a tea-meeting was to secure its success. He examined
into all the preparations, tasted the cake, pricked his fingers with the
garlands to the immense delight of the young ladies, and complimented
them on their skill with beaming cheerfulness; while the minister of
Salem, on the contrary, stalked about by his side pale and preoccupied,
with difficulty keeping himself from that contempt of the actual things
around to which youth is so often tempted. His mind wandered off to the
companion of his last night's walk--to the stranger pacing up and down
that damp garden with inscrutable unknown thoughts--to the beautiful
creature within those lighted windows, so near and yet so overwhelmingly
distant--as if somehow they had abstracted life and got it among
themselves. Mr. Vincent had little patience for what he considered the
mean details of existence nearer at hand. As soon as he could possibly
manage it, he escaped, regarding with a certain hopeless disgust the
appearance he had to make in the evening, and without finding a single
civil thing to say to the fair decorators. "My young brother looks sadly
low and out of spirits," said jolly Mr. Raffles. "What do you mean by
being so unkind to the minister, Miss Phoebe, eh?" Poor Phoebe
blushed pinker than ever, while the rest laughed. It was pleasant to be
supposed "unkind" to the minister; and Phoebe resolved to do what she
could to cheer him when she sat by his elbow at the platform table
making tea for the visitors of the evening.

The evening came, and there was not a ticket to be had anywhere in
Carlingford: the schoolroom, with its blazing gas, its festoons, and its
mottoes, its tables groaning with dark-complexioned plumcake and heavy
buns, was crowded quite beyond its accommodation; and the edifying sight
might be seen of Tozer and his brother deacons, and indeed all who were
sufficiently interested in the success of Salem to sacrifice themselves
on its behalf, making an erratic but not unsubstantial tea in corners,
to make room for the crowd. And in the highest good-humour was the
crowd which surrounded all the narrow tables. The urns were well filled,
the cake abundant, the company in its best attire. The ladies had
bonnets, it is true, but these bonnets were worthy the occasion. At the
table on the platform sat Mr. Raffles, in the chair, beaming upon the
assembled party, with cheerful little Mrs. Tufton and Mrs. Brown at one
side of him, and Phoebe looking very pink and pretty, shaded from the
too enthusiastic admiration of the crowd below by the tea-urn at which
she officiated. Next to her, the minister cast abstracted looks upon the
assembly. He was, oh, so interesting in his silence and pallor!--he
spoke little; and when any one addressed him, he had to come back as if
from a distance to hear. If anybody could imagine that Mr. Raffles
contrasted dangerously with Mr. Vincent in that reserve and quietness,
it would be a mistake unworthy a philosophic observer. On the contrary,
the Salem people were all doubly proud of their pastor. It was not to be
expected that such a man as he should unbend as the reverend chairman
did. They preferred that he should continue on his stilts. It would have
been a personal humiliation to the real partisans of the chapel, had he
really woke up and come down from that elevation. The more commonplace
the ordinary "connection" was, the more proud they felt of their student
and scholar. So Mr. Vincent leaned his head upon his hands and gazed
unmolested over the lively company, taking in all the particulars of the
scene, the busy groups engaged in mere tea-making and tea-consuming--the
flutter of enjoyment among humble girls and womankind who knew no
pleasure more exciting--the whispers which pointed out himself to
strangers among the party--the triumphant face of Tozer at the end of
the room, jammed against the wall, drinking tea out of an empty
sugar-basin. If the scene woke any movement of human sympathy in the
bosom of the young Nonconformist, he was half ashamed of himself for it.
What had the high mission of an evangelist--the lofty ambition of a man
trained to enlighten his country--the warm assurance of talent which
felt itself entitled to the highest sphere,--what had these great things
to do in a Salem Chapel tea-meeting? So the lofty spirit held apart,
gazing down from a mental elevation much higher than the platform; and
all the people who had heard his lectures pointed him out to each other,
and congratulated themselves on that studious and separated aspect which
was so unlike other men. In fact, the fine superiority of Mr. Vincent
was at the present moment the very thing that was wanted to rivet their
chains. Even Mrs. Pigeon looked on with silent admiration. He was
"high"--never before had Salem known a minister who did not condescend
to be gracious at a tea-meeting--and the leader of the opposition
honoured him in her heart.

And even when at last the social meal was over, when the urns were
cleared away, and with a rustle and flutter the assembly composed itself
to the intellectual regale about to follow, Mr. Vincent did not change
his position. Mr. Raffles made quite one of his best speeches; he kept
his audience in a perpetual flutter of laughter and applause; he set
forth all the excellencies of the new minister with such detail and
fulness as only the vainest could have swallowed. But the pleased
congregation still applauded. He praised Mr. Tufton, the venerable
father of the community, he praised the admirable deacons; he praised
the arrangements. In short, Mr. Raffles applauded everybody, and
everybody applauded Mr. Raffles. After the chairman had concluded his
speech, the hero of the evening gathered himself up dreamily, and rose
from Phoebe Tozer's side. He told them he had been gazing at them this
hour past, studying the scene before him; how strangely they appeared to
him, standing on this little bright gaslighted perch amid the dark sea
of life that surged round them; that now he and they were face to face
with each other, it was not their social pleasure he was thinking of,
but that dark unknown existence that throbbed and echoed around: he bade
them remember the dark night which enclosed that town of Carlingford,
without betraying the secret of its existence even to the nearest
village; of those dark streets and houses which hid so many lives and
hearts and tragic histories; he enlarged upon Mrs. Hilyard's idea of the
sentiment of "such a night," till timid people threw glances behind
them, and some sensitive mothers paused to wonder whether the minister
could have heard that Tommy had fallen into the fire, or Mary scalded
herself, and took this way to break the news. The speech was the
strangest that ever was listened to at a tea-party. It was the wayward
capricious pouring forth of a fanciful young mind under an unquiet
influence, having no connection whatever with the "object," the place,
or the listeners. The consequence was, that it was listened to with
breathless interest--that the faces grew pale and the eyes bright, and
shivers of restrained emotion ran through the astonished audience. Mr.
Vincent perceived the effect of his eloquence, as a nursery story-teller
perceives the rising sob of her little hearers. When he saw it, he
awoke, as the same nursery minstrel does sometimes, to feel how unreal
was the sentiment in his own breast which had produced this genuine
feeling in others, and with a sudden amusement proceeded to deepen his
colours and make bolder strokes of effect. His success was perfect;
before he concluded, he had in imagination dismissed the harmless Salem
people out of their very innocent recreation to the dark streets which
thrilled round them--to the world of unknown life, of which each man for
himself had some knowledge--to the tragedies that might be going on side
by side with them, for aught they knew. His hearers drew a long breath
when it was over. They were startled, frightened, enchanted. If they had
been witnessing a melodrama, they scarcely could have been more excited.
He had put the most dreadful suggestions in their mind of all sorts of
possible trouble; he sat down with the consciousness of having done his
duty by Salem for this night at least.

But when Tozer got up after him to tell about the prosperity of the
congregation, the anticlimax was felt even by the people of Salem. Some
said, "No, no," audibly, some laughed, not a few rose up and went away.
Vincent himself, feeling the room very hot, and not disliking the little
commotion of interest which arose on his departure, withdrew himself
from the platform, and made his way to the little vestry, where a breath
of air was to be had; for, January night as it was, the crowd and the
tea had established a very high temperature in the under-regions of
Salem. He opened the window in the vestry, which looked out upon the
damp ground behind the chapel and the few gravestones, and threw himself
down on the little sofa with a sensation of mingled self-reproach and
amusement. Somehow, even when one disapproves of one's self for doing
it, one has a certain enjoyment in bewildering the world. Mr. Vincent
was rather pleased with his success, although it was only a variety of
"humbug." He entertained with Christian satisfaction the thought that he
had succeeded in introducing a certain visionary uneasiness into the
lively atmosphere of the tea-meeting--and he was delighted with his own
cleverness in spite of himself.

While he lay back on his sofa, and pondered this gratifying thought, he
heard a subdued sound of voices outside--voices and steps that fell with
but little sound upon the damp grass. A languid momentary wonder touched
the mind of the minister: who could have chosen so doleful a retirement?
It was about the last place in the world for a lover's interview, which
was the first thing that suggested itself to the young man; the next
moment he started bolt upright, and listened with undisguised
curiosity. That voice so different from the careless voices of Salem,
the delicate refined intonations which had startled him in the shabby
little room in Back Grove Street, awoke an interest in his mind which no
youthful accents in Carlingford could have excited. He sat upright on
the instant, and edged towards the open window. The gas burned low in
the little vestry, which nobody had been expected to enter, and the
illumination from all the schoolroom windows, and sounds of cheering and
commotion there, had doubtless made the absolute darkness and silence
behind seem perfectly safe to the two invisible people now meeting under
the cloud of night. Mr. Vincent was not startled into eavesdropping
unawares, nor did he engage in any sophistical argument to justify
himself for listening. On the contrary, he listened honestly, with the
full intention of hearing all he could--suddenly changed from the
languid sentimentalist, painful and self-conscious, which the influences
of the evening had made him, into a spectator very wide awake and
anxious, straining his ear to catch some knowledge of a history, in
which a crowd of presentiments warned him that he himself should yet be
concerned.

"If you must speak, speak here," said that voice which Vincent had
recognised: "it is scarcely the atmosphere for a man of your fine taste,
to be sure; but considering the subject of the conference, it will do.
What do you want with me?"

"By Jove, it looks dangerous!--what do you mean to suggest by this sweet
rendezvous--murder?" said the man, whoever he was, who had accompanied
Mrs. Hilyard to the damp yard of Salem Chapel, with its scattered
graves.

"My nerves are strong," she answered. "It is a pity you should take the
trouble to be melodramatic. Do you think I am vain enough to imagine
that you could subject yourself to all the unpleasant accessories of
being hanged on my account? Fancy a rough hempen rope, and the dirty
fingers that would adjust it. Pah! you would not risk it for me."

Her companion swore a muttered oath. "By Jove! I believe you'd be
content to be murdered, to make such an end of me," he answered, in the
baffled tone of rage which a man naturally sinks into when engaged in
unequal conflict of recrimination with a woman.

"This is too conjugal," said Mrs. Hilyard; "it reminds me of former
experiences: come to the point, I beg of you. You did not come here and
seek me out that we might have an amusing conversation--what do you want
with me?"

"Don't tempt me too far with your confounded impertinence," exclaimed
the man, "or there is no telling what may happen. I want to know where
that child is; you know I do. I mean to reclaim my rights so far as she
is concerned. If she had been a ward in Chancery, a man might have
submitted. But I am a reformed individual--my life is of the most
exemplary description--no court in Christendom would keep her from my
custody now. I want the girl for her own good--she shall marry
brilliantly, which she never could do with you. I know she's grown up
as lovely as I expected----"

"How do you know?" interrupted Mrs. Hilyard, with a certain hoarseness
in her voice.

"Ah! I have touched you at last. Remembering what her mother was," he
went on, in a mocking tone, "though I am grieved to see how much you
have gone off in late years--and having a humble consciousness of her
father's personal advantages, and, in short, of her relatives in
general, I know she's a little beauty--and, by Jove, she shall be a
duchess yet."

There was a pause--something like a hard sob thrilled in the air, rather
a vibration than a sound; and Vincent, making a desperate gesture of
rage towards the school-room, from which a burst of applause at that
moment sounded, approached closer to the window. Then the woman's voice
burst forth passionate, but subdued.

"You have seen her! you!--you that blasted her life before she was born,
and confused her sweet mind for ever--how did you dare to look at my
child? And I," cried the passionate voice, forgetting even
caution--"_I_, that would give my life drop by drop to restore what
never can be restored to that victim of your sin and my weakness--I do
not see her. I refuse myself that comfort. I leave it to others to do
all that love and pity can do for my baby. You speak of murder--man! if
I had a knife, I could find it in my heart to put an end to your horrid
career; and, look you, I will--Coward! I will! I will kill you before
you shall lay your vile hands on my child."

"She-wolf!" cried the man, grinding his teeth, "do you know how much it
would be to my advantage if you never left this lonely spot you have
brought me to? By Jove, I have the greatest mind----"

Another momentary silence. Vincent, wound up to a high state of
excitement, sprang noiselessly to his feet, and was rushing to the
window to proclaim his presence, when Mrs. Hilyard's voice, perfectly
calm, and in its usual tone, brought him back to himself.

"Second thoughts are best. It would compromise you horribly, and put a
stop to many pleasures--not to speak of those dreadful dirty fingers
arranging that rough rope round your neck, which, pardon me, I can't
help thinking of when you associate your own name with such a vulgar
suggestion as murder. _I_ should not mind these little details, but
_you_! However, I excited myself unreasonably, you have not seen her.
That skilful inference of yours was only a lie. She was not at Lonsdale,
you know."

"How the devil do you know I was at Lonsdale?" said her companion.

"I keep myself informed of the movements of so interesting a person. She
was not there."

"No," replied the man, "she was not there; but I need not suggest to
your clear wits that there are other Lonsdales in England. What if Miss
Mildmay were in her father's lawful guardianship now?"

Here the air palpitated with a cry, the cry as of a wild creature in
sudden blind anguish. It was echoed by a laugh of mockery and
exultation. "Should you like me to tell you which of the Lonsdales you
honoured with your patronage?" continued the mocking voice: "that in
Derbyshire, or that in Devonshire, or that in Cumberland? I am afflicted
to have defeated your skilful scheme so easily. Now that you see I am a
match for you, perhaps you will perceive that it is better to yield
peaceably, and unite with me in securing the girl's good. She needs only
to be seen to----"

"Who do you imagine you are addressing, Colonel Mildmay?" said Mrs.
Hilyard, haughtily; "there has been enough of this: you are mistaken if
you think you can deceive me for more than a moment: my child is not in
your hands, and never will be, please God. But mark what I say," she
continued, drawing a fierce, hard breath, "if you should ever succeed in
tracing her--if you should ever be able to snatch her from me--then
confess your sins, and say your last prayers, for as sure as I live you
shall die in a week."

"She-devil! murderess!" cried her companion, not without a certain shade
of alarm in his voice; "if your power were equal to your will----"

"In that case my power should be equal to my will," said the steady,
delicate woman's voice, as clear in very fine articulation as if it were
some peaceful arrangement of daily life for which she declared herself
capable: "you should not escape if you surrounded yourself with a king's
guards. I swear to you, if you do what you say, that I will kill you
somehow, by whatever means I can attain--and I have never yet broken my
word."

An unsteady defiant laugh was the only reply. The man was evidently more
impressed with the sincerity, and power to execute her intentions, of
the woman than she with his. Apparently they stood regarding each other
for another momentary interval in silence. Again Mrs. Hilyard was the
first to speak.

"I presume our conference is over now," she said, calmly; "how you could
think of seeking it is more than I can understand. I suppose poor pretty
Alice, who thinks every woman can be persuaded, induced you to attempt
this. Don't let me keep you any longer in a place so repugnant to your
taste. I am going to the tea-meeting at Salem Chapel to hear my young
friend the minister speak: perhaps this unprofitable discussion has lost
me that advantage. You heard him the other night, and were pleased, I
trust. Good-night. I suppose, before leaving you, I should thank you for
having spared my life."

Vincent heard the curse upon her and her stinging tongue, which burst in
a growl of rage from the lips of the other, but he did not see the
satirical curtsy with which this strange woman swept past, nor the
scarcely controllable impulse which made the man lift his stick and
clench it in his hand as she turned away from him those keen eyes, out
of which even the gloom of night could not quench the light. But even
Mrs. Hilyard herself never knew how near, how very near, she was at that
moment to the unseen world. Had her step been less habitually firm and
rapid,--had she lingered on her way--the temptation might have been too
strong for the man, maddened by many memories. He made one stride after
her, clenching his stick. It was perfectly dark in that narrow passage
which led out to the front of the chapel. She might have been stunned in
a moment, and left there to die, without any man being the wiser. It was
not virtue, nor hatred of bloodshed, nor repugnance to harm her, which
restrained Colonel Mildmay's hand: it was half the rapidity of her
movements, and half the instinct of a gentleman, which vice itself could
not entirely obliterate. Perhaps he was glad when he saw her disappear
from before him down the lighted steps into the Salem schoolroom. He
stood in the darkness and watched her out of sight, himself unseen by
any one, and then departed on his way, a splendid figure, all unlike the
population of Grove Street. Some of the Salem people, dispersing at the
moment, saw him sauntering down the street grand and leisurely, and
recognised the gentleman who had been seen in the Music Hall with Lady
Western. They thought he must have come privately once more to listen to
their minister's eloquence. Probably Lady Western herself, the leader of
fashion in Carlingford, would appear next Sunday to do Mr. Vincent
honour. The sight of this very fine gentleman picking his leisurely way
along the dark pavement of Grove Street, leaning confidingly upon that
stick over which his tall person swayed with fashionable languor, gave a
climax to the evening in the excited imaginations of Mr. Vincent's
admirers. Nobody but the minister and one utterly unnoted individual in
the crowd knew what had brought the Colonel and his stick to such a
place. Nobody but the Colonel himself, and the watchful heavens above,
knew how little had prevented him from leaving a silent, awful witness
of that secret interview upon the chapel steps.

When Mr. Vincent returned to the platform, which he did hurriedly, Mr.
Pigeon was addressing the meeting. In the flutter of inquiries whether
he was better, and gentle hopes from Phoebe that his studies had not
been too much for him, nobody appeared to mark the eagerness of his
eyes, and the curiosity in his face. He sat down in his old place, and
pretended to listen to Mr. Pigeon. Anxiously from under the shadow of
his hands he inspected the crowd before him, who had recovered their
spirits. In a corner close to the door he at last found the face he was
in search of. Mrs. Hilyard sat at the end of a table, leaning her face
on her hand. She had her eyes fixed upon the speaker, and there passed
now and then across the corners of her close-shut mouth that momentary
movement which was her symbol for a smile. She was not _pretending_ to
listen, but giving her entire attention to the honest poulterer. Now and
then she turned her eyes from Pigeon, and perused the room and the
company with rapid glances of amusement and keen observation. Perhaps
her eyes gleamed keener, and her dark cheek owned a slight flush--that
was all. Out of her mysterious life--out of that interview, so full of
violence and passion--the strange woman came, without a moment's
interval, to amuse herself by looking at and listening to all those
homely innocent people. Could it be that she was taking notes of
Pigeon's speech? Suddenly, all at once, she had taken a pencil out of
her pocket and began to write, glancing up now and then towards the
speaker. Mr. Vincent's head swam with the wonder he was
contemplating--was she flesh and blood after all, or some wonderful
skeleton living a galvanic life? But when he asked himself the question,
her cry of sudden anguish, her wild, wicked promise to kill the man who
stole her daughter, came over his mind, and arrested his thoughts. He,
dallying as he was on the verge of life, full of fantastic hopes and
disappointment, could only pretend to listen to Pigeon; but the good
poulterer turned gratified eyes towards Mrs. Hilyard. He recognised her
real attention and interest; was it the height of voluntary sham and
deception?--or was she really taking notes?

The mystery was solved after the meeting was over. There was some music,
in the first place--anthems in which all the strength of Salem united,
Tozer taking a heavy bass, while Phoebe exerted herself so in the
soprano that Mr. Vincent's attention was forcibly called off his own
meditations, in terror lest something should break in the throat so
hardly strained. Then there were some oranges, another speech, a hymn,
and a benediction; and then Mr. Raffles sprang joyfully up, and leaned
over the platform to shake hands with his friends. This last process was
trying. Mr. Vincent, who could no longer take refuge in silence,
descended into the retiring throng. He was complimented on his speech,
and even by some superior people, who had a mind to be fashionable, upon
the delightful evening they had enjoyed. When they were all gone, there
were still the Tozers, the Browns, the Pigeons, Mrs. Tufton, and Mr.
Raffles. He was turning back to them disconsolate, when he was suddenly
confronted by Mrs. Hilyard out of her corner with the fly-leaf of the
hymn-book the unscrupulous woman had been writing in, torn out in her
hand.

"Stop a minute!" she cried; "I want to speak to you. I want your help,
if you will give it me. Don't be surprised at what I ask. Is your mother
a good woman--was it she that trained you to act to the forlorn as you
did to me last night? I have been too hasty--I take away your
breath;--never mind, there is no time to choose one's words. The
butterman is looking at us, Mr. Vincent. The ladies are alarmed; they
think I want spiritual consolation at this unsuitable moment. Make
haste--answer my question. Would she do an act of Christian charity to a
woman in distress?"

"My mother is--yes, I know she would, what do you want of her?--my
mother is the best and tenderest of women," cried Vincent, in utter
amazement.

"I want to send a child to her--a persecuted, helpless child, whom it is
the object of my life to keep out of evil hands," said Mrs. Hilyard, her
dark thin face growing darker and more pallid, her eyes softening with
tears. "She will be safe at Lonsdale now, and I cannot go in my own
person at present to take her anywhere. Here is a message for the
telegraph," she added, holding up the paper which Vincent had supposed
to be notes of Mr. Pigeon's speech; "take it for me--send it off
to-night--you will? and write to your mother; she shall suffer no loss,
and I will thank her on my knees. It is life or death."

"I know--I am aware!" cried Vincent, not knowing what he said. "There is
no time to be lost."

She put the paper into his hand, and clasped it tight between both of
hers, not knowing in the excitement which she was so well trained to
repress, that he had betrayed any special knowledge of her distress. It
seemed natural, in that strain of desperation, that everybody should
understand her. "Come to-morrow and tell me," she said, hurriedly, and
then hastened away, leaving him with the paper folded close into his
hand as her hard grasp had left it. He turned away from the group which
awaited his coming with some curiosity and impatience, and read the
message by the light of one of the garlanded and festive lamps. "Rachel
Russell to Miss Smith, Lonsdale, Devonshire. Immediately on receiving
this, take the child to Lonsdale, near Peterborough--to Mrs. Vincent's;
leave the train at some station near town, and drive to a corresponding
station on the Great Northern; don't enter London. Blue veil--care--not
to be left for an instant. I trust all to you." Mr. Vincent put the
message in his pocketbook, took it out again--tried it in his purse, his
waistcoat pocket, everywhere he could think of--finally, closed his hand
over it as at first, and in a high state of excitement went up to the
chattering group at the little platform, the only thought in his mind
being how to get rid of them, that he might hasten upon his mission
before the telegraph office was closed for the night.

And, as was to be expected, Mr. Vincent found it no easy matter to get
rid of the Tozers and Pigeons, who were all overflowing about the
tea-party, its provisions, its speeches, and its success. He stood with
that bit of paper clenched in his hand, and endured the jokes of his
reverend brother, the remarks of Mrs. Tufton, the blushes of Phoebe.
He stood for half an hour at least perforce in unwilling and constrained
civility--at last he became desperate;--with a wild promise to return
presently, he rushed out into the night. The station was about half a
mile out of Carlingford, at the new end, a long way past Dr. Rider's.
When Vincent reached it, the telegraph clerk was putting on his hat to
go away, and did not relish the momentary detention; when the message
was received and despatched, the young minister drew breath--he went out
of the office, wiping his hot forehead, to the railway platform, where
the last train for town was just starting. As Vincent stood recovering
himself and regaining his breath, the sudden flash of a match struck in
one of the carriages attracted his attention. He looked, and saw by the
light of the lamp inside a man stooping to light his cigar. The action
brought the face, bending down close to the window, clearly out against
the dark-blue background of the empty carriage; hair light, fine, and
thin, in long but scanty locks--a high-featured eagle-face, too sharp
for beauty now, but bearing all the traces of superior good looks
departed--a light beard, so light that it did not count for its due in
the aspect of that remarkable countenance--a figure full of ease and
haughty grace: all these particulars Vincent noted with a keen rapid
inspection. In another moment the long leash of carriages had plunged
into the darkness. With a strange flush of triumph he watched them
disappear, and turned away with a smile on his lips. The message of
warning was already tingling along the sensitive wires, and must
outspeed the slow human traveller. This face, which so stamped itself
upon his memory, which he fancied he could see pictured on the air as he
returned along the dark road, was the face of the man who had been Lady
Western's companion at the lecture. That it was the same face which had
confronted Mrs. Hilyard in the dark graveyard behind Salem Chapel he
never doubted. With a thrill of active hatred and fierce enmity which it
was difficult to account for, and still more difficult for a man of his
profession to excuse, the young man looked forward to the unknown future
with a certainty of meeting that face again.

We drop a charitable veil over the conclusion of the night. Mr. Raffles
and Mr. Vincent supped at Pigeon's, along with the Browns and Tozers;
and Phoebe's testimony is on record that it was a feast of reason and
a flow of soul.




CHAPTER XI.


The next morning Vincent awoke with a sense of personal occupation and
business, which perhaps is only possible to a man engaged with the
actual occurrences of individual life. Professional duties and the
general necessities of existing, do not give that thrill of sensible
importance and use which a man feels who is busy with affairs which
concern his own or other people's very heart and being. The young
Nonconformist was no longer the sentimentalist who had made the gaping
assembly at Salem Chapel uneasy over their tea-drinking. That dark and
secret ocean of life which he had apostrophised, opened up to him
immediately thereafter one of its most mysterious scenes. This had
shaken Vincent rudely out of his own youthful vagaries. Perhaps the most
true of philosophers, contemplating, however profoundly, the secrets of
nature or thought, would come to a sudden standstill over a visible
abyss of human guilt, wretchedness, heroic self-restraint, and courage,
yawning apparent in the meditative way. What, then, were the poor
dialectics of Church and State controversy, or the fluctuations of an
uncertain young mind feeling itself superior to its work, to such a
spectacle of passionate life, full of evil and of noble qualities--of
guilt and suffering more intense than anything philosophy dreams of?
The thin veil which youthful ignorance, believing in the supremacy of
thought and superior charm of intellectual concerns, lays over the
world, shrivelled up under the fiery lurid light of that passionate
scene. Two people clearly, who had once loved each other, hating each
other to the death, struggling desperately over a lesser thread of life
proceeding from them both--the mother, driven to the lowest extremities
of existence, standing up like a wild creature to defend her
offspring--what could philosophy say to such phenomena? A wild circle of
passion sprang into conscious being under the young man's
half-frightened eyes--wild figures that filled the world, leaving small
space for the calm suggestions of thought, and even to truth itself so
little vantage-ground. Love, Hatred, Anger, Jealousy, Revenge--how many
more? Vincent, who was no longer the lofty reasoning Vincent of
Homerton, found life look different under the light of those
torch-bearers. But he had no leisure on this particular morning to
survey the subject. He had to carry his report and explanation to the
strange woman who had so seized upon and involved him in her concerns.

Mrs. Hilyard was seated in her room, just as he had seen her before,
working with flying needle and nervous fingers at her coarsest
needlework. She said, "Come in," and did not rise when he entered. She
gave him an eager, inquiring look, more importunate and commanding than
any words, but never stopped working, moving her thin fingers as if
there was some spell in the continuance of her labour. She was
impatient of his silence before he had closed the door--desperate when
he said the usual greeting. She opened her pale lips and spoke, but
Vincent heard nothing. She was beyond speech.

"The message went off last night, and I wrote to my mother," said
Vincent; "don't fear. She will do what you wish, and everything will be
well."

It was some time before Mrs. Hilyard quite conquered her agitation; when
she succeeded, she spoke so entirely in her usual tone that Vincent
started, being inexperienced in such changes. He contemplated her with
tragic eyes in her living martyrdom; she, on the contrary, more
conscious of her own powers, her own strength of resistance and activity
of life, than of any sacrifice, had nothing about her the least
tragical, and spoke according to nature. Instead of any passionate burst
of self-revelation, this is what she said--

"Thank you. I am very much obliged to you. How everything is to be well,
does not appear to me; but I will take your word for it. I hope I may
take your word for your mother also, Mr. Vincent. You have a right to
know how this is. Do you claim it, and must I tell you now?"

Here for the first time Vincent recollected in what an unjustifiable way
he had obtained his information. Strangely enough, it had never struck
him before. He had felt himself somehow identified with the woman in the
strange interview he had overheard. The man was a personal enemy. His
interest in the matter was so honest and simple amid all the
complication of his youthful superficial insincerities, that this
equivocal action was one of the very few which Vincent had actually
never questioned even to himself. He was confounded now when he saw how
the matter stood. His face became suddenly crimson;--shame took
possession of his soul.

"Good heavens, I have done the most dishonourable action!" cried
Vincent, betrayed into sudden exclamation by the horror of the
discovery. Then he paused, turning an alarmed look upon his new friend.
She took it very calmly. She glanced up at him with a comic glance in
her eyes, and a twitch at the corners of her mouth. Notwithstanding last
night--notwithstanding the anxiety which she dared not move in her own
person to alleviate--she was still capable of being amused. Her eyes
said, "What now?" with no very alarming apprehensions. The situation was
a frightful one for poor Vincent.

"You will be quite justified in turning me out of your house," he said,
clearing his throat, and in great confusion; "but if you will believe
it, I never till this moment saw how atrocious---- Mrs. Hilyard, I was
in the vestry; the window was open; I heard your conversation last
night."

For a moment Vincent had all the punishment he expected, and greater.
Her eyes blazed upon him out of that pale dark face with a certain
contempt and lofty indifference. There was a pause. Mr. Vincent crushed
his best hat in his hands, and sat speechless doing penance. He was
dismayed with the discovery of his own meanness. Nobody could deliver
such a cutting sentence as he was pronouncing on himself.

"All the world might have listened, so far as I am concerned," she said,
after a while, quietly enough. "I am sorry you did it; but the discovery
is worse for yourself than for me." Then, after another pause, "I don't
mean to quarrel. I am glad for my own sake, though sorry for yours. Now
you know better than I can tell you. There were some pleasant flowers of
speech to be gathered in that dark garden," she continued, with another
odd upward gleam of her eyes. "We must have startled your clerical ideas
rather. At the moment, however, Mr. Vincent, people like Colonel Mildmay
and myself mean what we say."

"If I had gained my knowledge in a legitimate way," said the
shame-stricken minister, not venturing to look her in the face, "I
should have said that I hoped it was only for the moment."

Mrs. Hilyard laid down her work, and looked across at him with
undisguised amusement. "I am sorry there is nobody here to perceive this
beautiful situation," she said. "Who would not have their ghostly father
commit himself, if he repented after this fashion? Thank you, Mr.
Vincent, for what you don't say. And now we shall drop the subject,
don't you think? Were the deacons all charmed with the tea-meeting last
night?"

"You want me to go now," said Vincent, rising, with disconcerted looks.

"Not because I am angry. I am not angry," she said, rising and holding
out her hand to him. "It was a pity, but it was an inadvertence, and no
dishonourable action. Yes, go. I am best to be avoided till I hear how
this journey has been managed, and what your mother says. It was a
sudden thought, that sending them to Lonsdale. I know that, even if he
has not already found the right one, he will search all the others now.
And your Lonsdale has been examined and exhausted; all is safe there.
Yes, go. I am glad you know; but don't say anything to Alice, if you see
her, as she is sure to seek you out. You know who I mean by Alice? Lady
Western--yes. Good-bye. I trust you, notwithstanding the vestry window;
but close it after this on January nights."

She had sunk into her seat again, and was absorbed in her needlework,
before Vincent left the room. He looked back upon her before he shut the
door, but she had no look to spare from that all-engrossing work; her
thin fingers were more scarred than ever, and stained with the coarse
blue stuff. All his life after the young man never saw that colour
without thinking of the stains on those poor hands.

He went about his work assiduously all that day, visiting sick people,
poor people, men and women, "which were sinners." That dark ocean of
life with which he had frightened the Salem people last night, Mr.
Vincent made deeper investigations into this day than he had made before
during all the time he had been in Carlingford. He kept clear of the
smug comfort of the leading people of "the connection." Absolute want,
suffering, and sorrow, were comparatively new to him; and being as yet a
stranger to philanthropic schemes, and not at all scientific in the
distribution of his sympathies, the minister of Salem conducted himself
in a way which would have called forth the profoundest contempt and pity
of the curate of St. Roque's. He believed everybody's story, and emptied
his purse with the wildest liberality; for, indeed, visitation of the
poor had not been a branch of study at Homerton. Tired and all but
penniless, he did not turn his steps homeward till the wintry afternoon
was sinking into night, and the lamps began to be lighted about the
cheerful streets. As he came into George Street he saw Lady Western's
carriage waiting at the door of Masters's. Alice! that was the name they
called her. He looked at the celestial chariot wistfully. He had nothing
to do with it or its beautiful mistress--never, as anything but a
stranger, worshipping afar off, could the Dissenting minister of
Carlingford approach that lovely vision--never think of her but as of a
planet, ineffably distant--never----

"My lady's compliments," said a tall voice on a level with Vincent's
eyebrows: "will you please to step over and speak to her ladyship?" The
startled Nonconformist raised his eyes. The big footman, whose happy
privilege it was to wait upon that lady of his dreams, stood respectful
by his side, and from the carriage opposite the fairest face in the
world was beaming, the prettiest of hands waving to him. Vincent
believed afterwards that he crossed the entire breadth of George Street
in a single stride.

"I am so glad to see you, Mr. Vincent," said Lady Western, giving him
her hand; "I did so want to see you after the other night. Oh, how could
you be _so_ clever and wicked--so wicked to your friends! Indeed, I
shall never be pleased till you recant, and confess how wrong you were.
I must tell you why I went that night. I could not tell what on earth to
do with my brother, and I took him to amuse him; or else, you know, I
never could have gone to hear the poor dear old Church attacked. And how
violent you were too! Indeed I must not say how clever I thought it, or
I should feel I was an enemy to the Church. Now I want you to dine with
me, and I shall have somebody to come who will be a match for you. I am
very fond of clever society, though there is so little of it in
Carlingford. Tell me, will you come to-morrow? I am disengaged. Oh,
pray, do! and Mr. Wentworth shall come too, and you shall fight."

Lady Western clapped her pretty hands together with the greatest
animation. As for Vincent, all the superior thoughts in which he would
probably have indulged--the contrast he would have drawn between the
desperate brother and this butterfly creature, fluttering on the edge of
mysteries so dark and evil, had she been anybody else--deserted him
totally in the present crisis. She was not anybody else--she was
herself. The words that fell from those sweetest lips were of a
half-divine simplicity to the bewildered young man. He would have gone
off straightway to the end of the world if she had chosen to command
him. All unwarned by his previous failure, paradise opened again to his
delighted eyes.

"And I want to consult you about our friend," said Lady Western; "it
will be so kind of you to come. I am so pleased you have no engagement.
I am sure you thought us very stupid last time; and I am stupid, I
confess," added the beauty, turning those sweet eyes, which were more
eloquent than genius, upon the slave who was reconquered by a glance;
"but I like clever people dearly. Good-bye till to-morrow. I shall quite
reckon upon to-morrow. Oh, there is Mr. Wentworth! John, call Mr.
Wentworth to speak to me. Good morning--remember, half-past six--now,
you must not forget."

Spite of the fact that Mr. Wentworth took his place immediately by the
side of the carriage, Vincent passed on, a changed man. Forget! He
smiled to himself at the possibility, and as he walked on to his
lodging, a wonderful maze of expectation fell upon the young man's mind.
Why, he asked, was he brought into this strange connection with Her
relations and their story? what could be, he said to himself with a
little awe, the purpose of that Providence which shapes men's ends, in
interweaving his life with Hers by these links of common interest? The
skies throbbed with wonder and miracle as soon as they were lighted up
by her smile. Who could predict what might be coming, through all the
impossibilities of fact and circumstance? He would not dissipate that
delicious haze by any definite expectations like those which brought him
to sudden grief on a former occasion. He was content to believe it was
not for nothing that all these strange circles of fate were weaving
round his charmed feet.

In this elevated frame of mind, scarcely aware of the prosaic ground he
trod, Vincent reached home. The little maid at the door said something
about a lady, to which he paid no attention, being occupied with his own
thoughts. With an unconscious illumination on his face he mounted the
stair lightly, three steps at a time, to his own rooms. The lamp was
lighted in his little sitting-room, and some one rose nervously from the
table as he went in at the door. What was this sudden terror which fell
upon the young man in the renewed glory of his youthful hopes? It was
his mother, pale and faint, with sleepless tearful eyes, who, with the
cry of an aching heart, worn out by fatigue and suspense, came forward,
holding out anxious hands to him, and dropped in an utter _abandon_ of
weariness and distress into his astonished arms.




CHAPTER XII.


"What has happened? For heaven's sake tell me, mother," cried Vincent,
as she sank back, wiping her eyes, and altogether overpowered, half with
the trouble which he did not know, half with the joy of seeing him
again--"say it out at once, and don't keep me in this dreadful suspense.
Susan? She is not married? What is wrong?"

"Oh, my dear boy!" said Mrs. Vincent, recovering herself, but still
trembling in her agitation--"oh, my affectionate boy, always thinking of
us in his good heart! No, dear. It's--it's nothing particular happened.
Let me compose myself a little, Arthur, and take breath."

"But, Susan?" cried the excited young man.

"Susan, poor dear!--she is very well; and--and very happy up to this
moment, my darling boy," said Mrs. Vincent, "though whether she ought to
be happy under the circumstances--or whether it's only a cruel trick--or
whether I haven't been foolish and precipitate--but, my dear, what could
I do but come to you, Arthur? I could not have kept it from her if I had
stayed an hour longer at home. And to put such a dreadful suspicion into
her head, when it might be all a falsehood, would have only been killing
her; and, my dear boy, now I see your face again, I'm not so
frightened--and surely it can be cleared up, and all will be well."

Vincent, whose anxiety conquered his impatience, even while exciting it,
kneeled down by his mother's side and took her hands, which still
trembled, into his own. "Mother, think that I am very anxious; that I
don't know what you are referring to; and that the sudden sight of you
has filled me with all sort of terrors--for I know you would not lightly
take such a journey all by yourself," said the young man, growing still
more anxious as he thought of it--"and try to collect your thoughts and
tell me what is wrong."

His mother drew one of her hands out of his, laid it on his head, and
fondly smoothed back his hair. "My dear good son! you were always so
sensible--I wish you had never left us," she said, with a little groan;
"and indeed it was a great thought to undertake such a journey; and
since I came here, Arthur, I have felt so flurried and strange, that I
have not, as you see, even taken off my bonnet; but I think now you've
come, dear, if you would ring the bell and order up the tea? When I see
you, and see you looking so well, Arthur, it seems as if things could
never be so bad, you know. My dear," she said at last, with a little
quiver in her voice, stopping and looking at him with a kind of nervous
alarm, "it was about Mr. Fordham, you may be sure."

"Tea directly," said Vincent to the little maid, who appeared just at
this crisis, and who was in her turn alarmed by the brief and peremptory
order.

"What about Mr. Fordham?" he said, helping his mother to take off the
cloak and warm wraps in which she had been sitting, in her nervous
tremor and agitation, while she waited his return.

"Oh, my dear, my dear," cried poor Mrs. Vincent, wringing her hands, "if
he should not turn out as he ought, how can I ever forgive myself? I had
a kind of warning in my mind the first time he came to the house, and I
have always dreamt such uncomfortable dreams of him, Arthur. Oh! if
_you_ only could have seen him, my dear boy! But he was such a
gentleman, and had such ways. I am sure he must have mixed in the very
highest society--and he seemed so to _appreciate_ Susan--not only to be
in love with her, you know, my dear, as any young man might, but to
really appreciate my sweet girl. Oh, Arthur, Arthur, if he should turn
out badly, it will kill me, for my Susan will break her heart."

"Mother, you drive me frantic. What has he done?" cried poor Vincent.

"He has done nothing, my dear, that I know of. It is not him, Arthur,
for he has been gone for a month, arranging his affairs, you know,
before the wedding, and writes Susan regularly and beautiful letters. It
is a dreadful scrawl I got last night. I have it in my pocket-book. It
came by the last post when Susan was out, thank heaven. I'll show it you
presently, my dear, as soon as I can find it, but I have so many papers
in my pocket-book. She saw directly when she came in that something had
happened, and oh, Arthur, it was so hard to keep it from her. I don't
know when I have kept anything from her before. I can't tell how we got
through the night. But this morning I made up the most artful story I
could--here is the dreadful letter, my dear, at last--about being
determined to see you, and making sure that you were taking care of
yourself; for she knew as well as I did how negligent you always are
about wet feet. Are you sure your feet are dry now, Arthur? Yes, my dear
boy, it makes me very uncomfortable. You don't wonder to see your poor
mother here, now, after that?"

The letter which Vincent got meanwhile, and anxiously read, was as
follows--the handwriting very mean, with a little tremor in it, which
seemed to infer that the writer was an old man:--

     "MADAM,--Though I am but a poor man, I can't abear to see wrong
     going on, and do nothink to stop it. Madam, I beg of you to excuse
     me, as am unknown to you, and as can't sign my honest name to it
     like a man. This is the only way as I can give you a word of
     warning. Don't let the young lady marry him as she's agoing to, not
     if her heart should break first. Don't have nothink to do with Mr.
     Fordham. That's not his right name, and he has got a wife
     living--and this I say is true, as sure as I have to answer at the
     judgment;--and I say to you as a friend, Stop it, stop it! Don't
     let it go on a step, if you vally the young lady's charackter and
     her life. I don't add no more, because that's all I dare say, being
     only a servant; but I hope it's enough to save the poor young lady
     out of his clutches, as is a man that goeth about seeking whom he
     may devour.--From a well-wisher, though

     A STRANGER."


Mrs. Vincent's mind was easier when this epistle was out of her hands.
She stood up before the mirror to take off her bonnet, and put her cap
tidy; she glided across the room to take up the shawl and cloak which
her son had flung upon the little sofa anyhow, and to fold them and lay
them together on a chair. Then the trim little figure approached the
table, on which stood a dimly burning lamp, which smoked as lamps will
when they have it all their own way. Mrs. Vincent turned down the light
a little, and then proceeded to remove the globe and chimney by way of
seeing what was wrong--bringing her own anxious patient face, still
retaining many traces of the sweet comeliness which had almost reached
the length of beauty in her daughter, into the full illumination of the
smoky blaze. Notwithstanding the smoke, the presence of that little
woman made the strangest difference in the room. She took note of
various evidences of litter and untidiness with her mind's eye as she
examined the lamp. She had drawn a long breath of relief when she put
the letter into Arthur's hand. The sense of lightened responsibility
seemed almost to relieve her anxiety as well. She held the chimney of
the lamp in her hand, when an exclamation from her son called her back
to the consideration of that grievous question. She turned to him with a
sudden deepening of all the lines in her face.

"Oh, Arthur dear! don't you think it may be an enemy? don't you think it
looks like some cruel trick? You don't believe it's true?"

"Mother, have you an enemy in the world?" cried Vincent, with an almost
bitter affectionateness. "Is there anybody living that would take
pleasure in wounding you?"

"No, dear; but Mr. Fordham might have one," said the widow. "He is not
like you or your dear father, Arthur. He looks as if he might have been
in the army, and had seen a great deal of life. That is what has been a
great consolation to me. A man like that, you know, dear, is sure to
have enemies; so very different from our quiet way of life," said Mrs.
Vincent, holding up the chimney of the lamp, and standing a little
higher than her natural five feet, with a simple consciousness of that
grandeur of experience: "some one that wished him ill might have got
some one else to write the letter. Hush, Arthur, here is the maid with
the tea."

The maid with the tea pushed in, bearing her tray into a scene which
looked very strange to her awakened curiosity. The minister stood before
the fire with the letter in his hand, narrowly examining it, seal,
post-mark, handwriting, even paper. He did not look like the same man
who had come up-stairs three steps at a time, in the glow and
exhilaration of hope, scarcely half an hour ago. His teeth were set, and
his face pale. On the table the smoky lamp blazed into the dim air,
unregulated by the chimney, which Mrs. Vincent was nervously rubbing
with her handkerchief before she put it on. The little maid, with her
round eyes, set down the tray upon the table with an answering thrill of
excitement and curiosity. There was "somethink to do" with the minister
and his unexpected visitor. Vincent himself took no notice of the girl;
but his mother, with feminine instinct, proceeded to disarm this
possible observer. Mrs. Vincent knew well, by long experience, that when
the landlady happens to be one of the flock, it is as well that the
pastor should keep the little shocks and crises of his existence
studiously to himself.

"Does it always smoke?" said the gentle Jesuit, addressing the little
maid.

The effect of so sudden and discomposing a question, at a moment when
the person addressed was staring with all her soul at the minister,
open-mouthed and open-eyed, may be better imagined than described. The
girl gave a start and stifled exclamation, and made all the cups rattle
on the tray as she set it down. Did what smoke?--the chimney, or the
minister, or the landlady's husband down-stairs?

"Does it always smoke?" repeated Mrs. Vincent, calmly, putting on the
chimney. "I don't think it would if you were very exact in putting this
on. Look here: always at this height, don't you see? and now it burns
perfectly well."

"Yes, ma'am; I'll tell missis, ma'am," said the girl, backing out, with
some alarm. Mrs. Vincent sat down at the table with all the satisfaction
of success and conscious virtue. Her son, for his part, flung himself
into the easy-chair which she had given up, and stared at her with an
impatience and wonder which he could not restrain.

"To think you should talk about the lamp at such a time, or notice it at
all, indeed, if it smoked like fifty chimneys!" he exclaimed, with a
tone of annoyance; "why, mother, this is life or death."

"Yes, yes, my dear!" said the mother, a little mortified in her turn:
"but it does not do to let strangers see when you are in trouble. Oh,
Arthur, my own boy, you must not get into any difficulty here. I know
what gossip is in a congregation; you never would bear half of what your
poor dear papa did," said the widow, with tears in her eyes, laying her
soft old fingers upon the young man's impatient hand. "You have more of
my quick temper, Arthur; and whatever you do, dear, you must not expose
yourself to be talked of. You are all we have in the world. You must be
your sister's protector; for oh, if this should be true, what a poor
protector her mother has been! And, dear boy, tell me, what are we to
do?"

"Had he any friends?" asked Vincent, half sullenly; for he did feel an
instinctive desire to blame somebody, and nobody seemed so blamable as
the mother, who had admitted a doubtful person into her house. "Did he
know anybody--in Lonsdale, or anywhere? Did he never speak of his
friends?"

"He had been living abroad," said Mrs. Vincent, slowly. "He talked of
gentlemen sometimes, at Baden, and Homburg, and such places. I am afraid
you would think it very silly, and--and perhaps wrong, Arthur; but he
seemed to know so much of the world--so different from our quiet way of
life--that being so nice and good and refined himself with it all--I am
afraid it was rather an attraction to Susan. It was so different to what
she was used with, my dear. We used to think a man who had seen so much,
and known so many temptations, and kept his nice simple tastes through
it all--oh, dear, dear! If it is true, I was never so deceived in all my
life."

"But you have not told me," said Arthur, morosely, "if he had any
friends?"

"Nobody in Lonsdale," said Mrs. Vincent. "He came to see some young
relative at school in the neighbourhood----"

At this point Mrs. Vincent broke off with a half scream, interrupted by
a violent start and exclamation from her son, who jumped off his seat,
and began to pace up and down the room in an agitation which she could
not comprehend. This start entirely overpowered his mother. Her
overwrought nerves and feelings relieved themselves in tears. She got
up, trembling, approached the young man, put her hand, which shook,
through his arm, and implored him, crying softly all the time, to tell
her what he feared, what he thought, what was the matter? Poor Vincent's
momentary ill-humour deserted him: he began to realise all the
complications of the position; but he could not resist the sight of his
mother's tears. He led her back gently to the easy-chair, poured out for
her a cup of the neglected tea, and restrained himself for her sake. It
was while she took this much-needed refreshment that he unfolded to her
the story of the helpless strangers whom, only the night before, he had
committed to her care.

"The mother you shall see for yourself to-morrow. I can't tell what she
is, except a lady, though in the strangest circumstances," said Vincent.
"She has some reason--I cannot tell what--for keeping her child out of
the father's hands. She appealed to me to let her send it to you,
because he had been at Lonsdale already, and I could not refuse. His
name is Colonel Mildmay; he has been at Lonsdale; did you hear of such a
man?"

Mrs. Vincent shook her head--her face grew more and more troubled.

"I don't know about reasons for keeping a child from its father," she
said, still shaking her head. "My dear, dear boy, I hope no designing
woman has got a hold upon you. Why did you start so, Arthur? what had
Mr. Fordham to do with the child? Susan would open my letters, of
course, and I daresay she will make them very comfortable; but, Arthur
dear, though I don't blame you, it was very imprudent. Is Colonel
Mildmay the lady's husband? or--or what? Dear boy, you should have
thought of Susan--Susan, a young girl, must not be mixed up with anybody
of doubtful character. It was all your good heart, I know, but it was
very imprudent, to be sure."

Vincent laughed, in a kind of agony of mingled distress, anxiety, and
strange momentary amusement. His mother and he were both blaming each
other for the same fault. Both of them had equally yielded to kind
feelings, and the natural impulse of generous hearts, without any
consideration of prudence. But his mistake could not be attended by any
consequences a hundredth part so serious as hers.

"In the mean time, we must do something," he said. "If he has no
friends, he has at least an address, I suppose. Susan"--and a flush of
indignation and affectionate anger crossed the young man's face--"Susan,
no doubt, writes to the rascal. Susan! my sister! Good heaven!"

"Arthur!" said Mrs. Vincent. "Your dear papa always disapproved of such
exclamations: he said they were just a kind of oath, though people did
not think so. And you ought not to call him a rascal without
proof--indeed, it is very sinful to come to such hasty judgments. Yes, I
have got the address written down--it is in my pocket-book. But what
shall you do? Will you write to himself, Arthur? or what? To be sure, it
would be best to go to him and settle it at once."

"Oh, mother, have a little prudence now," cried the afflicted minister;
"if he were base enough to propose marriage to Susan (confound him!
that's not an oath--my father himself would have said as much) under
such circumstances, don't you think he has the courage to tell a lie as
well? I shall go up to town, and to his address to-morrow, and see what
is to be found there. You must rest in the mean time. Writing is out of
the question; what is to be done, I must _do_--and without a moment's
loss of time."

The mother took his hand again, and put her handkerchief to her
eyes--"God bless my dear boy," she said, with a mother's tearful
admiration--"Oh, what a thing for me, Arthur, that you are grown up and
a man, and able to do what is right in such a dreadful difficulty as
this! You put me in mind more and more of your dear father when you
settle so clearly what is to be done. He was always ready to act when I
used to be in a flutter, which was best. And, oh, how good has the
Father of the fatherless been to me in giving me such a son!"

"Ah, mother," said the young minister, "you gave premature thanks
before, when you thought the Father of the fatherless had brought poor
Susan a happy lot. Do you say the same now?"

"Always the same, Arthur dear," cried his mother, with tears--"always
the same. If it is even so, is it me, do you think, or is it _Him_ that
knows best?"

After this the agitation and distress of the first meeting gradually
subsided. That mother, with all her generous imprudence and innocence of
heart, was, her son well knew, the tenderest, the most indulgent, the
most sympathetic of all his friends. Though the little--the very little
insight he had obtained into life and the world had made him think
himself wiser than she was in some respects, nothing had ever come
between them to disturb the boy's half-adoring, half-protecting love. He
bethought himself of providing for her comfort, as she sat looking at
him in the easy-chair, with her eyes smiling on him through their tears,
patiently sipping the tea, which was a cold and doubtful infusion,
nothing like the fragrant lymph of home. He poked the fire till it
blazed, and drew her chair towards it, and hunted up a footstool which
he had himself kicked out of the way, under the sofa, a month before.
When he looked at the dear tender fresh old face opposite to him, in
that close white cap which even now, after the long fatiguing journey,
looked fresher and purer than other people's caps and faces look at
their best, a thaw came upon the young man's heart. Nature awoke and
yearned in him. A momentary glimpse crossed his vision of a humble
happiness long within his reach, which never till now, when it was about
to become impossible for ever, had seemed real or practicable, or even
desirable before.

"Mother, dear," said Vincent, with a tremulous smile, "you shall come
here, Susan and you, to me; and we shall all be together again--and
comfort each other," he added, with a deeper gravity still, thinking of
his own lot.

His mother did not answer in many words. She said, "My own boy!" softly,
following him with her eyes. It was hard, even with Susan's dreadful
danger before her, to help being tearfully happy in seeing him again--in
being his guest--in realising the full strength of his manhood and
independence. She gave herself up to that feeling of maternal pride and
consolation as she once more dried the tears which would come,
notwithstanding all her efforts. Then he sat down beside her, and
resigned himself to that confidential talk which can rarely be but
between members of the same family. He had unburdened his mind
unconsciously in his letters about Tozer and the deacons; and it cannot
be told what a refreshment it was to be able to utter roundly in words
his sentiments on all those subjects. The power of saying it out with no
greater hindrance than her mild remonstrances, mingled, as they were,
with questions which enabled him to complete his sketches, and smiles of
amusement at his descriptive powers, put him actually in better humour
with Salem. He felt remorseful and charitable after he had said his
worst.

"And are you sure, dear," said Mrs. Vincent, at last resuming the
subject nearest her heart, "that you can go away to-morrow without
neglecting any duty? You must not neglect a duty, Arthur--not even for
Susan's sake. Whatever happens to us, you must keep right."

"I have no duty to detain me," said Vincent, hastily. Then a sudden glow
came over the young man, a flush of happiness which stole upon him like
a thief, and brightened his own personal firmament with a secret
unacknowledgable delight; "but I must return early," he added, with a
momentary hesitation--"for if you won't think it unkind to leave you,
mother, I am engaged to dinner. I should scarcely like to miss it," he
concluded, after another pause, tying knots in his handkerchief, and
taking care not to look at her as he spoke.

"To dinner, Arthur? I thought your people only gave teas," said Mrs.
Vincent, with a smile.

"The Salem people do; but this--is not one of the Salem people," said
the minister, still hesitating. "In fact, it would be ungracious of me
not to go, and cowardly, too--for _that_ curate, I believe, is to meet
me--and Lady Western would naturally think----"

"Lady Western!" said Mrs. Vincent, with irrestrainable pleasure; "is
that one of the great people in Carlingford?" The good woman wiped her
eyes again with the very tenderest and purest demonstration of that
adoration of rank which is said to be an English instinct. "I don't mean
to be foolish, dear," she said, apologetically; "I know these
distinctions of society are not worth your caring about; but to see my
Arthur appreciated as he should be, is----" She could not find words to
say what it was--she wound up with a little sob. What with trouble and
anxiety, and pride and delight, and bodily fatigue added to all, tears
came easiest that night.

Vincent did not say whether or not these distinctions of society were
worth caring about. He sat abstractedly, untying the knots in his
handkerchief, with a faint smile on his face. Then, while that
pleasurable glow remained, he escorted his mother to his own
sleeping-room, which he had given up to her, and saw that her fire
burned brightly, and that all was comfortable. When he returned to poke
his solitary fire, it was some time before he took out the letter which
had disturbed his peace. The smile died away first by imperceptible
degrees from his face. He gradually erected himself out of the
meditative lounge into which he had fallen; then, with a little start,
as if throwing dreams away, he took out and examined the letter. The
more he looked at it, the graver and deeper became the anxiety in his
face. It had every appearance of being genuine in its bad writing and
doubtful spelling. And Vincent started again with an unexplainable
thrill of alarm when he thought how utterly unprotected his mother's
sudden journey had left that little house in Lonsdale. Susan had no
warning, no safeguard. He started up in momentary fright, but as
suddenly sat down again with a certain indignation at his own thoughts.
Nobody could carry her off, or do any act of violence; and as for taking
advantage of her solitude, Susan, a straightforward, simple-minded
English girl, was safe in her own pure sense of right.




CHAPTER XIII.


Next morning Mr. Vincent got up early, with an indescribable commotion
in all his thoughts. He was to institute inquiries which might be life
or death to his sister, but yet could not keep his mind to the
contemplation of that grave necessity. A flicker of private hope and
expectation kept gleaming with uncertain light over the dark weight of
anxiety in his heart. He could not help, in the very deepest of his
thoughts about Susan, breaking off now and then into a momentary
digression, which suddenly carried him into Lady Western's drawing-room,
and startled his heart with a thrill of conscious delight, secret and
exquisite, which he could neither banish nor deny. In and out, and round
about that grievous doubt which had suddenly disturbed the quiet history
of his family, this capricious fairy played, touching all his anxious
thoughts with thrills of sweetness. It seemed an action involuntary to
himself, and over which he had no power; but it gave the young man an
equally involuntary and causeless cheer and comfort. It did not seem
possible that any dreadful discovery could be made that day, in face of
the fact that he was to meet Her that night.

When he met his mother at breakfast, the recollection of Mrs. Hilyard
and the charge she had committed to him, came to his mind again. No
doubt Susan would take the wanderers in--no doubt they were as safe in
the cottage as it was possible to be in a humble inviolable English
home, surrounded by all the strength of neighbours and friends, and the
protection of a spotless life which everybody knew; but yet---- That was
not what his strange acquaintance had expected or bargained for. He felt
as if he had broken faith with her when he realised his mother's absence
from her own house. Yet somehow he felt a certain hesitation in
broaching the subject, and unconsciously prepared himself for doubts and
reluctance. The certainty of this gave a forced character to the assumed
easiness with which he spoke.

"You will go to see Mrs. Hilyard," he said; "I owe it to her to explain
that you were absent before her child went there. They will be safe
enough at home, no doubt, with Susan; but still, you know, it would have
been different had you been there."

"Yes, Arthur," said Mrs. Vincent, with an indescribable dryness in her
voice.

"You will find her a very interesting woman," said her son,
instinctively contending against that unexpressed doubt--"the strangest
contrast to her surroundings. The very sound of her voice carries one a
thousand miles from Salem. Had I seen her in a palace, I doubt whether I
should have been equally impressed by her. You will be interested in
spite of yourself."

"It is, as you say, very strange, Arthur," said Mrs. Vincent--the
dryness in her voice increasing to the extent of a short cough; "when
does your train start?"

"Not till eleven," said Vincent, looking at his watch; but you must
please me, and go to see her, mother."

"That reminds me, dear," said Mrs. Vincent, hurriedly, "that now I am
here, little as it suits my feelings, you must take me to see some of
your people, Arthur. Mrs. Tufton, and perhaps the Tozers, you know. They
might not like to hear that your mother had been in Carlingford, and had
not gone to see them. It will be hard work visiting strangers while I am
in this dreadful anxiety, but I must not be the means of bringing you
into any trouble with your flock."

"Oh, never mind my flock," said Vincent, with some impatience; "put on
your bonnet, and come and see her, mother."

"Arthur, you are going by the first train," said his mother.

"There is abundant time, and it is not too early for _her_," persisted
the minister.

But it was not so easy to conquer that meek little woman. "I feel very
much fatigued to-day," she said, turning her eyes, mild but invincible,
with the most distinct contradiction of her words to her son's face; "if
it had not been my anxiety to have all I could of you, Arthur, I should
not have got up to-day. A journey is a very serious matter, dear, for an
old woman. One does not feel it so much at first," continued this
plausible defendant, still with her mild eyes on her son's face, secure
in the perfect reasonableness of her plea, yet not unwilling that he
should perceive it was a pretence; "it is the next day one feels it. I
shall lie down on the sofa, and rest when you are gone."

And, looking into his mother's soft eyes, the young Nonconformist
retreated, and made no more attempts to shake her. Not the
invulnerability of the fortress alone discouraged him--though that was
mildly obdurate, and proof to argument--but a certain uneasiness in the
thought of that meeting, an inclination to postpone it, and stave off
the thought of all that might follow, surprised himself in his own mind.
Why he should be afraid of the encounter, or how any complication could
arise out of it, he could not by any means imagine, but such was the
instinctive sentiment in his heart.

Accordingly he went up to London by the train, leaving Mrs. Hilyard
unwarned, and his mother reposing on the sofa, from which, it is sad to
say, she rose a few minutes after he was gone, to refresh herself by
tidying his bookcase and looking over all his linen and stockings, in
which last she found a very wholesome subject of contemplation, which
relieved the pressure of her thoughts much more effectually than could
have been done by the rest which she originally proposed. Arthur, for
his part, went up to London with a certain nervous thrill of anxiety
rising in his breast as he approached the scene and the moment of his
inquiries; though it was still only by intervals that he realised the
momentous nature of those inquiries, on the result of which poor Susan's
harmless girlish life, all unconscious of the danger that threatened
it, hung in the balance. Poor Susan! just then going on with a bride's
preparations for the approaching climax of her youthful existence. Was
she, indeed, really a bride, with nothing but truth and sweet honour in
the contract that bound her, or was she the sport of a villanous pastime
that would break her heart, and might have shipwrecked her fair fame and
innocent existence? Her brother set his teeth hard as he asked himself
that question. Minister as he was, it might have been a dangerous chance
for Fordham, had he come at that moment without ample proofs of
guiltlessness in the Nonconformist's way.

When he got to town, he whirled, as fast as it was possible to go, to
the address where Susan's guileless letters were sent almost daily. It
was in a street off Piccadilly, full of lodging-houses, and all manner
of hangers-on and ministrants to the world of fashion. He found the
house directly, and was somewhat comforted to find it really an actual
house, and not a myth or Doubtful Castle, or a post-office window. He
knocked with the real knocker, and heard the bell peal through the
comparative silence in the street, and insensibly cheered up, and began
to look forward to the appearance of a real Mr. Fordham, with
unquestionable private history and troops of friends. A quiet house,
scrupulously clean, entirely respectable, yet distinct in all its
features of lodging-house; a groom in the area below, talking to an
invisible somebody, also a man, who seemed to be cleaning somebody
else's boots; up-stairs, at the first-floor balcony, a smart little
tiger making a fashion of watering plants, and actually doing his best
to sprinkle the conversational groom below; altogether a superabundance
of male attendants, quite incompatible with the integrity of the small
dwelling-place as a private house. Another man, who evidently belonged
to the place, opened the door, interrupting Vincent suddenly in his
observations--an elderly man, half servant, half master, in reality the
proprietor of the place, ready either to wait or be waited on as
occasion might require. Turning with a little start from his inspection
of the attendant circumstances, Vincent asked, did Mr. Fordham live
there?

The man made a momentary but visible pause; whatever it might betoken,
it was not ignorance. He did not answer with the alacrity of frank
knowledge or simple non-information. He paused, then said, "Mr. Fordham,
sir?" looking intently at Vincent, and taking in every particular of his
appearance, dress, and professional looks, with one rapid glance.

"Mr. Fordham," repeated Vincent, "does he live here?"

Once more the man perused him, swiftly and cautiously. "No, sir, he does
not live here," was the second response.

"I was told this was his address," said Vincent. "I perceive you are not
ignorant of him; where does he live? I know his letters come here."

"There are a many gentlemen in the house in the course of the season,"
answered the man, still on the alert to find out Vincent's meaning by
his looks--"sometimes letters keep on coming months after they are
gone. When we knows their home address, sir, we sends them; when we
don't, we keeps them by us till we see if any owner turns up. Gen'leman
of the name of Fordham?--do you happen to know, sir, what part o' the
country _he_ comes from? There's the Lincolnshire Fordhams, as you know,
sir, and the Northumberland Fordhams; but there's no gen'leman of that
name lives here."

"I am sure you know perfectly whom I mean," said Vincent, in his heat
and impatience. "I don't mean Mr. Fordham any harm--I only want to see
him, or to get some information about him, if he is not to be seen. Tell
me where he does live, or tell me which of his friends is in town, that
I may ask them. I tell you I don't mean Mr. Fordham any harm."

"No, sir?--nor I don't know as anybody means any harm," said the man,
once more examining Vincent's appearance. "What was it as you were
wishing to know? Though I ain't acquainted with the gen'leman myself,
the missis or some of the people may be. We have a many coming and
going, and I might confuse a name.--What was it as you were wishful to
know?"

"I wish to see Mr. Fordham," said Vincent, impatiently.

"I have told you, sir, he don't live here," said the guardian of the
house.

"Then, look here; you don't deceive me, remember. I can see you know all
about him," said Vincent; "and, as I tell you, I mean him no harm;
answer me one or two simple questions, and I will either thank or
reward you as you like best. In the first place, Is this Mr. Fordham a
married man? and, Has he ever gone by another name?"

As he asked these questions the man grinned in his face. "Lord bless
you, sir, we don't ask no such questions here. A gen'leman comes and has
his rooms, and pays, and goes away, and gives such name as he pleases. I
don't ask a certificate of baptism, not if all's right in the pay
department. We don't take ladies in, being troublesome; but if a man was
to have a dozen wives, what could we know about it? Sorry to disoblige a
clergyman, sir; but as I don't know nothing about Mr. Fordham, perhaps
you'll excuse me, as it's the busiest time of the day."

"Well, then, my good man," said Vincent, taking out his purse, "tell me
what friend he has that I can apply to; you will do me the greatest
service, and I----"

"Sorry to disoblige a clergyman, as I say," said the man, angrily; "but,
begging your pardon, I can't stand jabbering here. I never was a spy on
a gen'leman, and never will be. If you want to know, you'll have to find
out. Time's money to me."

With which the landlord of No. 10 Nameless Street, Piccadilly, shut the
door abruptly in Vincent's face. A postman was audibly approaching at
the moment. Could that have anything to do with the sudden breaking off
of the conference? The minister, exasperated, yet, becoming more
anxious, stood for a moment in doubt, facing the blank closed door.
Then, desperate, turned round suddenly, and faced the advancing
Mercury. He had no letters for No. 10; he was hastening past, altogether
regardless of Vincent's look of inquiry. When he was addressed, however,
the postman responded with immediate directness. "Fordham, sir--yes--a
gentleman of that name lives at No. 10--leastways he has his letters
there--No. 10--where you have just been, sir."

"But they say he doesn't live there," said Vincent.

"Can't tell, sir--has his letters there," said the public servant,
decidedly.

More than ever perplexed, Vincent followed the postman to pursue his
inquiries. "What sort of a house is it?" he asked.

"Highly respectable house, sir," answered the terse and decisive
functionary, performing an astounding rap next door.

In an agony of impatience and uncertainty, the young man lingered
opposite the house, conscious of a helplessness and impotence which made
him furious with himself. That he ought to be able to get to the bottom
of it was clear; but that he was as far as possible from knowing how to
do that same, or where to pursue his inquiries, was indisputable. One
thing was certain, that Mr. Fordham did not choose to be visible at this
address to which his letters were sent, and that it was hopeless to
attempt to extract any information on the subject by such frank
inquiries as the minister had already made. He took a half-hour's walk,
and thought it over with no great enlightenment on the subject. Then,
coming back, applied once more at the highly respectable
uncommunicative door. He had entertained hopes that another and more
manageable adherent of the house might possibly appear this time--a
maid, or impressionable servitor of some description, and had a little
piece of gold ready for the propitiatory tip in his hand. His hopes
were, however, put to flight by the appearance of the same face,
increased in respectability and composure by the fact that the owner had
thrown off the jacket in which he had formerly been invested, and now
appeared in a solemn black coat, the essence of respectable and
dignified servitude. He fixed his eyes severely upon Vincent as soon as
he opened the door. He was evidently disgusted by this return to the
charge.

"Look here," said Vincent, somewhat startled and annoyed to find himself
confronted by the same face which had formerly defied him; "could you
get a note conveyed from me to Mr. Fordham?--the postman says he has his
letters here."

"If he gets his letters here they come by the post," said the man,
insolently. "There's a post-office round the corner, but I don't keep
one here. If one reaches him, another will. It ain't nothing to me."

"But it is a great deal to me," said Vincent, with involuntary
earnestness. "You have preserved his secret faithfully, whatever it may
be; but it surely can't be any harm to convey a note to Mr. Fordham.
Most likely, when he hears my name," said the young man, with a little
consciousness that what he said was more than he believed, "he will see
me; and I have to leave town this evening. You will do me a great
service if you will save me the delay of the post, and get it delivered
at once. And you may do Mr. Fordham a service too."

The man looked with less certainty in Vincent's face.--"Seems to me some
people don't know what 'No' means, when it's said," he replied, with a
certain relenting in his voice. "There's things as a gen'leman ought to
know, sure enough--something happened in the family or so; but you see,
he don't live here; and since you stand it out so, I don't mind saying
that he's a gen'leman as can't be seen in town to-day, seeing he's in
the country, as I'm informed, on urgent private affairs. It's uncommon
kind of a clergyman, and a stranger, to take such an interest in my
house," continued the fellow, grinning spitefully; "but what I say first
I say last--he don't live here."

"And he is not in town?" asked Vincent eagerly, without noticing the
insolence of the speech. The man gradually closed the door upon himself
till he had shut it, and stood outside, facing his persistent visitor.

"In town or out of town," he said, folding his arms upon his chest, and
surveying Vincent with all the insolence of a lackey who knows he has to
deal with a man debarred by public opinion from the gratifying privilege
of knocking him down, "there ain't no more information to be got here."

Such was the conclusion of Vincent's attempted investigation. He went
away at once, scarcely pausing to hear this speech out, to take the only
means that presented themselves now; and going into the first
stationer's shop in his way, wrote a note entreating Mr. Fordham to meet
him, and giving a friend's address in London, as well as his own in
Carlingford, that he might be communicated with instantly. When he had
written and posted this note, Vincent proceeded to investigate the
Directory and all the red and blue books he could lay his hands upon,
for the name of Fordham. It was not a plentiful name, but still it
occurred sufficiently often to perplex and confuse him utterly. When he
had looked over the list of Fordhams in London, sufficiently long to
give himself an intense headache, and to feel his under-taking entirely
hopeless, he came to a standstill. What was to be done? He had no clue,
nor the hope of any, to guide him through this labyrinth; but he had no
longer any trust in the honour of the man whom his mother had so rashly
received, and to whom Susan had given her heart. By way of the only
precaution which occurred to him, he wrote a short note to Susan,
begging her not to send any more letters to Mr. Fordham until her
mother's return; and desiring her not to be alarmed by this prohibition,
but to be very careful of herself, and wait for an explanation when Mrs.
Vincent should return. He thought he himself would accompany his mother
home. The note was written, as Vincent thought, in the most guarded
terms; but in reality was such an abrupt, alarming performance, as was
sure to drive a sensitive girl into the wildest fright and uncertainty.
Having eased his conscience by this, he went back to the railway, and
returned to Carlingford. Night had fallen before he reached home. Under
any other circumstances, he would have encountered his mother after such
an ineffectual enterprise, conscious as he was of carrying back nothing
but heightened suspicion, with very uncomfortable feelings, and would
have been in his own person too profoundly concerned about this dreadful
danger which menaced his only sister, to be able to rest or occupy
himself about other things. But the fact was, that whenever he relapsed
into the solitary carriage in which he travelled to Carlingford, and
when utterly quiet and alone, wrapped in the haze of din and smoke and
speed which abstracts railway travellers from all the world,--gave
himself up to thought, the rosy hue of his own hopes came stealing over
him unawares. Now and then he woke up, as men wake up from a doze, and
made a passing snatch at his fears. But again and again they eluded his
grasp, and the indefinite brightness which had no foundation in reason,
swallowed up everything which interfered with its power. The effect of
this was to make the young man preternaturally solemn when he entered
the room where his mother awaited him. He felt the reality of the fear
so much less than he ought to do, that it was necessary to put on twice
the appearance. Had he really been as deeply anxious and alarmed as he
should have been, he would naturally have tried to ease and lighten the
burden of the discovery to his mother; feeling it so hazily as he did,
no such precautions occurred to him. She rose up when he came in, with a
face which gradually paled out of all its colour as he approached. When
he was near enough to hold out his hand to her, Mrs. Vincent was nearly
fainting. "Arthur," she cried, in a scarcely audible voice, "God have
pity upon us; it is true: I can see it in your face."

"Mother, compose yourself. I have no evidence that it is true. I have
discovered nothing," cried Vincent, in alarm.

The widow dropped heavily into her chair, and sobbed aloud. "I can read
it in your face," she said. "Oh! my dear boy, have you seen that--that
villain? Does he confess it? Oh, my Susan, my Susan! I will never
forgive myself; I have killed my child."

From this passion it was difficult to recover her, and Vincent had to
represent so strongly the fact that he had ascertained nothing certain,
and that, for anything he could tell, Fordham might still prove himself
innocent, that he almost persuaded his own mind in persuading hers.

"His letters might be taken in at a place where he did not live, for
convenience sake," said Vincent. "The man might think me a dun, or
something disagreeable. Fordham himself, for anything we can tell, may
be very angry about it. Cheer up, mother; things are no worse than they
were last night. I give you my word I have made no discovery, and
perhaps to-morrow may bring us a letter clearing it all up."

"Ah! Arthur, you are so young and hopeful. It is different with me, who
have seen so many terrors come true," said the mother, who
notwithstanding was comforted. As for Vincent, he felt neither the
danger nor the suspense. His whole soul was engrossed with the fact that
it was time to dress; and it was with a little conscious sophistry that
he himself made the best of it, and excused himself for his
indifference.

"I can't bear to leave you, mother, in such suspense and distress," he
said, looking at his watch; "but--I have to be at Lady Western's at
half-past six."

Mrs. Vincent looked up with an expression of stupified surprise and pain
for a moment, then brightened all at once. "My dear, I have laid out all
your things," she said, with animation. "Do you think I would let you
miss it, Arthur? Never mind talking to me. I shall hear all about it
when you come home to-night. Now go, dear, or you will be late. I will
come and talk to you when you are dressing, if you don't mind your
mother? Well, perhaps not. I will stay here, and you can call me when
you are ready, and I will bring you a cup of tea. I am sure you are
tired, what with the fatigue and what with the anxiety. But you must try
to put it off your mind, and enjoy yourself to-night."

"Yes, mother," said Vincent, hastening away; the tears were in her
gentle eyes when she gave him that unnecessary advice. She pressed his
hands fast in hers when he left her at last, repeating it, afraid in her
own heart that this trouble had spoilt all the brightness of the opening
hopes which she perceived with so much pride and joy. When he was gone,
she sat down by the solitary fire, and cried over her Susan in an utter
forlornness and helplessness, which only a woman, so gentle, timid, and
unable to struggle for herself, could feel. Her son, in the mean time,
walked down Grange Lane, first with a momentary shame at his own want of
feeling, but soon, with an entire forgetfulness both of the shame and
the subject of it, absorbed in thoughts of his reception there. With a
palpitating heart he entered the dark garden, now noiseless and chill in
winterly decay, and gazed at the lighted windows which had looked like
distant planets to him the last time he saw them. He lingered looking at
them, now that the moment approached so near. A remembrance of his
former disappointment went to his heart with a momentary pang as he
hesitated on the edge of his present happiness. Another moment and he
had thrown himself again, with a degree of suppressed excitement
wonderful to think of, upon the chances of his fate.

Not alarming chances, so far as could be predicated from the scene. A
small room, the smaller half of that room which he had seen full of the
pretty crowd of the summer-party, the folding-doors closed, and a
curtain drawn across them; a fire burning brightly; groups of candles
softly lighting the room in clusters upon the wall, and throwing a
colourless soft illumination upon the pictures of which Lady Western was
so proud. She herself, dropped amid billows of dark blue silk and clouds
of black lace in a low easy-chair by the side of the fire, smiled at
Vincent, and held out her hand to him without rising, with a sweet
cordiality and friendliness which rapt the young man into paradise.
Though Lucy Wodehouse was scarcely less pretty than the young Dowager,
Mr. Vincent saw her as if he saw her not, and still less did he realise
the presence of Miss Wodehouse, who was the shadow to all this
brightness. He took the chair which Lady Western pointed to him by her
side. He did not want anybody to speak; or anything to happen. The
welcome was not given as to a stranger, but made him at once an intimate
and familiar friend of the house. At once all his dreams were realised.
The sweet atmosphere was tinged with the perfumy breath which always
surrounded Her; the room, which was so fanciful and yet so home-like,
seemed a reflection of her to his bewildered eyes; and the murmur of
soft sound, as these two lovely creatures spoke to each other, made the
most delicious climax to the scene; although the moment before he had
been afraid lest the sound of a voice should break the spell. But the
spell was not to be broken that night. Mr. Wentworth came in a few
minutes after him, and was received with equal sweetness; but still the
young Nonconformist was not jealous. It was he whose arm Lady Western
appropriated, almost without looking at him as she did so, when they
went to dinner. She had put aside the forms which were intended to keep
the outer world at arm's length. It was as her own closest personal
friends that the little party gathered around the little table, just
large enough for them, which was placed before the fire in the great
dining-room. Lady Western was not a brilliant talker, but Mr. Vincent
thought her smallest observation more precious than any utterance of
genius. He listened to her with a fervour which few people showed when
listening to _him_, notwithstanding his natural eloquence; but as to
what he himself said in reply, he was entirely oblivious, and spoke like
a man in a dream. When she clapped her pretty hands, and adjured the
Churchman and the Nonconformist to fight out their quarrel, it was well
for Vincent that Mr. Wentworth declined the controversy. The lecturer on
Church and State was _hors de combat_; he was in charity with all men.
The curate of St. Roque's, who--blind and infatuated man!--thought Lucy
Wodehouse the flower of Grange Lane, did not come in his way. He might
pity him, but it was a sympathetic pity. Mr. Vincent took no notice when
Miss Wodehouse launched tiny arrows of argument at him. She was the only
member of the party who seemed to recollect his heresies in respect to
Church and State--which, indeed, he had forgotten himself, and the state
of mind which led to them. No such world existed now as that cold and
lofty world which the young man of genius had seen glooming down upon
his life, and shutting jealous barriers against his progress. The
barriers were opened, the coldness gone--and he himself raised high on
the sunshiny heights, where love and beauty had their perennial abode.
He had gained nothing--changed in nothing--from his former condition:
not even the golden gates of society had opened to the dissenting
minister; but glorious enfranchisement had come to the young man's
heart. It was not Lady Western who had asked him to dinner--a
distinction of which his mother was proud. It was the woman of all women
who had brought him to her side, whose sweet eyes were sunning him
over, whose voice thrilled to his heart. By her side he forgot all
social distinctions, and all the stings contained in them. No prince
could have reached more completely the ideal elevation and summit of
youthful existence. Ambition and its successes were vulgar in
comparison. It was a poetic triumph amid the prose tumults and downfalls
of life.

When the two young men were left over their wine, a somewhat grim shadow
fell upon the evening. The curate of St. Roque's and the minister of
Salem found it wonderfully hard to get up a conversation. They discussed
the advantages of retiring with the ladies as they sat glum and reserved
opposite each other--not by any means unlike, and, by consequence,
natural enemies. Mr. Wentworth thought it an admirable plan, much more
sensible than the absurd custom which kept men listening to a parcel of
old fogies, who retained the habits of the last generation; and he
proposed that they should join the ladies--a proposal to which Vincent
gladly acceded. When they returned to the drawing-room, Lucy Wodehouse
was at the piano; her sister sat at table with a pattern-book before
her, doing some impossible pattern in knitting; and Lady Western again
sat languid and lovely by the fire, with her beautiful hands in her lap,
relieved from the dark background of the billowy blue dress by the
delicate cambric and lace of her handkerchief. She was not doing
anything, or looking as if she could do anything. She was leaning back
in the low chair, with the rich folds of her dress sweeping the carpet,
and her beautiful ungloved hands lying lightly across each other. She
did not move when the gentlemen entered. She turned her eyes to them,
and smiled those sweet welcoming smiles, which Vincent knew well enough
were for both alike, yet which made his heart thrill and beat. Wentworth
(insensible prig!) went to Lucy's side, and began to talk to her over
her music, now and then appealing to Miss Wodehouse. Vincent, whom no
man hindered, and for whose happiness all the fates had conspired,
invited by those smiling eyes, approached Lady Western with the
surprised delight of a man miraculously blessed. He could not understand
why he was permitted to be so happy. He drew a chair between her and the
table, and, shutting out the other group by turning his back upon them,
had her all to himself. She never changed her position, nor disturbed
her sweet indolence, by the least movement. The fire blazed no longer.
The candles, softly burning against the wall, threw no very brilliant
light upon this scene. To Vincent's consciousness, bewildered as he was
by the supreme delight of his position, they were but two in a new
world, and neither thing nor person disturbed the unimaginable bliss.
But Miss Wodehouse, when she raised her eyes from her knitting, only saw
the young Dowager leaning back in her chair, smiling the natural smiles
of her sweet temper and kind heart upon the young stranger whom she had
chosen to make a _protege_ of. Miss Wodehouse silently concluded that
perhaps it might be dangerous for the young man, who knew no better, and
that Lady Western always looked well in a blue dress. Such was the
outside world's interpretation of that triumphant hour of Vincent's
life.

How it went on he never could tell. Soft questions, spoken in that voice
which made everything eloquent, gently drew from him the particulars of
his life; and sweet laughter, more musical than that song of Lucy's to
which the curate (dull clod!) gave all his attention, rang silvery peals
over the name of Tozer and the economics of Salem. Perhaps Lady Western
enjoyed the conversation almost half as much as her worshipper did. She
was amused, most delicate and difficult of all successes. She was
pleased with the reverential devotion which had a freshness and tender
humility conjoined with sensitive pride which was novel to her, and more
flattering than ordinary adoration. When he saw it amused her, the young
man exerted himself to set forth his miseries with their ludicrous
element fully developed. They were no longer miseries, they were
happinesses which brought him those smiles. He said twice enough to turn
him out of Salem, and make him shunned by all the connection. He forgot
everything in life but the lovely creature beside him, and the means by
which he could arouse her interest, and keep her ear a little longer.
Such was the position of affairs, when Miss Wodehouse came to the plain
part of her pattern, where she could go on without counting; and seeing
Lady Western so much amused, became interested and set herself to listen
too. By this time Vincent had come to more private concerns.

"I have been inquiring to-day after some one whom my mother knows, and
whom I am anxious to hear about," said Vincent. "I cannot discover
anything about him. It is a wild question to ask if you know him, but it
is just possible; there are such curious encounters in life."

"What is his name?" said Lady Western, with a smile as radiant as a
sunbeam.

"His name is Fordham--Herbert Fordham: I do not know where he comes
from, nor whether he is of any profession; nor, indeed, anything but his
name. I have been in town to-day----"

Here Vincent came to a sudden stop. He had withdrawn his eyes from that
smile of hers for the moment. When he raised them again, the beautiful
picture was changed as if by magic. Her eyes were fixed upon him dilated
and almost wild. Her face was deadly pale. Her hands, which had been
lying lightly crossed, grasped each other in a grasp of sudden anguish
and self-control. He stopped short with a pang too bitter and strange
for utterance. At that touch all his fancies dispersed into the air. He
came to himself strangely, with a sense of chill and desolation. In one
instant, from the height of momentary bliss down to the miserable flat
of conscious unimportance. Such a downfall was too much for man to
endure without showing it. He stopped short at the aspect of her face.

"You have been in town to-day?" she repeated, pointedly, with white and
trembling lips.

"And could hear nothing of him," said Vincent, with a little bitterness.
"He was not to be heard of at his address."

"Where was that?" asked Lady Western again, with the same intent and
anxious gaze.

Vincent, who was sinking down, down in hopeless circles of jealousy,
miserable fierce rage and disappointment, answered, "10 Nameless Street,
Piccadilly," without an unnecessary word.

Lady Western uttered a little cry of excitement and wonder. She knew
nothing of the black abyss into which her companion had fallen any more
than she knew the splendid heights to which her favour had raised him;
but the sound of her own voice recalled her to herself. She turned away
from Vincent and pulled the bell which was within her reach--pulled it
once and again with a nervous twitch, and entangled her bracelet in the
bell-pull, so that she had to bend over to unfasten it. Vincent sat
gloomily by and looked on, without offering any assistance. He knew it
was to hide her troubled face and gain a moment to compose herself; but
he was scarcely prepared for her total avoidance of the subject when she
next spoke.

"They are always so late of giving us tea," she said, rising from her
chair, and going up to Miss Wodehouse: "I can see you have finished your
pattern; let me see how it looks. That is pretty; but I think it is too
elaborate. How many things has Mary done for this bazaar, Mr.
Wentworth?--and do tell us when is it to be?"

What did Vincent care for the answer? He sat disenchanted in that same
place which had been his bower of bliss all the evening, watching her as
she moved about the room; her beautiful figure went and came with a
certain restlessness, surely not usual to her, from one corner to
another. She brought Miss Wodehouse something to look at from the
work-table, and fetched some music for Lucy from a window. She had the
tea placed in a remote corner, and made it there; and insisted on
bringing it to the Miss Wodehouses with her own hands. She was
disturbed; her sweet composure was gone. Vincent sat and watched her
under the shade of his hands, with feelings as miserable as ever moved
man. It was not sorrow for having disturbed her;--feelings much more
personal, mortification and disappointment, and, above all, jealousy,
raged in his heart. Warmer and stronger than ever was his interest in
Mr. Fordham now.

After a miserable interval, he rose to take his leave. When he came up
to her, Lady Western's kind heart once more awoke in his behalf. She
drew him aside after a momentary struggle with herself.

"I know that gentleman," she said, quickly, with a momentary flush of
colour, and shortening of breath; "at least I knew him once; and the
address you mention is my brother's address. If you will tell me what
you want to know, I will ask for you. My brother and he used not to be
friends, but I suppose----. What did you want to know?"

"Only," said Vincent, with involuntary bitterness, "if he was a man of
honour, and could be trusted; nothing else."

The young Dowager paused and sighed; her beautiful eyes softened with
tears. "Oh, yes--yes; with life--to death!" she said, with a low
accompaniment of sighing, and a wistful melancholy smile upon her lovely
face.

Vincent hastened out of the house. He ventured to say nothing to himself
as he went up Grange Lane in the starless night, with all the silence
and swiftness of passion. He dared not trust himself to think. His very
heart, the physical organ itself, seemed throbbing and bursting with
conscious pain. Had she loved this mysterious stranger whose
undecipherable shadow hung over the minister's path? To Vincent's fancy,
nothing else could account for her agitation; and was he so true, and to
be trusted? Poor gentle Susan, whom such a fate and doom was approaching
as might have softened her brother's heart, had but little place in his
thoughts. He was not glad of that favourable verdict. He was overpowered
with jealous rage and passion. Alas for his dreams! Once more, what
downfall and over-throw had come of it! once more he had come down to
his own position, and the second awakening was harder than the first.
When he got home, and found his mother, affectionately proud, waiting to
hear all about the great lady he had been visiting, it is impossible to
express in words the intolerable impatience and disgust with himself and
his fate which overpowered the young man. He had a bad headache, Mrs.
Vincent said, she was sure, and he did not contradict her. It was an
unspeakable relief to him when she went to her own room, and delivered
him from the tender scrutiny of her eyes--those eyes full of nothing but
love, which, in the irritation of his spirit, drove him desperate. He
did not tell her about the unexpected discovery he had made. The very
name of Fordham would have choked him that night.




CHAPTER XIV.


The next morning brought no letters except from Susan. Fordham, if so
true as Lady Western called him, was not, Vincent thought with
bitterness, acting as an honourable man should in this emergency. But
perhaps he might come to Carlingford in the course of the day, to see
Susan's brother. The aspect of the young minister was changed when he
made his appearance at the breakfast table. Mrs. Vincent made the most
alarmed inquiries about his health, but--stopped abruptly in making them
by his short and ungracious answer--came to a dead pause; and with a
pang of fright and mortification, acknowledged to herself that her son
was no longer her boy, whose entire heart she knew, but a man with a
life and concerns of his own, possibly not patent to his mother. That
breakfast was not a cheerful meal. There had been a long silence, broken
only by those anxious attentions to each other's personal comfort, with
which people endeavour to smooth down the embarrassment of an
intercourse apparently confidential, into which some sudden
unexplainable shadow has fallen. At last Vincent got up from the table,
with a little outbreak of impatience.

"I can't eat this morning; don't ask me. Mother, get your bonnet on,"
said the young man; "we must go to see Mrs. Hilyard to-day."

"Yes, Arthur," said Mrs. Vincent, meekly; she had determined _not_ to
see Mrs. Hilyard, of whom her gentle respectability was suspicious; but,
startled by her son's looks, and by the evident arrival of that period,
instinctively perceived by most women, at which a man snatches the reins
out of his adviser's hand, and has his way, the alarmed and anxious
mother let her arms fall, and gave in without a struggle.

"The fact is, I heard of Mr. Fordham last night," said Vincent, walking
about the room, lifting up and setting down again abstractedly the
things on the table. "Lady Western knows him, it appears; perhaps Mrs.
Hilyard does too."

"Lady Western knows him? Oh, Arthur, tell me--what did she say?" cried
his mother, clasping her hands.

"She said he could be trusted--with life--to death," said Vincent, very
low, with an inaudible groan in his heart. He was prepared for the joy
and the tears, and the thanksgiving with which his words were received;
but he could not have believed, how sharply his mother's exclamation,
"God bless my Susan! now I am happy about her, Arthur. I could be
content to die," would go to his heart. Susan, yes;--it was right to be
happy about her; and as for himself, who cared? He shut up his heart in
that bitterness; but it filled him with an irritation and restlessness
which he could not subdue.

"We must go to Mrs. Hilyard; probably she can tell us more," he said,
abruptly; "and there is her child to speak of. I blame myself," he
added, with impatience, "for not telling her before. Let us go now
directly--never mind ringing the bell; all that can be done when we are
out. Dinner? oh, for heaven's sake, let _them_ manage that! Where is
your bonnet, mother? the air will do me good after a bad night."

"Yes, dear," said Mrs. Vincent, moved by this last argument. It must be
his headache, no doubt, she tried to persuade herself. Stimulated by the
sound of his footstep in the next room, she lost very little time over
her toilette. Perhaps the chill January air, sharp with frost, air full
of natural exhilaration and refreshment, did bring a certain relief to
the young Nonconformist's aching temples and exasperated temper. It was
with difficulty his mother kept time with his long strides, as he
hurried her along the street, not leaving her time to look at Salem,
which was naturally the most interesting point in Carlingford to the
minister's mother. Before she had half prepared herself for this
interview, he had hurried her up the narrow bare staircase which led to
Mrs. Hilyard's lodgings. On the landing, with the door half open, stood
Lady Western's big footman, fully occupying the narrow standing-ground,
and shedding a radiance of plush over the whole shabby house. The result
upon Mrs. Vincent was an immediate increase of comfort, for surely the
woman must be respectable to whom people sent messages by so grand a
functionary. The sight of the man struck Vincent like another pang. She
had sent to take counsel, no doubt, on the evidently unlooked-for
information which had startled her so last night.

"Come in," said the inhabitant of the room. She was folding a note for
which the footman waited. Things were just as usual in that shabby
place. The coarse stuff at which she had been working lay on the table
beside her. Seeing a woman with Vincent, she got up quickly, and turned
her keen eyes upon the new-comer. The timid doubtful mother, the young
man, somewhat arbitrary and self-willed, who had brought his companion
there against her will, the very look, half fright, half suspicion,
which Mrs. Vincent threw round the room, explained matters to this quick
observer. She was mistress of the position at once.

"Take this to Lady Western, John," said Mrs. Hilyard. "She may come when
she pleases--I shall be at home all day; but tell her to send a maid
next time, for you are much too magnificent for Back Grove Street. This
is Mrs. Vincent, I know. Your son has brought you to see me, and I hope
you have not come to say that I was too rash in asking a Christian
kindness from this young man's mother. If he had not behaved like a
paladin, I should not have ventured upon it; but when a young man
conducts himself so, I think his mother is a good woman. You have taken
in my child?"

She had taken Mrs. Vincent by both hands, and placed her in a chair, and
sat down beside her. The widow had not a word to say. What with the
praise of her son, which was music to her ears--what with the confusion
of her own position, she was painfully embarrassed and at a loss, and
anxiously full of explanations. "Susan has, I have no doubt; but I am
sorry I left home on Wednesday morning, and we did not know then they
were expected; but we have a spare room, and Susan, I don't doubt----"

"The fact is, my mother had left home before they could have reached
Lonsdale," interposed Vincent; "but my sister would take care of them
equally well. They are all safe. A note came this morning announcing
their arrival. My mother," said the young man, hastily, "returns almost
immediately. It will make no difference to the strangers."

"I am sure Susan will make them comfortable, and the beds would be well
aired," said Mrs. Vincent; "but I had sudden occasion to leave home, and
did not even know of it till the night before. My dear," she said, with
hesitation, "did you think Mrs. Hilyard would know? I brought Susan's
note to show you," she added, laying down that simple performance in
which Susan announced the receipt of Arthur's letter, and the subsequent
arrival of "a governess-lady, and the most beautiful girl that ever was
seen." The latter part of Susan's hurried note, in which she declared
this beautiful girl to be "very odd--a sort of grown-up baby," was
carefully abstracted by the prudent mother.

The strange woman before them took up the note in both her hands and
drank it in, with an almost trembling eagerness. She seemed to read over
the words to herself again and again with moving lips. Then she drew a
long breath of relief.

"Miss Smith is the model of a governess-lady," she said, turning with a
composure wonderfully unlike that eagerness of anxiety to Mrs. Vincent
again--"she never writes but on her day, whatever may happen; and
yesterday did not happen to be her day. Thank you; it is Christian
charity. You must not be any loser meantime, and we must arrange these
matters before you go away. This is not a very imposing habitation," she
said, glancing round with a movement of her thin mouth, and comic gleam
in her eye--"but that makes no difference, so far as they are concerned.
Mr. Vincent knows more about me than he has any right to know,"
continued the strange woman, turning her head towards him for the moment
with an amused glance--"a man takes one on trust sometimes, but a woman
must always explain herself to a woman: perhaps, Mr. Vincent, you will
leave us together while I explain my circumstances to your mother?"

"Oh, I am sure it--it is not necessary," said Mrs. Vincent, half
alarmed; "but, Arthur, you were to ask----"

"What were you to ask?" said Mrs. Hilyard, laying her hand with an
involuntary movement upon a tiny note lying open on the table, to which
Vincent's eyes had already wandered.

"The fact is," he said, following her hand with his eyes, "that my
mother came up to inquire about some one called Fordham, in whom she is
interested. Lady Western knows him," said Vincent, abruptly, looking in
Mrs. Hilyard's face.

"Lady Western knows him. You perceive that she has written to ask me
about him this morning. Yes," said Mrs. Hilyard, looking at the young
man, not without a shade of compassion. "You are quite right in your
conclusions; poor Alice and he _were_ in love with each other before she
married Sir Joseph. He has not been heard of for a long time. What do
you want to know, and how is it he has showed himself now?"

"It is for Susan's sake," cried Mrs. Vincent, interposing; "oh, Mrs.
Hilyard, you will feel for me better than any one--my only daughter! I
got an anonymous letter the night before I left. I am so flurried, I
almost forget what night it was--Tuesday night--which arrived when my
dear child was out. I never kept anything from her in all her life, and
to conceal it was dreadful--and how we got through that night----"

"Mother, the details are surely not necessary now," said her impatient
son. "We want to know what are this man's antecedents and his
character--that is all," he added, with irrestrainable bitterness.

Mrs. Hilyard took up her work, and pinned the long coarse seam to her
knee. "Mrs. Vincent will tell me herself," she said, looking straight at
him with her amused look. Of all her strange peculiarities, the faculty
of amusement was the strangest. Intense restrained passion, anxiety of
the most desperate kind, a wild will which would pause at nothing, all
blended with and left room for this unfailing perception of any
ludicrous possibility. Vincent got up hastily, and, going to the window,
looked out upon the dismal prospect of Salem, throwing its shabby shadow
upon those dreary graves. Instinctively he looked for the spot where
that conversation must have been held which he had overheard from the
vestry window; it came most strongly to his mind at that moment. As his
mother went through her story, how Mr. Fordham had come accidentally to
the house--how gradually they had admitted him to their friendship--how,
at last, Susan and he had become engaged to each other--her son stood at
the window, following in his mind all the events of that evening, which
looked so long ago, yet was only two or three evenings back. He recalled
to himself his rush to the telegraph office; and again, with a sharp
stir of opposition and enmity, recalled, clear as a picture, the
railway-carriage just starting, the flash of light inside, the face so
clearly evident against the vacant cushions. What had he to do with that
face, with its eagle outline and scanty long locks? Somehow, in the
meshes of fate he felt himself so involved that it was impossible to
forget this man. He came and took his seat again with his mind full of
that recollection. The story had come to a pause, and Mrs. Hilyard sat
silent, taking in with her keen eyes every particular of the gentle
widow's character, evidently, as Vincent could see, following her
conduct back to those springs of gentle but imprudent generosity and
confidence in what people said to her, from which her present
difficulties sprang.

"And you admitted him first?" said Mrs. Hilyard, interrogatively,
"because----?" She paused. Mrs. Vincent became embarrassed and nervous.

"It was very foolish, very foolish," said the widow, wringing her hands;
"but he came to make inquiries, you know. I answered him civilly the
first time, and he came again and again. It looked so natural. He had
come down to see a young relation at school in the neighbourhood."

Mrs. Hilyard uttered a sudden exclamation--very slight, low, scarcely
audible; but it attracted Vincent's attention. He could see that her
thin lips were closed, her figure slightly erected, a sudden keen gleam
of interest in her face. "Did he find his relation?" she asked, in a
voice so ringing and distinct that the young minister started, and sat
upright, bracing himself for something about to happen. It did not flash
upon him yet what that meaning might be; but his pulses leapt with a
prescient thrill of some tempest or earthquake about to fall.

"No; he never could find her--it did not turn out to be our Lonsdale, I
think--what is the matter?" cried Mrs. Vincent; "you both know something
I don't know--what has happened? Arthur, have I said anything
dreadful?--oh, what does it mean?"

"Describe him if you can," said Mrs. Hilyard, in a tone which, sharp and
calm, tingled through the room with a passionate clearness which nothing
but extreme excitement could give. She had taken Mrs. Vincent's hand,
and held it tightly with a certain compassionate compulsion, forcing her
to speak. As for Vincent, the horrible suspicion which stole upon him
unmanned him utterly. He had sprung to his feet, and stood with his eyes
fixed on his mother's face with an indescribable horror and suspense. It
was not her he saw. With hot eyes that blazed in their sockets, he was
fixing the gaze of desperation upon a picture in his mind, which he
felt but too certain would correspond with the faltering words which
fell from her lips. Mrs. Vincent, for her part, would have thrown
herself wildly upon him, and lost her head altogether in a frightened
attempt to find out what this sudden commotion meant, had she not been
fixed and supported by that strong yet gentle grasp upon her hand.
"Describe him--take time," said her strange companion again--not looking
at her, but waiting in an indescribable calm of passion for the words
which she could frame in her mind before they were said.

"Tall," said the widow's faltering alarmed voice, falling with a strange
uncertainty through the intense stillness, in single words, with gasps
between; "not--a very young man--aquiline--with a sort of
eagle-look--light hair--long and thin, and as fine as silk--very light
in his beard, so that it scarcely showed. Oh, God help us! what is it?
what is it?--You both know whom I mean."

Neither of them spoke; but the eyes of the two met in a single look,
from which both withdrew, as if the communication were a crime. With a
shudder Vincent approached his mother; and, speechless though he was,
took hold of her, and drew her to him abruptly. Was it murder he read in
those eyes, with their desperate concentration of will and power? The
sight of them, and recollection of their dreadful splendour, drove even
Susan out of his mind. Susan, poor gentle soul!--what if she broke her
tender heart, in which no devils lurked? "Mother, come--come," he said,
hoarsely, raising her up in his arm, and releasing the hand which the
extraordinary woman beside her still clasped fast. The movement roused
Mrs. Hilyard as well as Mrs. Vincent. She rose up promptly from the side
of the visitor who had brought her such news.

"I need not suggest to you that this must be acted on at once," she said
to Vincent, who, in his agitation, saw how the hand, with which she
leant on the table, clenched hard till it grew white with the pressure.
"The man we have to deal with spares nothing." She stopped, and then,
with an effort, went up to the half-fainting mother, who hung upon
Vincent's arm, and took her hands and pressed them close. "We have both
thrust our children into the lion's mouth," she cried, with a momentary
softening. "Go, poor woman, and save your child if you can, and so will
I--we are companions in misfortune. And you are a priest, why cannot you
curse him?" she exclaimed, with a bitter cry. The next moment she had
taken down a travelling-bag from a shelf, and, kneeling down by a trunk,
began to transfer some things to it. Vincent left his mother, and went
up to her with a sudden impulse, "I am a priest, let me bless you," said
the young man, touching with a compassionate hand the dark head bending
before him. Then he took his mother away. He could not speak as he
supported her down-stairs; she, clinging to him with double weakness,
could scarcely support herself at all in her agitation and wonder when
they got into the street. She kept looking in his face with a pitiful
appeal that went to his heart.

"Tell me, Arthur, tell me!" She sobbed it out unawares, and over and
over before he knew what she was saying. And what could he tell her? "We
must go to Susan--poor Susan!" was all the young man could say.




CHAPTER XV.


Mrs. Vincent came to a dead stop as they passed the doors of Salem,
which were ajar, taking resolution in the desperateness of her
uncertainty--for the feelings in the widow's mind were not confined to
one burning impulse of terror for Susan, but complicated by a wonderful
amount of flying anxieties about other matters as well. _She_ knew, by
many teachings of experience, what would be said by all the connection,
when it was known that the minister's mother had been in Carlingford
without going to see anybody--not even Mrs. Tufton, the late minister's
wife, or Mrs. Tozer, who was so close at hand. Though her heart was
racked, Mrs. Vincent knew her duty. She stopped short in her fright and
distress with the mild obduracy of which she was capable. Before rushing
away out of Carlingford to protect her daughter, the mother,
notwithstanding her anxiety, could not forget the injury which she might
possibly do by this means to the credit of her son.

"Arthur, the chapel is open--I should like to go in and rest," she said,
with a little gasp; "and oh, my dear boy, take a little pity upon me! To
see the state you are in, and not to know anything, is dreadful. You
must have a vestry, where one could sit down a little--let us go in."

"A vestry--yes; it will be a fit place," cried Vincent, scarcely knowing
what he was saying, and indeed worn out with the violence of his own
emotions. This little persistent pause of the widow, who was not
absorbed by any one passionate feeling, but took all the common cares of
life with her into her severest trouble, awoke the young man to himself.
He, too, recollected that this enemy who had stolen into his house was
not to be reached by one wild rush, and that everything could not be
suffered to plunge after Susan's happiness into an indiscriminate gulf
of ruin. All his own duties pricked at his heart with bitter reminders
in that moment when he stood by the door of Salem, where two poor women
were busy inside, with pails and brushes, preparing for Sunday. The
minister, too, had to prepare for Sunday. He could not dart forth,
breathing fire and flame at a moment's notice, upon the serpent who had
entered his Eden. Even at this dreadful moment, in all the fever of such
a discovery, the touch of his mother's hand upon his arm brought him
back to his lot. He pushed open the mean door, and led her into the
scene of his weekly labours with a certain sickening disgust in his
heart which would have appalled his companion. _She_ was a dutiful
woman, subdued by long experience of that inevitable necessity against
which all resistance fails; and he a passionate young man, naturally a
rebel against every such bond. They could not understand each other; but
the mother's troubled face, all conscious of Tufton and Tozer, and what
the connection would say, brought all the weight of his own particular
burden back upon Vincent's mind. He pushed in past the pails with a
certain impatience which grieved Mrs. Vincent. She followed him with a
pained and disapproving look, nodding, with a faint little smile, to the
women, who no doubt were members of the flock, and might spread an evil
report of the pastor, who took no notice of them. As she followed him to
the vestry, she could not help thinking, with a certain strange mixture
of pain, vexation, and tender pride, how different his dear father would
have been. "But Arthur, dear boy, has my quick temper," sighed the
troubled woman. After all, it was her fault rather than her son's.

"This is a very nice room," said Mrs. Vincent, sitting down with an air
of relief; "but I think it would be better to close the window, as there
is no fire. You were always very susceptible to cold, Arthur, from a
child. And now, my dear boy, we are undisturbed, and out of those
dreadful glaring streets where everybody knows you. I have not troubled
you, Arthur, for I saw you were very much troubled; but, oh! don't keep
me anxious now."

"Keep you anxious! You ask me to make you anxious beyond anything you
can think of," said the young man, closing the window with a hasty and
fierce impatience, which she could not understand. "Good heavens,
mother! why did you let that man into your innocent house?"

"Who is he, Arthur?" asked Mrs. Vincent, with a blanched face.

"He is----" Vincent stopped with his hand upon the window where he had
overheard that conversation, a certain awe coming over him. Even Susan
went out of his mind when he thought of the dreadful calmness with which
his strange acquaintance had promised to kill her companion of that
night. Had she started already on this mission of vengeance? A cold
thrill came over him where he stood. "I can't tell who he is," he
exclaimed, abruptly, throwing himself down upon the little sofa; "but it
was to be in safety from him that Mrs. Hilyard sent her daughter to
Lonsdale. It was he whom she vowed to kill if he found the child.
Ah!--he is," cried the young man, springing to his feet again with a
sudden pang and smothered exclamation as the truth dawned upon him,
"Lady Western's brother. What other worse thing he is I cannot tell.
Ruin, misery, and horror at the least--death to Susan--not much less to
me."

"To you? Oh, Arthur, have pity upon me, my heart is breaking," said Mrs.
Vincent. "Oh, my boy, my boy, whom I would die to save from any trouble!
don't tell me I have destroyed you. That cannot be, Arthur--_that_
cannot be!"

The poor minister did not say anything--his heart was bitter within him.
He paced up and down the vestry with dreadful thoughts. What was She to
him if she had a hundred brothers? Nothing in the world could raise the
young Nonconformist to that sweet height which she made beautiful; and
far beyond that difference came the cruel recollection of those smiles
and tears--pathetic, involuntary confessions. If there was another man
in the world whom she could trust "with life--to death!" what did it
matter though a thousand frightful combinations involved poor Vincent
with her kindred? He tried to remind himself of all this, but did not
succeed. In the mean time, the fact glared upon him that it was her
brother who had aimed this deadly blow at the honour and peace of his
own humble house; and his heart grew sad with the thought that, however
indifferent she might be to him, however unattainable, here was a
distinct obstacle which must cut off all that bewildering tantalising
intercourse which at present was still possible, notwithstanding every
other hindrance. He thought of this, and not of Susan, as the floor of
the little vestry thrilled under his feet. He was bitter, aggrieved,
indignant. His troubled mother, who sat by there, half afraid to cry,
watching him with frightened, anxious, uncomprehending eyes, had done
him a sharp and personal injury. _She_ could not fancy how it was, nor
what she could have done. She followed him with mild tearful glances,
waiting with a woman's compelled patience till he should come to
himself, and revolving thoughts of Salem, and supply for the pulpit
there, with an anxious pertinacity. But in her way Mrs. Vincent was a
wise woman. She did not speak--she let him wear himself out first in
that sudden apprehension of the misfortune personal to himself, which
was at the moment so much more poignant and bitter than any other dread.
When he had subsided a little--and first of all he threw up the window,
leaning out, to his mother's great vexation, with a total disregard of
the draught, and receiving the chill of the January breeze upon his
heated brow--she ventured to say, gently, "Arthur, what are we to do?"

"To go to Lonsdale," said Vincent. "When we came in here, I thought we
could rush off directly; but these women outside there, and this place,
remind me that I am not a free man, who can go at once and do his duty.
I am in fetters to Salem, mother. Heaven knows when I may be able to get
away. Sunday must be provided for first. No natural immediate action is
possible to me."

"Hush, Arthur dear--oh, hush! Your duty to your flock is above your duty
even to your sister," said the widow, with a tremulous voice, timid of
saying anything to him whose mood she could not comprehend. "You must
find out when the first train starts, and I will go. I have been very
foolish," faltered the poor mother, "as you say, Arthur; but if my poor
child is to bear such a dreadful blow, I am the only one to take care of
her. Susan"--here she made a pause, her lip trembled, and she had all
but broken into tears--"will not upbraid me, dear. You must not neglect
your duty, whatever happens; and now let us go and inquire about the
train, Arthur, and you can come on Monday, after your work is over; and,
oh! my dear boy, we must not repine, but accept the arrangements of
Providence. It was what your dear father always said to his dying day."

Her face all trembling and pale, her eyes full of tears which were not
shed, her tender humility, which never attempted a defence, and those
motherly, tremulous, wistful advices which it now for the first time
dawned upon Mrs. Vincent her son was not certain to take, moved the
young Nonconformist out of his personal vexation and misery.

"This will not do," he said. "I must go with you; and we must go
directly. Susan may be less patient, less believing, less ready to take
our word for it, than you imagine, mother. Come; if there is anybody to
be got to do this preaching, the thing will be easy. Tozer will help me,
perhaps. We will waste no more time here."

"I am quite rested, Arthur dear," said Mrs. Vincent; "and it will be
right for me to call at Mrs. Tozer's too. I wish I could have gone to
Mrs. Tufton's, and perhaps some others of your people. But you must tell
them, dear, that I was very hurried--and--and not very well; and that it
was family business that brought me here."

"I do not see they have any business with the matter," said the
rebellious minister.

"My dear, it will of course be known that I was in Carlingford; and I
know how things are spoken of in a flock," said Mrs. Vincent, rising;
"but you must tell them all I wanted to come, and could not--which,
indeed, will be quite true. A minister's family ought to be very
careful, Arthur," added the much-experienced woman. "I know how little a
thing makes mischief in a congregation. Perhaps, on the whole, I ought
not to call at Mrs. Tozer's, as there is no time to go elsewhere. But
still I should like to do it. One good friend is often everything to a
young pastor. And, my dear, you should just say a word in passing to the
women outside."

"By way of improving the occasion?" said Vincent, with a little scorn.
"Mother, don't torture yourself about me. I shall get on very well; and
we have plenty on our hands just now without thinking of Salem. Come,
come; with this horrible cloud overhanging Susan, how can you spare a
thought for such trifles as these?"

"Oh, Arthur, my dear boy, must not we keep you right?" said his mother;
"are not you our only hope? If this dreadful news you tell me is true,
my child will break her heart, and I will be the cause of it; and Susan
has no protector or guardian, Arthur dear, that can take care of her,
but you."

Wiping her eyes, and walking with a feeble step, Mrs. Vincent followed
her son out of Salem; but she looked up with gentle interest to his
pulpit as she passed, and said it was a cold day to the cleaners, with
anxious carefulness. She was not carried away from her palpable
standing-ground by any wild tempest of anxiety. Susan, whose heart would
be broken by this blow, was her mother's special object in life; but the
thought of that coming sorrow which was to crush the girl's heart, made
Mrs. Vincent only the more anxiously concerned to conciliate and please
everybody whose influence could be of any importance to her son.

So they came out into the street together, and went on to Tozer's shop.
She, tremulous, watchful, noting everything; now lost in thought as to
how the dreadful truth was to be broken to Susan; now in anxious plans
for impressing upon Arthur the necessity of considering his people--he,
stinging with personal wounds and bitterness, much more deeply alarmed
than his mother, and burning with consciousness of all the complications
which she was totally ignorant of. Fury against the villain himself,
bitter vexation that he was Lady Western's brother, anger at his mother
for admitting, at Susan for giving him her heart, at Mrs. Hilyard for he
could not tell what, because she had added a climax to all, burned in
Vincent's mind as he went on to George Street with his mother leaning on
his arm, who asked him after every wayfarer who passed them, Who was
that? It was not wonderful that the young man gradually grew into a
fever of excitement and restless misery. Everything conspired to
exasperate him,--even the fact that Sunday came so near, and could not
be escaped. The whirl of his brain came to a climax when Lady Western's
carriage drove past, and through the mist of his wretchedness he saw the
smile and the beautiful hand waved to him in sweet recognition. Oh
heaven! to bring tears to those eyes, or a pang to that heart!--to have
her turn from him shuddering, or pass him with cold looks, because her
brother was a villain, and _he_ the avenger of that crime! His mother,
almost running to keep up with his unconsciously quickened pace, cast
pitiful looks at him, inquiring what it was. The poor young fellow could
not have told even if he would. It was a combination of miseries,
sharply stimulated to the intolerable point by the mission on which he
had now to enter Tozer's shop.

"We heard you was come, ma'am," said Tozer, graciously, "and in course
was looking for a call. I hope you are going to stay awhile and help us
take care of the pastor. He don't take that care of himself as his
friends would wish," said the butterman. "Mr. Vincent, sir, I've a deal
to say to you when you're at leisure. Old Mr. Tufton, he has a deal to
say to you. We are as anxious as ever we can be, us as are old stagers,
to keep the minister straight, ma'am. He's but a young man, and he's
come into a deal of popularity, and any one more thought on in our
connection, I don't know as I would wish to see; but it wouldn't do to
let him have his head turned. Them lectures on Church and State couldn't
but be remarked, being delivered, as you may say, in the world, all on
us making a sacrifice to do our duty by our fellow-creaturs, seein' what
we had in our power. But man is but mortal; and us Salem folks don't
like to see no signs of that weakness in a pastor; it's our duty to see
as his head's not turned."

"Indeed, I trust there is very little fear of that," said Mrs. Vincent,
roused, and set on the defensive. "My dear boy has been used to be
appreciated, and to have people round him who could understand him. As
for having his head turned, that might happen to a man who did not know
what intelligent approbation was; but after doing so well as he did at
college, and having his dear father's approval, I must say I don't see
any cause to apprehend _that_, Mr. Tozer. I am not surprised at all, for
my part,--I always knew what my Arthur could do."

"No more of this," said Vincent, impatiently. "Look here, I have come
on a special business. Can any one be got, do you think, to preach on
Sunday? I must go home with my mother to-day."

"To-day!" Tozer opened his eyes, with a blank stare, as he slowly took
off his apron. "You was intimated to begin that course on the Miracles,
Mr. Vincent, if you'll excuse _me_, on Sunday. Salem folks is a little
sharp, I don't deny. It would be a great disappointment, and I can't say
I think as it would be took well if you was to go away."

"I can't help that," said the unfortunate minister, to whom opposition
at this moment was doubly intolerable. "The Salem people, I presume,
will hear reason. My mother has come upon----"

"Family business," interrupted Mrs. Vincent, with the deepest trembling
anxiety. "Arthur dear, let me explain it, for you are too susceptible.
My son is all the comfort we have in the world, Mr. Tozer," said the
anxious widow. "I ought not to have told him how much his sister wanted
him, but I was rash, and did so; and now I ought to bear the penalty. I
have made him anxious about Susan; but, Arthur dear, never mind; you
must let me go by myself, and on Monday you can come. Your dear father
always said his flock was his first duty, and if Sunday is a special
day, as Mr. Tozer says----"

"Oh, Pa, is it Mrs. Vincent? and you keep her in the shop, when we are
all as anxious as ever we can be to see her," said Phoebe, who
suddenly came upon the scene. "Oh, please to come up-stairs to the
drawing-room. Oh, I _am_ so glad to see you! and it was so unkind of Mr.
Vincent not to let us know you were coming. Mamma wanted to ask you to
come here, for she thought it would be more comfortable than a
bachelor's rooms; and we did think the minister would have told _us_,"
said Phoebe, with reproachful looks; "but now that you have come back
again, after such a long time, please, Mr. Vincent, let your mother come
up-stairs. They say you don't think us good enough to be trusted now;
but oh, I don't think you could ever be like that!" continued Phoebe,
pausing by the door as she ushered Mrs. Vincent into the drawing-room,
and giving the minister an appealing remonstrative glance before she
dropped her eyelids in virginal humility. Poor Vincent paused too,
disgusted and angry, but with a certain confusion. To fling out of the
house, dash off to his rooms, make his hasty preparations for the
journey, was the impulse which possessed him; but his mother was looking
back with wistful curiosity, wondering what the two could mean by
pausing behind her at the door.

"I am exactly as I was the last time I saw you, which was on Tuesday,"
he said, with some indignation. "I will follow you, please. My mother
has no time to spare, as she leaves to-day--can Mrs. Tozer see her? She
has been agitated and worn out, and we have not really a moment to
spare."

"Appearingly not--not for your own friends, Mr. Vincent," said Mrs.
Tozer, who now presented herself. "I hope I see you well, ma'am, and
proud to see you in my house, though I will say the minister don't show
himself not so kind as was to be wished. Phoebe, don't put on none o'
your pleading looks--for shame of yourself, Miss! If Mr. Vincent has
them in Carlingford as he likes better than any in his own flock, it
ain't no concern of ours. It's a thing well known as the Salem folks are
all in trade, and don't drive their carriages, nor give themselves up to
this world and vanity. I never saw no good come, for my part, of folks
sacrificing theirselves and their good money as Tozer and the rest set
their hearts on, with that Music Hall and them advertisings and
things--not as I was meaning to upbraid you, Mr. Vincent, particular not
before your mother, as is a stranger--but we was a deal comfortabler
before them lectures and things, and taking off your attention from your
own flock."

Before this speech was finished, the whole party had assembled in the
drawing-room, where a newly-lighted fire, hastily set light to on the
spur of the moment by Phoebe, was sputtering drearily. Mrs. Vincent
had been placed in an arm-chair at one side, and Mrs. Tozer, spreading
out her black silk apron and arranging her cap, set herself doggedly on
the other, with a little toss of her head and careful averting of her
eyes from the accused pastor. Tozer, without his apron, had drawn a
chair to the table, and was drumming on it with the blunt round ends of
his fingers; while Phoebe, in a slightly pathetic attitude, ready for
general conciliation, hovered near the minister, who grew red all over,
and clenched his hand with an emphasis most intelligible to his
frightened mother. The dreadful pause was broken by Phoebe, who rushed
to the rescue.

"Oh, Ma, how can you!" cried that young lady--"you were all worrying
and teasing Mr. Vincent, you know you were; and if he does know that
beautiful lady," said Phoebe, with her head pathetically on one side,
and another glance at him, still more appealing and tenderly
reproachful--"and--and likes to go to see her--it's--it's the naturalest
thing that ever was. Oh, I knew he never could think anything of anybody
else in Carlingford after Lady Western! and I am sure, whatever other
people may say, I--I--never can think Mr. Vincent was to blame."

Phoebe's words were interrupted by her feelings--she sank back into a
seat when she had concluded, and put a handkerchief to her eyes. As for
Tozer, he still drummed on the table. A certain human sympathy was in
the mind of the butterman, but he deferred to the readier utterance of
his indignant wife.

"I never said it was any concern of ours," said Mrs. Tozer. "It ain't
our way to court nobody as doesn't seek our company; but a minister as
we've all done a deal to make comfortable, and took an interest in equal
to a son, and has been made such a fuss about as I never see in our
connection--it's disappointing, I will say, to see him a-going off after
worldly folks that don't care no more about religion than I do about
playing the piano. Not as Phoebe doesn't play the piano better than
most--but such things ain't in my thoughts. I do say it's disappointing,
and gives folks a turn. If she's pretty-lookin'--as she may be, for what
I can tell--it ain't none of the pastor's business. Them designing
ladies is the ruin of a young man; and when he deserts his flock, as
are making sacrifices, and goes off after strangers, I don't say if it's
right or wrong, but I say it's disappointin', and what wasn't looked for
at Mr. Vincent's hands."

Vincent had listened up to this point with moderate
self-restraint--partially, perhaps, subdued by the alarmed expression of
his mother's face, who had fixed her anxious eyes upon him, and vainly
tried to convey telegraphic warnings; but the name of Lady Western stung
him. "What is all this about?" he asked, with assumed coldness. "Nobody
supposes, surely, that I am to render an account of my private friends
to the managers of the chapel. It is a mistake, if it has entered any
imagination. I shall do nothing of the kind. There is enough of this.
When I neglect my duties, I presume I shall hear of it more seriously.
In the mean time, I have real business in hand."

"But, Arthur dear, I daresay some one has misunderstood you," said his
mother; "it always turns out so. I came the day before yesterday, Mrs.
Tozer. I left home very suddenly in great anxiety, and I was very much
fatigued by the journey, and I must go back to-day. I have been very
selfish, taking my son away from his usual occupations. Never mind me,
Arthur dear; if you have any business, leave me to rest a little with
Mrs. Tozer. I can take such a liberty here, because I know she is such a
friend of yours. Don't keep Mr. Tozer away from his business on my
account. I know what it is when time is valuable. I will just stay a
little with Mrs. Tozer, and you can let me know when it is time for the
train. Yes, I came up very hurriedly," said the gentle diplomatist,
veiling her anxiety as she watched the gloomy countenances round her.
"We had heard some bad news; I had to ask my son to go to town yesterday
for me, and--and I must go home to-day without much comfort. I feel a
good deal shaken, but I dare not stay away any longer from my dear child
at home."

"Dear, dear; I hope it's nothing serious as has happened?" said Mrs.
Tozer, slightly mollified.

"It is some bad news about the gentleman Susan was going to marry," said
Mrs. Vincent, with a rapid calculation of the necessities of the
position; "and she does not know yet. Arthur, my dear boy, it would be a
comfort to my mind to know about the train."

"Oh, and you will be so fatigued!" said Phoebe. "I do so hope it's
nothing bad. I _am_ so interested about Miss Vincent. Oh, Pa, do go
down-stairs and look at the railway bill. Won't you lie down on the sofa
a little and rest? Fancy, mamma, taking two journeys in three days!--it
would kill you; and, oh, I do so hope it is nothing very bad. I have so
longed to see you and Mr. Vincent's sister. He told me all about her one
evening. Is the gentleman ill? But do lie down and rest after all your
fatigue. Mamma, don't you think it would do Mrs. Vincent good?"

"We'll have a bit of dinner presently," said Mrs. Tozer. "Phoebe, go
and fetch the wine. There is one thing in trouble, that it makes folks
find out their real friends. It wouldn't be to Lady Western the
minister would think of taking his mother. I ain't saying anything,
Tozer--nor Mr. Vincent needn't think I am saying anything. If I speak my
mind a bit, I don't bear malice. Phoebe's a deal too feelin', Mrs.
Vincent--she's overcome, that's what she is; and if I must speak the
truth, it's disappointing to see our pastor, as we've all made
sacrifices for, following after the ungodly. I am a mother myself,"
continued Mrs. Tozer, changing her seat, as her husband, followed by the
indignant Vincent, went down-stairs, "and I know a mother's feelin's:
but after what I heard from Mrs. Pigeon, and how it's going through all
the connection in Carlingford----"

Mrs. Vincent roused herself to listen. Her son's cause was safe in her
hands.

Meantime Vincent went angry and impetuous down-stairs. "I will not
submit to any inquisition," cried the young man. "I have done nothing I
am ashamed of. If I dine with a friend, I will suffer no questioning on
the subject. What do you mean? What right has any man in any connection
to interfere with my actions? Why, you would not venture to attack your
servant so! Am I the servant of this congregation? Am I their slave?
Must I account to them for every accident of my life? Nobody in the
world has a right to make such a demand upon me."

"If a minister ain't a servant, we pays him his salary at the least, and
expects him to please us," said Tozer, sulkily. "If it weren't for that,
I don't give a sixpence for the Dissenting connection. Them as likes to
please themselves would be far better in a State Church, where it
wouldn't disappoint nobody; not meaning to be hard on you as has given
great satisfaction, them's my views; but if the Chapel folks is a little
particular, it's no more nor a pastor's duty to bear with them, and
return a soft answer. I don't say as I'm dead again' you, like the
women," added the butterman, softening; "they're jealous, that's what
they are; but I couldn't find it in my heart, not for my own part, to be
hard on a man as was led away after a beautiful creature like that. But
there can't no good come of it, Mr. Vincent; take my advice, sir, as
have seen a deal of the world--there can't no good come of it. A man as
goes dining with Lady Western, and thinking as she means to make a
friend of him, ain't the man for Salem. We're different sort of folks,
and we can't go on together. Old Mr. Tufton will tell you just the same,
as has gone through it all--and that's why I said both him and me had a
deal to say to you, as are a young man, and should take good advice."

It was well for Vincent that the worthy butterman was lengthy in his
address. The sharp impression of resentment and indignation which
possessed him calmed down under this outpouring of words. He bethought
himself of his dignity, his character. A squabble of self-defence, in
which the sweet name of the lady of his dreams must be involved--an
angry encounter of words about her, down here in this mean world to
which the very thought of her was alien, wound up her young worshipper
into supernatural self-restraint. He edged past the table in the
back-parlour to the window, and stood there looking out with a
suppressed fever in his veins, biting his lip, and bearing his lecture.
On the whole, the best way, perhaps, would have been to leave
Carlingford at once, as another man would have done, and leave the
Sunday to take care of itself. But though he groaned under his bonds,
the young Nonconformist was instinctively confined by them, and had the
habits of a man trained in necessary subjection to circumstances. He
turned round abruptly when the butterman at last came to a pause.

"I will write to one of my friends in Homerton," he said, "if you will
make an apology for me in the chapel. I daresay I could get Beecher to
come down, who is a very clever fellow; and as for the beginning of that
course of sermons----"

He stopped short with a certain suppressed disgust. Good heavens! what
mockery it seemed. Amid these agonies of life, a man overwhelmed with
deadly fear, hatred, and grief might indeed pause to snatch a burning
lesson, or appropriate with trembling hands a consolatory promise; but
with the whole solemn future of his sister's life hanging on a touch,
with all the happiness and peace of his own involved in a feverish
uncertainty, with dark unsuspected depths of injury and wretchedness
opening at his feet--to think of courses of sermons and elaborate
preachments, ineffectual words, and pretences of teaching! For the first
time in the commotion of his soul, in the resentments and forebodings to
which he gave no utterance, in the bitter conviction of uncertainty in
everything which consumed his heart, a doubt of his own ability to teach
came to Vincent's mind. He stopped short with an intolerable pang of
impatience and self-disgust.

"And what of that, Mr. Vincent?" said Tozer. "I can't say as I think
it'll be well took to see a stranger in the pulpit after them
intimations. I made it my business to send the notices out last night;
and after saying everywhere as you were to begin a coorse, as I always
advised, if you had took my advice, it ain't a way to stop talk to put
them off now. Old Mr. Tufton, you know, he was a different man; it was
experience as was his line; and I don't mean to say nothing against
experience," said the worthy deacon. "There ain't much true godliness,
take my word, where there's a shrinking from disclosin' the state of
your soul; but for keeping up a congregation there's nothing I know on
like a coorse--and a clever young man as has studied his subjects, and
knows the manners of them old times, and can give a bit of a description
as takes the interest, that's what I'd set my heart on for Salem.
There's but three whole pews in the chapel as isn't engaged," said the
butterman, with a softening glance at the pastor; "and the Miss Hemmings
sent over this morning to say as they meant to come regular the time you
was on the Miracles; and but for this cackle of the women, as you'll
soon get over, there ain't a thing as I can see to stop us filling up to
the most influential chapel in the connection; I mean in our parts."

The subdued swell of expectation with which the ambitious butterman
concluded, somehow made Vincent more tolerant even in his undiminished
excitement. He gave a subdued groan over all this that was expected of
him, but not without a little answering thrill in his own troubled and
impatient heart.

"A week can't make much difference, if I am ever to do any good," said
the young man. "I must go now; but if you explain the matter for me, you
will smooth the way. I will bring my mother and sister here," he went
on, giving himself over for a moment to a little gleam of comfort, "and
everything will go on better. I am worried and anxious now, and don't
know what I am about. Give me some paper, and I will write to Beecher.
You will like him. He is a good fellow, and preaches much better than I
do," added poor Vincent with a sigh, sitting wearily down by the big
table. He was subdued to his condition at that moment, and Tozer
appreciated the momentary humbleness.

"I am not the man to desert my minister when he's in trouble," said the
brave butterman. "Look you here, Mr. Vincent; don't fret yourself about
it. I'll take it in hand; and I'd like to see the man in Salem as would
say to the contrary again' me and the pastor both. Make your mind easy;
I'll manage 'em. As for the women," said Tozer, scratching his head, "I
don't pretend not to be equal to that; but my missis is as reasonable as
most; and Phoebe, she'll stand up for you, whatever you do. If you'll
take my advice, and be a bit prudent, and don't go after no more
vanities, things ain't so far wrong but a week or two will make them
right."

With this consolatory assurance Vincent began to write his letter.
Before he had concluded it, the maid came to lay the cloth for dinner,
thrusting him into a corner, where he accomplished his writing painfully
on his knee with his ink on the window-sill, a position in which
Phoebe found him when she ventured down-stairs. It was she who took
his letter from him, and ran with it to the shop to despatch it at once;
and Phoebe came back to tell him that Mrs. Vincent was resting, and
that it was _so_ pleasant to see him back again after such a time. "I
never expected you would have any patience for us when I saw you knew
Lady Western _so_ well. Oh, she is so sweetly pretty! and if I were a
gentleman, I know I should fall _deep_ in love with her," said Phoebe,
with a sidelong glance, and not without hopes of calling forth a
disclaimer from the minister; but the poor minister, jammed up in the
corner, whence it was now necessary to extricate his chair preparatory
to sitting down to a family dinner with the Tozers, was, as usual,
unequal to the occasion, and had nothing to say. Phoebe's chair was by
the minister's side during that substantial meal; and the large fire
which burned behind Mrs. Tozer at the head of the table, and the
steaming viands on the hospitable board, and the prevailing atmosphere
of cheese and bacon which entered when the door was opened, made even
Mrs. Vincent pale and flush a little in the heroic patience and
friendliness with which she bent all her powers to secure the support of
these adherents to her son. "I could have wished, Arthur, they were a
little more refined," she said, faintly, when the dinner was over, and
they were at last on their way to the train; "but I am sure they are
very _genuine_, my dear; and one good friend is often everything to a
pastor; and I am so glad we went at such a time." So glad! The young
Nonconformist heaved a tempestuous sigh, and turned away not without a
reflection upon the superficial emotions of women who at such a time
could he glad. But Mrs. Vincent, for her part, with a fatigue and
sickness of heart which she concealed from herself as much as she could,
let down her veil, and cried quietly behind it. Perhaps her share of the
day's exhaustion had not been the mildest or least hard.




CHAPTER XVI.


The journey was troublesome and tedious, involving a change from one
railway to another, and a troubled glimpse into the most noisy streets
of London by the way. Vincent had left his mother, as he thought, safe
in the cab which carried them to the second railway station, and was
disposing of the little luggage they had with them, that he might not
require to leave her again, when he heard an anxious voice calling him,
and found her close behind him, afloat in the bustle and confusion of
the crowd, dreadfully agitated and helpless, calling upon her Arthur
with impatient accents of distress. His annoyance to find her there
increased her confusion and trembling. "Arthur," she gasped out, "I saw
him--I saw him--not a minute ago--in a cab--with some ladies; oh, my
dear, run after him. That was the way he went. Arthur, Arthur, why don't
you go? Never mind me--I can take care of myself."

"Who was it--how did he go?--why didn't you stop him, mother?" cried the
young man, rushing back to the spot she had left. Nothing was to be seen
there but the usual attendant group of railway porters, and the alarmed
cabman who had been keeping his eye on Mrs. Vincent. The poor widow
gasped as she gazed and saw no traces of the enemy who had eluded them.

"Oh, Arthur, my dear boy, I thought, in such a case, it ought to be a
man to speak to him," faltered Mrs. Vincent. "He went that way--that
way, look!--in a cab, with somebody in a blue veil."

Vincent rushed away in the direction she indicated, at a pace which he
was totally unused to, and of course quite unable to keep up beyond the
first heat; but few things could be more hopeless than to dash into the
whirl of vehicles in the crowded current of the New Road, with any vain
hope of identifying one which had ten minutes' start, and no more
distinctive mark of identity than the spectrum of a blue veil. He rushed
back again, angry with himself for losing breath in so vain an attempt,
just in time to place his mother in a carriage and jump in beside her
before the train started. Mrs. Vincent's anxiety, her questions which he
could not hear, her doubts whether it might not have been best to have
missed the train and followed Mr. Fordham, aggravated the much-tried
patience of her son beyond endurance. They set off upon their sad
journey with a degree of injured feeling on both sides, such as often
gives a miserable complication to a mutual anxiety. But the mother,
wounded and timid, feeling more than ever the difference between the boy
who was all her own and the man who had thoughts and impulses of which
she knew nothing, was naturally the first to recover and to make wistful
overtures of peace.

"Well, Arthur," she said, after a while, leaning forward to him, her
mild voice making a gentle murmur through the din of the journey,
"though it was very foolish of me not to speak to him when I saw him,
still, dear, he is gone and out of the way; that is a great comfort--we
will never, never let him come near Susan again. That is just what I was
afraid of; I have been saying to myself all day, 'What if he should go
to Lonsdale too, and deny it all?' but Providence, you see, dear, has
ordered it for us, and now he shall never come near my poor child
again."

"Do you think he has been to Lonsdale?" asked Vincent.

"My poor Susan!" said his simple mother, "she will be happier than ever
when we come to her with this dreadful news. Yes; I suppose he must have
been seeing her, Arthur--and I am glad it has happened while I was away,
and before we knew; and now he is gone," said the widow, looking out of
the carriage with a sigh of relief, as if she could still see the road
by which he had disappeared--"now he is gone, there will be no need for
any dreadful strife or arguments. God always arranges things for us so
much better than we can arrange them for ourselves. Fancy if he had come
to-morrow to tear her dear heart to pieces!--Oh, Arthur, I am very
thankful! There will be nothing to do now but to think best how to break
it to her. He had ladies with him; it is dreadful to think of such
villany. Oh, Arthur, do you imagine it could be his wife?--and somebody
in a blue veil."

"A blue veil!"--Mrs. Hilyard's message suddenly occurred to Vincent's
mind, with its special mention of that article of disguise. "If this man
is the man we suppose, he has accomplished one of his wishes," said the
minister, slowly; "and she will kill him as sure as he lives."

"Who will kill him?--I hope nothing has occurred about your friend's
child to agitate my Susan," said his mother. "It was all the kindness of
your heart, my dear boy; but it was very imprudent of you to let Susan's
name be connected with anybody of doubtful character. Oh, Arthur, dear,
we have both been very imprudent!--you have so much of my quick temper.
It was a punishment to me to see how impatient you were to-day; but
Susan takes after your dear father. Oh, my own boy, pray; pray for her,
that her heart may not be broken by this dreadful news."

And Mrs. Vincent leant back in her corner, and once more put down her
veil. Pray!--who was he to pray for? Susan, forlorn and innocent,
disappointed in her first love, but unharmed by any worldly soil or evil
passion?--or the other sufferers involved in more deadly sort, himself
palpitating with feverish impulses, broken loose from all his peaceful
youthful moorings, burning with discontents and aspirations, not
spiritual, but of the world? Vincent prayed none as he asked himself
that bitter question. He drew back in his seat opposite his mother, and
pondered in his heart the wonderful difference between the objects of
compassion to whom the world gives ready tears, and those of whom the
world knows and suspects nothing. Susan! he could see her mother
weeping over her in her white and tender innocence. What if, perhaps,
she broke her young heart? the shock would only send the girl with more
clinging devotion to the feet of the great Father; but as for himself,
all astray from duty and sober life, devoured with a consuming fancy,
loathing the way and the work to which he had been trained to believe
that Father had called him--who thought of weeping?--or for Her, whom
his alarmed imagination could not but follow, going forth remorseless
and silent to fulfil her promise, and kill the man who had wronged her?
Oh, the cheat of tears!--falling sweet over the young sufferers whom
sorrow blessed--drying up from the horrible complex pathways where other
souls, in undisclosed anguish, went farther and farther from God!

With such thoughts the mother and son hurried on upon their darkling
journey. It was the middle of the night when they arrived in Lonsdale--a
night starless, but piercing with cold. They were the only passengers
who got out at the little station, where two or three lamps glared
wildly on the night, and two pale porters made a faint bustle to forward
the long convoy of carriages upon its way. One of these men looked
anxiously at the widow, as if with the sudden impulse of asking a
question, or communicating some news, but was called off by his superior
before he could speak. Vincent unconsciously observed the look, and was
surprised and even alarmed by it, without knowing why. It returned to
his mind, as he gave his mother his arm to walk the remaining distance
home. Why did the man put on that face of curiosity and wonder? But, to
be sure, to see the mild widow arrive in this unexpected way in the
middle of the icy January night, must have been surprising enough to any
one who knew her, and her gentle decorous life. He tried to think no
more of it, as they set out upon the windy road, where a few
sparely-scattered lamps blinked wildly, and made the surrounding
darkness all the darker. The station was half a mile from the town, and
Mrs. Vincent's cottage was on the other side of Lonsdale, across the
river, which stole sighing and gleaming through the heart of the little
place. Somehow the sudden black shine of that water as they caught it,
crossing the bridge, brought a shiver and flash of wild imagination to
the mind of the Nonconformist. He thought of suicides, murders, ghastly
concealment, and misery; and again the face of the porter returned upon
him. What if something had happened while the watchful mother had been
out of the way? The wind came sighing round the corners with an
ineffectual gasp, as if it too had some warning, some message to
deliver. Instinctively he drew his mother's arm closer, and hurried her
on. Suggestions of horrible unthought-of evil seemed lurking everywhere
in the noiseless blackness of the night.

Mrs. Vincent shivered too, but it was with cold and natural agitation.
In her heart she was putting tender words together, framing tender
phrases--consulting with herself how she was to look, and how to speak.
Already she could see the half-awakened girl, starting up all glowing
and sweet from her safe rest, unforeboding of evil; and the widow
composed her face under the shadow of her veil, and sent back with an
effort the unshed tears from her eyes, that Susan might not see any
traces in her face, till she had "prepared her" a little, for that
dreadful, inevitable blow.

The cottage was all dark, as was natural--doubly dark to-night, for
there was no light in the skies, and the wind had extinguished the lamp
which stood nearest, and on ordinary occasions threw a doubtful flicker
on the little house. "Susan will soon hear us, she is such a light
sleeper," said Mrs. Vincent. "Ring the bell, Arthur. I don't like using
the knocker, to disturb the neighbours. Everybody would think it so
surprising to hear a noise in the middle of the night from our house.
There--wait a moment. That was a very loud ring; Susan must be sleeping
very soundly if that does not wake her up."

There was a little pause; not a sound, except the tinkling of the bell,
which they could hear inside as the peal gradually subsided, was in the
air; breathless silence, darkness, cold, an inhuman preternatural chill
and watchfulness, no welcome sound of awakening sleepers, only their own
dark shadows in the darkness, listening like all the hushed surrounding
world at that closed door.

"Poor dear! Oh, Arthur, it is dreadful to come and break her sleep,"
sighed Mrs. Vincent, whose strain of suspense and expectation heightened
the effect of the cold: "when will she sleep as sound again? Give
another ring, dear. How terribly dark and quiet it is! Ring again,
again, Arthur!--dear, dear me, to think of Susan in such a sound
sleep!--and generally she starts at any noise. It is to give her
strength to bear what is coming, poor child, poor child!"

The bell seemed to echo out into the silent road, it pealed so clearly
and loudly through the shut-up house, but not another sound disturbed
the air without or within. Mrs. Vincent began to grow restless and
alarmed. She went out into the road, and gazed up at the closed windows;
her very teeth chattered with anxiety and cold.

"It is very odd she does not wake," said the widow; "she must be rousing
now, surely. Arthur, don't look as if we had bad news. Try to command
your countenance, dear. Hush! don't you hear them stirring? Now, Arthur,
Arthur, oh remember not to look so dreadful as you did in Carlingford! I
am sure I hear her coming down-stairs. Hark! what is it? Ring again,
Arthur--again!"

The words broke confused and half-articulate from her lips; a vague
dread took possession of her, as of her son. For his part, he rang the
bell wildly without pausing, and applied the knocker to the echoing door
with a sound which seemed to reverberate back and back through the
darkness. It was not the sleep of youth Vincent thought of, as, without
a word to say, he thundered his summons on the cottage door. He was not
himself aware what he was afraid of; but in his mind he saw the porter's
alarmed and curious look, and felt the ominous silence thrilling with
loud clangour of his own vain appeals through the deserted house.

At length a sound--the mother and son both rushed speechless towards the
side-window, from which it came. The window creaked slowly open, and a
head, which was not Susan's, looked cautiously out. "Who is there?"
cried a strange voice; it's some mistake. This is Mrs. Vincent's, this
is, and nobody's at home. If you don't go away I'll spring the rattle,
and call Thieves, thieves--Fire! What do you mean coming rousing folks
like this in the dead of night?"

"Oh, Williams, are you there? Thank God!--then all is well," said Mrs.
Vincent, clasping her hands. "It is I--you need not be afraid--I and my
son: don't disturb Miss Susan, since she has not heard us--but come
down, and let us in;--don't disturb my daughter. It is I--don't you know
my voice?"

"Good Lord!" cried the speaker at the window; then in a different tone,
"I'm coming, ma'am--I'm coming." Instinctively, without knowing why,
Vincent drew his mother's arm within his own, and held her fast.
Instinctively the widow clung to him, and kept herself erect by his aid.
They did not say a word--no advices now about composing his countenance.
Mrs. Vincent's face was ghastly, had there been any light to see it. She
went sheer forward when the door was open, as though neither her eyes
nor person were susceptible of any other motion. An inexpressible air of
desolation upon the cottage parlour, where everything looked far too
trim and orderly for recent domestic occupation, brought to a climax
all the fanciful suggestions which had been tormenting Vincent. He
called out his sister's name in an involuntary outburst of dread and
excitement, "Susan! Susan!" The words pealed into the midnight
echoes--but there was no Susan to answer to the call.

"It is God that keeps her asleep to keep her happy," said his mother,
with her white lips. She dropt from his arm upon the sofa in a dreadful
pause of determination, facing them with wide-open eyes--daring them to
undeceive her--resolute not to hear the terrible truth, which already in
her heart she knew. "Susan is asleep, asleep!" she cried, in a terrible
idiocy of despair, always facing the frightened woman before her with
those eyes which knew better, but would not be undeceived. The shivering
midnight, the mother's dreadful looks, the sudden waking to all this
fright and wonder, were too much for the terrified guardian of the
house. She fell on her knees at the widow's feet.

"Oh, Lord! Miss Susan's gone! I'd have kep her if I had been here. I'd
have said her mamma would never send no gentleman but Mr. Arthur to
fetch her away. But she's gone. Good Lord! it's killed my missis--I knew
it would kill my missis. Oh, good Lord! good Lord! Run for a doctor, Mr.
Arthur; if the missis is gone, what shall we do?"

Vincent threw the frightened creature off with a savage carelessness of
which he was quite unconscious, and raised his mother in his arms. She
had fallen back in a dreary momentary fit which was not fainting--her
eyes fluttering under their half-closed lids, her lips moving with
sounds that did not come. The shock had struck her as such shocks strike
the mortal frame when it grows old. When sound burst at last from the
moving lips, it was in a babble that mocked all her efforts to speak.
But she was not unconscious of the sudden misery. Her eyes wandered
about, taking in everything around her, and at last fixed upon a letter
lying half-open on Susan's work-table, almost the only token of disorder
or agitation in the trim little room. The first sign of revival she
showed was pointing at it with a doubtful but impatient gesture. Before
she could make them understand what she meant, that "quick temper" of
which Mrs. Vincent accused herself blazed up in the widow's eyes. She
raised herself erect out of her son's arms, and seized the paper. It was
Vincent's letter to his sister, written from London after he had failed
in his inquiries about Mr. Fordham. In the light of this dreadful
midnight the young man himself perceived how alarming and peremptory
were its brief injunctions. "Don't write to Mr. Fordham again till my
mother's return; probably I shall bring her home: we have something to
say to you on this subject, and in the mean time be sure you do as I
tell you." Mrs. Vincent gradually recovered herself as she read this;
she said it over under her breath, getting back the use of her speech.
There was not much explanation in it, yet it seemed to take the place,
in the mother's confused faculties, of an apology for Susan. "She was
frightened," said Mrs. Vincent, slowly, with strange twitches about her
lips--"she was frightened." That was all her mind could take in at once.
Afterwards, minute by minute, she raised herself up, and came to
self-command and composure. Only as she recovered did the truth reveal
itself clearly even to Vincent, who, after the first shock, had been
occupied entirely by his mother. The young man's head throbbed and
tingled as if with blows. As she sat up and gazed at him with her own
recovered looks, through the dim ice-cold atmosphere, lighted faintly
with one candle, they both woke up to the reality of their position. The
shock of the discovery was over--Susan was gone; but where, and with
whom? There was still something to hope, if everything to fear.

"She is gone to her aunt Alice," said Mrs. Vincent, once more looking
full in the eyes of the woman who had been left in charge of the house,
and who stood shivering with cold and agitation, winding and unwinding
round her a thin shawl in which she had wrapped up her arms. "She has
gone to her aunt Alice--she was frightened, and thought something had
happened. To-morrow we can go and bring her home."

"Oh, good Lord! No; she ain't there," cried the frightened witness, half
inaudible with her chattering teeth.

"Or to Mrs. Hastings at the farm. Susan knows what friends I can trust
her to. Arthur, dear, let us go to bed. It's uncomfortable, but you
won't mind for one night," said the widow, with a gasp, rising up and
sitting down again. She dared not trust herself to hear any explanation,
yet all the time fixed with devouring eyes upon the face of the woman
whom she would not suffer to speak.

"Mother, for Heaven's sake let us understand it; let her speak--let us
know. Where has Susan gone? Speak out; never mind interruptions. Where
is my sister?" cried Vincent, grasping the terrified woman by the arm.

"Oh Lord! If the missis wouldn't look at me like that! I ain't to
blame!" cried Williams, piteously. "It was the day afore yesterday as
the ladies came. I come up to help Mary with the beds. There was the old
lady as had on a brown bonnet and the young miss in the blue veil----"

Vincent uttered a sudden exclamation, and looked at his mother; but she
would not meet his eyes--would not acknowledge any recognition of that
fatal piece of gauze. She gave a little gasp, sitting bolt upright,
holding fast by the back of a chair, but kept her eyes steadily and
sternly upon the woman's face.

"We tidied the best room for the lady, and Miss Susan's little closet;
and Mary had out the best sheets, for she says----"

"Mary--where's Mary?" cried Mrs. Vincent, suddenly.

"I know no more nor a babe," cried Williams, wringing her hands. "She's
along with Miss Susan--wherever that may be--and the one in the blue
veil."

"Go on, go on!" cried Vincent.

But his mother did not echo his cry. Her strained hand fell upon her lap
with a certain relaxation and relief; her gaze grew less rigid;
incomprehensible moisture came to her eyes. "Oh, Arthur, there's comfort
in it!" said Mrs. Vincent, looking like herself again. "She's taken
Mary, God bless her! she's known what she was doing. Now I'm more easy;
Williams, you can sit down and tell us the rest."

"Go on!" cried Vincent, fiercely. "Good heavens! what good can a
blundering country girl do here?--go on."

The women thought otherwise; they exchanged looks of sympathy and
thankfulness; they excited the impatient young man beside them, who
thought he knew the world, into the wildest exasperation by that pause
of theirs. His mother even loosed her bonnet off her aching head, and
ventured to lean back under the influence of that visionary consolation;
while Vincent, aggravated to the intolerable pitch, sprang up, and, once
more seizing Williams by the arm, shook her unawares in the violence of
his anxiety. "Answer me!" cried the young man; "you tell us everything
but the most important of all. Besides this girl--and Mary--who was with
my sister when she went away?"

"Oh Lord! you shake the breath out of me, Mr. Arthur--you do," cried the
woman. "Who? why, who should it be, to be sure, but him as had the best
right after yourself to take Miss Susan to her mamma? You've crossed her
on the road, poor dear," said the adherent of the house, wringing her
hands; "but she was going to her ma--that's where she was going. Mr.
Arthur's letter gave her a turn; and then, to be sure, when Mr. Fordham
came, the very first thing he thought upon was to take her to her
mamma."

Vincent groaned aloud. In his first impulse of fury he seized his hat
and rushed to the door to pursue them anyhow, by any means. Then,
remembering how vain was the attempt, came back again, dashed down the
hat he had put on, and seized upon the railway book in his pocket, to
see when he could start upon that desperate mission. Minister as he was,
a muttered curse ground through his teeth--villain! coward!
destroyer!--curse him! His passion was broken in the strangest way by
the composed sounds of his mother's voice.

"It was very natural," she said, with dry tones, taking time to form the
words as if they choked her; "and of course, as you say, Williams, Mr.
Fordham had the best right. He will take her to his mother's--or--or
leave her in my son's rooms in Carlingford; and as she has Mary with
her--Arthur," continued his mother, fixing a warning emphatic look upon
him as he raised his astonished eyes to her face, "you know that is
quite right: after you--Mr. Fordham is--the only person--that could have
taken care of her in her journey. There, I am satisfied. Perhaps,
Williams, you had better go to bed. My son and I have something to talk
of, now I feel myself."

"I'll go light the fire, and get you a cup of tea--oh Lord! what Miss
Susan would say if she knew you were here, and had got such a fright!"
cried the old servant; "but now you're composed, there's nothing as'll
do you good like a cup of tea."

"Thank you--yes; make it strong, and Mr. Arthur will have some too,"
said the widow; "and take care the kettle is boiling; and then,
Williams, you must not mind us, but go to bed."

Vincent threw down his book, and stared at her with something of that
impatience and half-contempt which had before moved him. "If the world
were breaking up, I suppose women could still drink tea!" he said,
bitterly.

"Oh, Arthur, my dear boy," cried his mother, "don't you see we must put
the best face on it now? Everybody must not know that Susan has been
carried away by a---- O God, forgive me! don't let _me_ curse him,
Arthur. Let us get away from Lonsdale, dear, before we say anything.
Words will do no good. Oh, my dear boy, till we know better, Mr. Fordham
is Susan's betrothed husband, and he has gone to take care of her to
Carlingford. Hush--don't say any more. I am going to compose myself,
Arthur, for my child's sake," cried the mother, with a smile of anguish,
looking into her son's face. How did she drive those tears back out of
her patient eyes? how did she endure to talk to the old servant about
what was to be done to-morrow--and how the sick lady was next door--till
the excited and shivering attendant could be despatched up-stairs and
got out of the way? Woman's weaker nature, that could mingle the common
with the great; or woman's strength, that could endure all things--which
was it? The young man, sitting by in a sullen, intolerable suspense,
waiting till it was practicable to rush away through the creeping gloom
of night after the fugitives, could no more understand these phenomena
of love and woe, than he could translate the distant mysteries of the
spheres.




CHAPTER XVII.


Early morning, but black as midnight; bitter cold, if bitterer cold
could be, than that to which they entered when they first came to the
deserted house; the little parlour, oh, so woefully trim and tidy, with
the fire laid ready for lighting, which even the mother, anxious about
her son, had not had the heart to light; the candle on the table between
them lighting dimly this speechless interval; some shawls laid ready to
take with them when they went back again to the earliest train; Mrs.
Vincent sitting by with her bonnet on, and its veil drooping half over
her pale face, sometimes rousing up to cast hidden looks of anxiety at
her son, sometimes painfully saying something with a vain effort at
smiling--what o'clock was it? when did he think they could reach
town?--little ineffectual attempts at the common intercourse, which
seemed somehow to deepen the dreadful silence, the shivering cold, the
utter desolation of the scene. Such a night!--its minutes were hours as
they stole by noiseless in murderous length and tedium--and the climax
of its misery was in the little start with which Mrs. Vincent now and
then woke up out of her own thoughts to make that pitiful effort to talk
to her son.

They were sitting thus, waiting, not even venturing to look at each
other, when a sudden sound startled them. Nothing more than a footstep
outside approaching softly. A footstep--surely two steps. They could
hear them far off in this wonderful stillness, making steady progress
near--nearer. Mrs. Vincent rose up, stretching her little figure into a
preternatural hysteric semblance of height. Who was it? Two
people--surely women--and what women could be abroad at such an hour?
One lighter, one heavier, irregular as female steps are, coming this
way--this way! Her heart fluttered in the widow's ears with a sound that
all but obliterated those steps which still kept advancing. Hark, sudden
silence! a pause--then, oh merciful heaven, could it be true? a tinkle
at the bell--a summons at the closed door.

Mrs. Vincent had flown forth with open arms--with eyes blinded. The poor
soul thought nothing less than that it was her child returned. They
carried her back speechless, in a disappointment too cruel and bitter to
have expression. Two women--one sober, sleepy, nervous, and full of
trouble, unknown to either mother or son--the other with a certain
dreadful inspiration in her dark face, and eyes that gleamed out of it
as if they had concentrated into them all the blackness of the night.

"You are going back, and so am I," Mrs. Hilyard said. "I came to say a
word to you before I go away. If I have been anyhow the cause, forgive
me. God knows, of all things in the world the last I dreamt of was to
injure this good woman or invade her innocent house. Do you know where
they have gone?--did she leave any letters?--Tell me. She shall be
precious to me as my own, if I find them out."

Mrs. Vincent freed herself from her son's arms, and got up with her
blanched face. "My daughter--followed me--to Carlingford," she said, in
broken words, with a determination which sat almost awful on her
weakness. "We have had the great misfortune--to cross each other--on the
way. I am going--after her--directly. I am not afraid--of my Susan. She
is all safe in my son's house."

The others exchanged alarmed looks, as they might have done had a child
suddenly assumed the aspect of a leader. She, who could scarcely steady
her trembling limbs to stand upright, faced their looks with a dumb
denial of her own anguish. "It is--very unfortunate--but I am not
anxious," she said, slowly, with a ghastly smile. Human nature could do
no more. She sank down again on her seat, but still faced them--absolute
in her self-restraint, rejecting pity. Not even tears should fall upon
Susan's sweet name--not while her mother lived to defend it in life and
death.

The Carlingford needlewoman stood opposite her, gazing with eyes that
went beyond that figure, and yet dwelt upon it, at so wonderful a
spectacle. Many a terrible secret of life unknown to the minister's
gentle mother throbbed in her heart; but she stood in a pause of wonder
before that weaker woman. The sight of her stayed the passionate current
for a moment, and brought the desperate woman to a pause. Then she
turned to the young man, who stood speechless by his mother's side--

"You are a priest, and yet you do not curse," she said. "Is God as
careless of a curse as of a blessing? _She_ thinks He will save the
Innocents yet. She does not know that He stands by like a man, and sees
them murdered, and shines and rains all the same. God! No--He never
interferes. Good-bye," she added, suddenly, holding out to him the thin
hand upon which, even in that dreadful moment, his eye still caught the
traces of her work, the scars of the needle, and stains of the coarse
colour. "If you ever see me again, I shall be a famous woman, Mr.
Vincent. You will have a little of the trail of my glory, and be able to
furnish details of my latter days. This good Miss Smith here will tell
you of the life it was before; but if I should make a distinguished end
after all, come to see me then--never mind where. I speak madly, to be
sure, but you don't understand me. There--not a word. You preach very
well, but I am beyond preaching now--Good-bye."

"No," said Vincent, clutching her hand--"never, if you go with that
horrible intention in your eyes; I will say no farewell to such an
errand as this."

The eyes in their blank brightness paused at him for a moment before
they passed to the vacant air on which they were always fixed--paused
with a certain glance of troubled amusement, the lightning of former
days. "You flatter me," she said, steadily, with the old habitual
movement of her mouth. "It is years since anybody has taken the trouble
to read any intention in my eyes. But don't you understand yet that a
woman's intention is the last thing she is likely to perform in this
world? We do have meanings now and then, we poor creatures, but they
seldom come to much. Good-bye, good-bye!"

"You cannot look at me," said Vincent, with a conscious incoherence,
reason or argument being out of the question. "What is it you see behind
there? Where are you looking with those dreadful eyes?"

She brought her eyes back as he spoke, with an evident effort, to fix
them upon his face. "I once remarked upon your high-breeding," said the
strange woman. "A prince could not have shown finer manners than you did
in Carlingford, Mr. Vincent. Don't disappoint me now. If I see ghosts
behind you, what then? Most people that have lived long enough, come to
see ghosts before they die. But this is not exactly the time for
conversation, however interesting it may be. If you and I ever see each
other again, things will have happened before then; you too, perhaps,
may have found the ghosts out. I appoint you to come to see me after you
have come to life again, in the next world. Good-night. I don't forget
that you gave me your blessing when we parted last."

She was turning away when Mrs. Vincent rose, steadying herself by the
chair, and put a timid hand upon the stranger's arm. "I don't know who
you are," said the widow; "it is all a strange jumble; but I am an older
woman than you, and a--a minister's wife. You have something on your
mind. My son is frightened you will do something--I cannot tell what.
You are much cleverer than I am; but I am, as I say, an older woman, and
a--a minister's wife. I am not--afraid of anything. Yes! I know God does
not always save the Innocents, as you say--but He knows why, though we
don't. Will you go with me? If you have gone astray when you were
young," said the mild woman, raising up her little figure with an
ineffable simplicity, "I will never ask any questions, and it will not
matter--for everybody I care for knows me. The dreadful things you think
of will not happen if we go together. I was a minister's wife thirty
years. I know human nature and God's goodness. Come with me."

"Mother, mother! what are you saying?" cried Vincent, who had all the
time been making vain attempts to interrupt this extraordinary speech.
Mrs. Hilyard put him away with a quick gesture. She took hold of the
widow's hand with that firm, supporting, compelling pressure under
which, the day before, Mrs. Vincent had yielded up all her secrets. She
turned her eyes out of vacancy to the little pale woman who offered her
this protection. A sudden mist surprised those gleaming eyes--a sudden
thrill ran through the thin, slight, iron figure, upon which fatigue and
excitement seemed to make no impression. The rock was stricken at last.

"No--no," she sighed, with a voice that trembled. "No--no! the lamb and
the lion do not go together yet in this poor world. No--no--no. I wonder
what tears have to do in my eyes; ah, God in the skies! if you ever do
miracles, do one for this woman, and save her child! Praying and crying
are strange fancies for me--I must go away, but first," she said, still
holding Mrs. Vincent fast--"a woman is but a woman after all--if it is
more honourable to be a wicked man's wife than to have gone astray, as
you call it, then there is no one in the world who can breathe suspicion
upon me. Ask this other good woman here, who knows all about me, but
fears me, like you. Fears me! What do you suppose there can be to fear,
Mr. Vincent, you who are a scholar, and know better than these soft
women," said Mrs. Hilyard, suddenly dropping the widow's hand, and
turning round upon the young minister, with an instant throwing off of
all emotion, which had the strangest horrifying effect upon the little
agitated company, "in a woman who was born to the name of Rachel
Russell, the model English wife? Will the world ever believe harm, do
you imagine, of such a name? I will take refuge in my ancestress. But we
go different ways, and have different ends to accomplish," she
continued, with a sudden returning gleam of the subdued
horror--"Good-night--good-night!"

"Oh, stop her, Arthur--stop her!--Susan will be at Carlingford when we
get there; Susan will go nowhere else but to her mother," cried Mrs.
Vincent, as the door closed on the nocturnal visitors--"I am as sure--as
sure----! Oh, my dear, do you think I can have any doubt of my own
child? As for Susan going astray--or being carried off--or falling into
wickedness--Arthur!" said his mother, putting back her veil from her
pale face, "now I have got over this dreadful night, I know
better--nobody must breathe such a thing to me. Tell her so, dear--tell
her so!--call her back--they will be at Carlingford when we get there!"

Vincent drew his mother's arm through his own, and led her out into the
darkness, which was morning and no longer night. "A few hours longer and
we shall see," he said, with a hard-drawn breath. Into that darkness
Mrs. Hilyard and her companion had disappeared. There was another line
of railway within a little distance of Lonsdale, but Vincent was at
pains not to see his fellow-travellers as he placed his mother once more
in a carriage, and once more caught the eye of the man whose curious
look had startled him. When the grey morning began to dawn, it revealed
two ashen faces, equally speechless and absorbed with thoughts which
neither dared communicate to the other. They did not even look at each
other, as the merciful noise and motion wrapped them in that little
separate sphere of being. One possibility and no more kept a certain
coherence in both their thoughts, otherwise lost in wild chaos--horrible
suspense--an uncertainty worse than death.




CHAPTER XVIII.


It was the very height of day when the travellers arrived in
Carlingford. It would be vain to attempt to describe their transit
through London in the bustling sunshine of the winter morning after the
vigil of that night, and in the frightful suspense and excitement of
their minds. Vincent remembered, for years after, certain cheerful
street-corners, round which they turned on their way from one station to
another, with shudders of recollection, and an intense consciousness of
all the life circulating about them, even to the attitudes of the boys
that swept the crossings, and their contrast with each other. His mother
made dismal attempts now and then to say something; that he was looking
pale; that after all he could yet preach, and begin his course on the
Miracles; that it would be such a comfort to rest when they got home;
but at last became inaudible, though he knew by her bending across to
him, and the motion of those parched lips with which she still tried to
smile, that the widow still continued to make those pathetic little
speeches without knowing that she had become speechless in the rising
tide of her agony. But at last they reached Carlingford, where
everything was at its brightest, all the occupations of life afloat in
the streets, and sunshine, lavish though ineffectual, brightening the
whole aspect of the town. When they emerged from the railway, Mrs.
Vincent took her son's arm, and for the last time made some remark with
a ghastly smile--but no sound came from her lips. They walked up the
sunshiny street together with such silent speed as would have been
frightful to look at had anybody known what was in their hearts. Mrs.
Pigeon, who was coming along the other side, crossed over on purpose to
accost the minister and be introduced to his mother, but was driven
frantic by the total blank unconsciousness with which the two swept past
her; "taking no more notice than if he had never set eyes on me in his
born days!" as she described it afterwards. The door of the house where
Vincent lived was opened to them briskly by the little maid in holiday
attire; everything wore the most sickening, oppressive brightness within
in fresh Saturday cleanliness. Vincent half carried his mother up the
steps, and held fast in his own to support her the hand which he had
drawn tightly through his arm. "Is there any one here? Has anybody come
for me since I left?" he asked, with the sound of his own words ringing
shrilly into his ears. "Please, sir, Mr. Tozer's been," said the girl,
alertly, with smiling confidence. She could not comprehend the groan
with which the young man startled all the clear and sunshiny atmosphere,
nor the sudden rustle of the little figure beside him, which moved
somehow, swaying with the words as if they were a wind. "Mother, you are
going to faint!" cried Vincent--and the little maid flew in terror to
call her mistress, and bring a glass of water. But when she came back,
the mother and son were no longer in the bright hall with its newly
cleaned wainscot and whitened floor. When she followed them up-stairs
with the water, it was the minister who had dropped into the easy-chair
with his face hidden on the table, and his mother was standing beside
him. Mrs. Vincent looked up when the girl came in and said, "Thank
you--that will do," looking in her face, and not at what she carried.
She was of a dreadful paleness, and looked with eyes that were terrible
to that wondering observer upon the little attendant. "Perhaps there
have been some letters or messages," said Mrs. Vincent. "We--we expected
somebody to come; think! a young lady came here?--and when she found we
were gone----"

"Only Miss Phoebe!" said the girl, in amazement--"to say as her
Ma----"

"Only Miss Phoebe!" repeated the widow, as if she did not comprehend
the words. Then she turned to her son, and smoothed down the ruffled
locks on his head; then held out her hand again to arrest the girl as
she was going away. "Has your mistress got anything in the house," she
asked--"any soup or cold meat, or anything? Would you bring it up,
please, directly?--soup would perhaps be best--or a nice chop. Ask what
she has got, and bring it up on a tray. You need not lay the cloth--only
a tray with a napkin. Yes, I see you know what I mean."

"Mother!" cried Vincent, raising his head in utter fright as the maid
left the room. He thought in the shock his mother's gentle wits had
gone.

"You have eaten nothing, dear, since we left," she said, with a
heartbreaking smile. "I am not going crazy, Arthur. O no, no, my dear
boy! I will not go crazy; but you must eat something, and not be killed
too. Susan is not here," said Mrs. Vincent, with a ghastly, wistful look
round the room; "but we are not going to distrust her at the very first
moment, far less her Maker, Arthur. Oh, my dear, I must not speak, or
something will happen to me; and nothing must happen to you or me till
we have found your sister. You must eat when it comes, and then you must
go away. Perhaps," said Mrs. Vincent, sitting down and looking her son
direct in the eyes, as if to read any suggestion that could arise there,
"she has lost her way:--perhaps she missed one of these dreadful
trains--perhaps she got on the wrong railway, Arthur. Oh, my dear boy,
you must take something to eat, and then you must go and bring Susan
home. She has nobody to take care of her but you."

Vincent returned his mother's look with a wild inquiring gaze, but with
his lips he said "Yes," not daring to put in words the terrible thoughts
in his heart. The two said nothing to each other of the horror that
possessed them both, or of the dreadful haze of uncertainty in which
that Susan whom her brother was to go and bring home as if from an
innocent visit, was now enveloped. Their eyes spoke differently as they
looked into each other, and silently withdrew again, each from each, not
daring to communicate further. Just then a slight noise came below, to
the door. Mrs. Vincent stood up directly in an agony of listening,
trembling all over. To be sure it was nothing. When nothing came of it,
the poor mother sank back again with a piteous patience, which it was
heartbreaking to look at; and Vincent returned from the window which he
had thrown open in time to see Phoebe Tozer disappear from the door.
They avoided each other's eyes now; one or two heavy sobs broke forth
from Mrs. Vincent's breast, and her son walked with a dreadful funereal
step from one end of the room to the other. Not even the consolation of
consulting together what was to be done, or what might have happened,
was left them. They dared not put their position into words--dared not
so much as inquire in their thoughts where Susan was, or what had
befallen her. She was to be brought home; but whence or from what abyss
neither ventured to say.

Upon their misery the little maid entered again with her tray, and the
hastily prepared refreshment which Mrs. Vincent had ordered for her son.
The girl's eyes were round and staring with wonder and curiosity; but
she was aware, with female instinct, that the minister's mother, awful
little figure, with lynx eyes, which nothing escaped, was watching her,
and her observations were nervous accordingly. "Please, sir, it's a
chop," said the girl--"please, sir, missus sent to know was the other
gentleman a-coming?--and please, if he is, there ain't nowhere as missus
knows of, as he can sleep--with the lady, and you, and all; and the
other lodgers as well"--said the handmaiden with a sigh, as she set down
her tray and made a desperate endeavour to turn her back upon Mrs.
Vincent, and to read some interpretation of all this in the unguarded
countenance of the minister; "and please, am I to bring up the Wooster
sauce, and would the lady like some tea or anythink? And missus would be
particklar obliged if you would say. Miss Phoebe's been to ask the
gentleman to tea, but where he's to sleep, missus says----"

"Yes, yes, to be sure," said Vincent, impatiently; "he can have my room,
tell your mistress--that will do--we don't want anything more."

"Mr. Vincent is going to leave town again this afternoon," said his
mother. "Tell your mistress that I shall be glad to have a little
conversation with her after my son goes away--and you had better bring
the sauce--but it would have saved you trouble and been more sensible,
if you had put it on the tray in the first place. Oh, Arthur," cried his
mother again, when she had seen the little maid fairly out--"do be a
little prudent, my dear! When a minister lodges with one of his flock,
he must think of appearances--and if it were only for my dear child's
sake, Arthur! Susan must not be spoken of through our anxiety; oh, my
child!--Where can she be?--Where can she be?"

"Mother dear, you must keep up, or everything is lost!" cried Vincent,
for the first time moved to the depths of his heart by that outcry of
despair. He came to her and held her trembling hands, and laid his face
upon them without any kiss or caress, that close clinging touch of
itself expressing best the fellowship of their wretchedness. But Mrs.
Vincent put her son away from her, when the door again bounced open.
"My dear boy, here is the sauce, and you must eat your chop," she said,
getting up and drawing forward a chair for him; her hands, which
trembled so, grew steady as she put everything in order, cut the bread,
and set his plate before him. "Oh, eat something, Arthur dear--you must,
or you cannot go through it," said the widow, with her piteous smile.
Then she sat down at the table by him in her defensive armour. The
watchful eyes of "the flock" were all around spying upon the dreadful
calamity which had overwhelmed them; at any moment the college companion
whom Vincent had sent for might come in upon them in all the gaiety of
his holiday. What they said had to be said with this consciousness--and
the mother, in the depth of her suspense and terror, sat like a queen
inspected on all sides, and with possible traitors round her, but
resolute and self-commanding in her extremity, determined at least to be
true to herself.

"Arthur, can you think where to go?" she said, after a little interval,
almost under her breath.

"To London first," said Vincent--"to inquire after--_him_, curse him!
don't say anything, mother--I am only a man after all. Then, according
to the information I get.--God help us!--if I don't get back before
another Sunday----"

Mrs. Vincent gave a convulsive start, which shook the table against
which she was leaning, and fell to shivering as if in a fit of ague.
"Oh, Arthur, Arthur, what are you saying? Another Sunday!" she
exclaimed, with a cry of despair. To live another day seemed impossible
in that horror. But self-restraint was natural to the woman who had
been, as she said, a minister's wife for thirty years. She clasped her
hands tight, and took up her burden again. "I will see Mr. Beecher when
he comes, dear, and--and speak to him," she said, with a sigh, "and I
will see the Tozers and--and your people, Arthur; and if it should be
God's will to keep us so long in suspense, if--if--I can keep alive,
dear, I may be of some use. Oh, Arthur, Arthur, the Lord have pity upon
us! if my darling comes back, will she come here or will she go home?
Don't you think she will come here? If I go back to Lonsdale, I will not
be able to rest for thinking she is at Carlingford; and if I stay--oh,
Arthur, where do you think Susan will go to? She might be afraid to see
you, and think you would be angry, but she never could distrust her poor
mother, who was the first to put her in danger; and to think of my dear
child going either there or here, and not finding me, Arthur! My dear,
you are not eating anything. You can never go through it all without
some support. For my sake, try to eat a little, my own boy; and oh,
Arthur, what must I do?"

"These Tozers and people will worry you to death if you stay here," said
the minister, with an impatient sigh, as he thought of his own
difficulties; "but I must not lose time by going back with you to
Lonsdale, and you must not travel by yourself, and this is more in the
way, whatever happens. Send word to Lonsdale that you are to have a
message by telegraph immediately--without a moment's loss of time--if
she comes back."

"You might say _when_, Arthur, not _if_," said his mother, with a little
flash of tender resentment--then she gave way for the moment, and leaned
her head against his arm and held him fast with that pressure and close
clasp which spoke more than any words. When she raised her pale face
again, it was to entreat him once more to eat. "Try to take something,
if it were only a mouthful, for Susan's sake," pleaded the widow. Her
son made a dismal attempt as she told him. Happy are the houses that
have not seen such dreadful pretences of meals where tears were the only
possible food! When she saw him fairly engaged in this desperate effort
to take "some support," the poor mother went away and wrote a crafty
female letter, which she brought to him to read. He would have smiled at
it had the occasion been less tragic. It was addressed to the minister
of "the connection" at Lonsdale, and set forth how she was detained at
Carlingford by some family affairs--how Susan was visiting friends and
travelling, and her mother was not sure where to address her--and how it
would be the greatest favour if he would see Williams at the cottage,
and have a message despatched to Mrs. Vincent the moment her daughter
returned. "Do you not think it would be better to confide in him a
little, and tell him what anxiety we are in?" said Vincent, when he read
this letter. His mother took it out of his hands with a little cry.

"Oh, Arthur, though you are her brother, you are only a man, and don't
understand," cried Mrs. Vincent. "Nobody must have anything to say about
my child. If she comes to-night, she will come here," continued the poor
mother, pausing instinctively once more to listen; "she might have been
detained somewhere; she may come at any moment--at any moment, Arthur
dear! Though these telegraphs frighten me, and look as if they must
bring bad news, I will send you word directly when my darling girl
comes; but oh, my dear, though it is dreadful to send you away, and to
think of your travelling to-morrow and breaking the Sunday, and very
likely your people hearing it--oh, Arthur, God knows better, and will
not blame you: and if you will not take anything more to eat, you should
not lose time, my dearest boy! Don't look at me, Arthur--don't say
good-bye. Perhaps you may meet her before you leave--perhaps you may not
need to go away. Oh, Arthur dear, don't lose any more time!"

"It is scarcely time for the train yet," said the minister, getting up
slowly; "the world does not care, though our hearts are breaking; it
keeps its own time. Mother, good-bye. God knows what may have happened
before I see you again."

"Oh, Arthur, say nothing--say nothing! What can happen but my child to
come home?" cried his mother, as he clasped her hands and drew her
closer to him. She leaned against her son's breast, which heaved
convulsively, for one moment, and no more. She did not look at him as he
went slowly out of the room, leaving her to the unspeakable silence and
solitude in which every kind of terror started up and crept about. But
before Vincent had left the house his mother's anxiety and hope were
once more excited to passion. Some one knocked and entered; there was a
sound of voices and steps on the stair audibly approaching this room in
which she sat with her fears. But it was not Susan; it was a young man
of Arthur's own age, with his travelling-bag in his hand, and his
sermons in his pocket. He had no suspicion that the sight of him brought
the chill of despair to her heart as he went up to shake hands with his
friend's mother. "Vincent would not come back to introduce me," said Mr.
Beecher, "but he said I should find you here. I have known him many
years, and it is a great pleasure to make your acquaintance. Sometimes
he used to show me your letters years ago. Is Miss Vincent with you? It
is pleasant to get out of town for a little, even though one has to
preach; and they will all be interested in 'Omerton to hear how Vincent
is getting on. Made quite a commotion in the world, they say, with these
lectures of his. I always knew he would make an 'it if he had
fair-play."

"I am very glad to see you," said Mrs. Vincent. "I have just come up
from Lonsdale, and everything is in a confusion. When people grow old,"
said the poor widow, busying herself in collecting the broken pieces of
bread which Arthur had crumbled down by way of pretending to eat, "they
feel fatigue and being put out of their way more than they ought. What
can I get for you? will you have a glass of wine, and dinner as soon as
it can be ready? My son had to go away."

"Preaching somewhere?" asked the lively Mr. Beecher.

"N-no; he has some--private business to attend to," said Mrs. Vincent,
with a silent groan in her heart.

"Ah!--going to be married, I suppose?" said the man from 'Omerton;
"that's the natural consequence after a man gets a charge. Miss Vincent
is not with you, I think you said? I'll take a glass of wine, thank you;
and I hear one of the flock has sent over to ask me to tea--Mr. Tozer, a
leading man, I believe, among our people here," added Mr. Beecher, with
a little complacence. "It's very pleasant when a congregation is
hospitable and friendly. When a pastor's popular, you see, it always
reacts upon his brethren. May I ask if you are going to Mr. Tozer's to
tea to-night?"

"Oh, no," faltered poor Mrs. Vincent, whom prudence kept from adding,
"heaven forbid!" "They--did not know I was here," she continued,
faintly, turning away to ring the bell. Mr. Beecher, who flattered
himself on his penetration, nodded slightly when her back was turned.
"Jealous that they've asked me," said the preacher, with a lively thrill
of human satisfaction. How was he to know the blank of misery, the
wretched feverish activity of thought, that possessed that mild little
woman, as she gave her orders about the removal of the tray, and the
dinner which already was being prepared for the stranger? But the lively
young man from 'Omerton perceived that there was something wrong.
Vincent's black looks when he met him at the door, and the exceeding
promptitude of that invitation to tea, were two and two which he could
put together. He concluded directly that the pastor, though he had made
"an 'it," was not found to suit the connection in Carlingford; and that
possibly another candidate for Salem might be required ere long. "I
would not injure Vincent for the world," he said to himself, "but if he
does not 'it it, I might." The thought was not unpleasant. Accordingly,
while Vincent's mother kept her place there in the anguish of her heart,
thinking that perhaps, even in this dreadful extremity, she might be
able to do something for Arthur with his people, and conciliate the
authorities, her guest was thinking, if Vincent were to leave
Carlingford, what a pleasant distance from town it was, and how very
encouraging of the Tozers to ask him to tea. It might come to something
more than preaching for a friend; and if Vincent did not "'it it," and a
change were desirable, nobody could tell what might happen. All this
smiling fabric the stranger built upon the discomposed looks of the
Vincents and Phoebe's invitation to tea.

To sit by him and keep up a little attempt at conversation--to
superintend his dinner, and tell him what she knew of Salem and her
son's lectures, and his success generally, as became the minister's
mother--was scarcely so hard as to be left afterwards, when he went out
to Tozer's, all alone once more with the silence, with the sounds
outside, with the steps that seem to come to the door, and the carriages
that paused in the street, all sending dreadful thrills of hope through
poor Mrs. Vincent's worn-out heart. Happily, her faculties were engaged
by those frequent and oft-repeated tremors. In the fever of her anxiety,
always startled with an expectation that at last this was Susan, she did
not enter into the darker question where Susan might really be, and what
had befallen the unhappy girl. Half an hour after Mr. Beecher left her,
Phoebe Tozer came in, affectionate and anxious, driving the wretched
mother almost wild by the sound of her step and the apparition of her
young womanhood, to beg and pray that Mrs. Vincent would join them at
their "friendly tea." "And so this is Mr. Vincent's room," said
Phoebe, with a bashful air; "it feels so strange to be here! and you
must be _so_ dull when he is gone. Oh, do come, and let us try to amuse
you a little; though I am sure none of us could ever be such good
company as the minister--oh, not half, nor quarter!" cried Phoebe.
Even in the midst of her misery, the mother was woman enough to think
that Phoebe showed too much interest in the minister. She declined the
invitation with gentle distinctness. She did not return the enthusiastic
kiss which was bestowed upon her. "I am very tired, thank you," said
Mrs. Vincent. "On Monday, if all is well, I will call to see your mamma.
I hope you will not catch cold coming out in this thin dress. I am sure
it was very kind of you; but I am very tired to-night. On--Monday."
Alas, Monday! could this horror last so long, and she not die? or would
all be well by that time, and Susan in her longing arms? The light went
out of her eyes, and the breath from her heart, as that dreadful
question stared her in the face. She scarcely saw Phoebe's
withdrawal; she lay back in her chair in a kind of dreadful trance, till
those stumbling steps and passing carriages began again, and roused her
back into agonised life and bootless hope.




CHAPTER XIX.


Vincent had shaken hands with his friend at the door, and hurried past,
saying something about losing the train, in order to escape
conversation; but, with the vivid perceptions of excitement, he heard
the delivery of Phoebe's message, and saw the complacence with which
the Homerton man regarded the invitation which had anticipated his
arrival. The young Nonconformist had enough to think of as he took his
way once more to the railway, and tea at Mrs. Tozer's was anything but
attractive to his own fancy; yet in the midst of his wretchedness he
could not overcome the personal sense of annoyance which this trifling
incident produced. It came like a prick of irritating pain, to aggravate
the dull horror which throbbed through him. He despised himself for
being able to think of it at all, but at the same time it came back to
him, darting unawares again and again into his thoughts. Little as he
cared for the entertainments and attention of his flock, he was
conscious of a certain exasperation in discovering their eagerness to
entertain another. He was disgusted with Phoebe for bringing the
message, and disgusted with Beecher for looking pleased to receive it.
"Probably he thinks he will supersede me," Vincent thought, in sudden
gusts of disdain now and then, with a sardonic smile on his lip, waking
up afterwards with a thrill of deeper self-disgust, to think that
anything so insignificant had power to move him. When he plunged off
from Carlingford at last, in the early falling darkness of the winter
afternoon, and looked back upon the few lights struggling red through
the evening mists, it was with a sense of belonging to the place where
he had left an interloper who might take his post over his head, which,
perhaps, no other possible stimulant could have given him. He thought
with a certain pang of Salem, and that pulpit which was his own, but in
which another man should stand to-morrow, with a quickened thrill of
something that was almost jealousy; he wondered what might be the
sentiments of the connection about his deputy--perhaps Brown and Pigeon
would prefer that florid voice to his own--perhaps Phoebe might find
the substitute more practicable than the incumbent. Nothing before had
ever made Salem so interesting to the young pastor as Beecher's
complacence over that invitation to tea.

But he had much more serious matters to consider in his rapid journey.
Vincent was but a man, though he was Susan's brother. He did not share
those desperate hopes which afforded a kind of forlorn comfort and agony
of expectation to his mother's heart. No thought that Susan would come
home either to Carlingford or Lonsdale was in his mind. In what way
soever the accursed villain, whom his face blanched with deadly rage to
think of, had managed to get her in his power, Susan's sweet life was
lost, her brother knew. He gave her up with unspeakable anguish and
pity; but he did give her up, and hoped for no deliverance. Shame had
taken possession of that image which fancy kept presenting in double
tenderness and brightness to him as his heart burned in the darkness. He
might find her indeed; he might snatch her out of these polluting arms,
and bring home the sullied lily to her mother, but never henceforward
could hope or honour blossom about his sister's name. He made up his
mind to this in grim misery, with his teeth clenched, and a desperation
of rage and horror in his heart. But in proportion to his conviction
that Susan would not return, was his eagerness to find her, and snatch
her away. To think of her in horror and despair was easier than to think
of her deluded and happy, as might be--as most probably was the case.
This latter possibility made Vincent frantic. He could scarcely endure
the slowness of the motion which was the highest pitch of speed that
skill and steam had yet made possible. No express train could travel so
fast as the thoughts which went before him, dismal pioneers penetrating
the most dread abysses. To think of Susan happy in her horrible downfall
and ruin was more than flesh or blood could bear.

When Vincent reached town, he took his way without a moment's hesitation
to the street in Piccadilly where he had once sought Mr. Fordham. He
approached the place now with no precautions; he had his cab driven up
to the door, and boldly entered as soon as it was opened. The house was
dark and silent but for the light in the narrow hall; nobody there at
that dead hour, while it was still too early for dinner. And it was not
the vigilant owner of the place, but a drowsy helper in a striped jacket
who presented himself at the door, and replied to Vincent's inquiry for
Colonel Mildmay, that the Colonel was not at home--never was at home at
that hour--but was not unwilling to inquire, if the gentleman would
wait. Vincent put up the collar of his coat about his ears, and stood
back with eager attention, intently alive to everything. Evidently the
ruler of the house was absent as well as the Colonel. The man lounged to
the staircase and shouted down, leaning upon the bannisters. No aside or
concealment was possible in this perfectly easy method of communication.
With an anxiety strongly at variance with the colloquy thus going on,
and an intensification of all his faculties which only the height of
excitement could give, Vincent stood back and listened. He heard every
step that passed outside; the pawing of the horse in the cab that waited
for him, the chance voices of the passengers, all chimed in, without
interrupting the conversation between the man who admitted him and his
fellow-servant down-stairs.

"Jim, is the Colonel at home?--he ain't, to be sure, but we wants to
know particklar. Here," in a slightly lowered voice, "his mother's been
took bad, and the parson's sent for him. When is he agoing to be in to
dinner? Ask Cookie; she'll be sure to know."

"The Colonel ain't coming in to dinner, stoopid," answered the unseen
interlocutor; "he ain't been here all day. Out o' town. Couldn't you say
so, instead of jabbering? Out o' town. It's allays safe to say, and
this time it's true."

"What's he adoing of, in case the gen'leman should want to know?" said
the fellow at the head of the stair.

"After mischief," was the brief and emphatic answer. "You come along
down to your work, and let the Colonel alone."

"Any mischief in particklar?" continued the man, tossing a dirty napkin
in his hand, and standing in careless contempt, with his back to the
minister. "It's a pleasant way the Colonel's got, that is: any more
particklars, Jim?--the gen'leman 'll stand something if you'll let him
know."

"Hold your noise, stoopid--it ain't no concern o' yours--my master's my
master, and I ain't agoing to tell his secrets," said the voice below.
Vincent had made a step forward, divided between his impulse to kick the
impertinent fellow who had admitted him down-stairs, and the equally
strong impulse which prompted him to offer any bribe to the witness who
knew his master's secrets; but he was suddenly arrested in both by a
step on the street outside, and the grating of a latch-key in the door.
A long light step, firm and steady, with a certain sentiment of rapid
silent progress in it. Vincent could not tell what strange fascination
it was that made him turn round to watch this new-comer. The stranger's
approach thrilled him vaguely, he could not tell how. Then the door
opened, and a man appeared like the footstep--a very tall slight figure,
stooping forward a little; a pale oval face, too long to be handsome,
adorned with a long brown beard; thoughtful eyes, with a distant gleam
in them, now and then flashing into sudden penetrating glances--a loose
dress too light for the season, which somehow carried out all the
peculiarities of the long light step, the thin sinewy form, the
thoughtful softness and keenness of the eye. Even in the height of his
own suspense and excitement, Vincent paused to ask himself who this
could be. He came in with one sudden glance at the stranger in the hall,
passed him, and calling to the man, who became on the moment respectful
and attentive, asked if there were any letters. "What name, sir?--beg
your pardon--my place ain't up-stairs," said the fellow. What was the
name? Vincent rushed forward when he heard it, and seized the new-comer
by the shoulder with the fierceness of a tiger. "Fordham!" cried the
young man, with boiling rage and hatred. Next moment he had let go his
grasp, and was gazing bewildered upon the calm stranger, who looked at
him with merely a thoughtful inquiry in his eyes. "Fordham--at your
service--do you want anything with me?" he asked, meeting with
undiminished calm the young man's excited looks. This composure put a
sudden curb on Vincent's passion.

"My name is Vincent," he said, restraining himself with an effort; "do
you know now what I want with you? No? Am I to believe your looks or
your name? If you are the man," cried the young Nonconformist, with a
groan out of his distracted heart, "whom Lady Western could trust with
life, to death--or if you are a fiend incarnate, making misery and
ruin, you shall not escape me till I know the truth. Where is Susan?
Here is where her innocent letters came--they were addressed to your
name. Where is she now? Answer me! For you, as well as the rest of us,
it is life or death."

"You are raving," said the stranger, keeping his awakened eyes fixed
upon Vincent; "but this is easily settled. I returned from the East only
yesterday. I don't know you. What was that you said about
Lady--Lady--what lady? Come in: and my name?--my name has been unheard
in this country, so far as I know, for ten years. Lady----?--come in and
explain what you mean."

The two stood together confronting each other in the little parlour of
the house, where the striped jacket quickly and humbly lighted the gas.
Vincent's face, haggard with misery and want of rest, looked wild in
that sudden light. The stranger stood opposite him, leaning forward with
a strange eagerness and inquiry. He did not care for Vincent's anxiety,
who was a stranger to him; he cared only to hear again that
name--Lady----? He had heard it already, or he would have been less
curious; he wanted to understand this wonderful message wafted to him
out of his old life. What did it matter to Herbert Fordham, used to the
danger of the deserts and mountains, whether it was a maniac who brought
this chance seed of a new existence to his wondering heart?

"A man called Fordham has gone into my mother's house," said Vincent,
fixing his eyes upon those keen but visionary orbs which were fixed on
him--"and won the love of my sister. She wrote to him here--to this
house; yesterday he carried her away, to her shame and destruction.
Answer me," cried the young man, making another fierce step forward,
growing hoarse with passion, and clenching his hands in involuntary
rage--"was it you?"

"There are other men called Fordham in existence besides me," cried the
stranger, with a little irritation; then seizing his loose coat by its
pockets, he shook out, with a sudden impatient motion, a cloud of
letters from these receptacles. "Because you seem in great excitement
and distress, and yet are not, as far as I can judge," said Mr. Fordham,
with another glance at Vincent, "mad, I will take pains to satisfy you.
Look at my letters; their dates and post-marks will convince you that
what you say is simply impossible, for that I was not here."

Vincent clutched and took them up with a certain blind eagerness, not
knowing what he did. He did not look at them to satisfy himself that
what Fordham said was true. A wild, half-conscious idea that there must
be something in them about Susan possessed him; he saw neither dates nor
post-mark, though he held them up to the light, as if they were proofs
of something. "No," he said at last, "it was not you--it was that fiend
Mildmay, Rachel Russell's husband. Where is he? he has taken your name,
and made you responsible for his devilish deeds. Help me, if you are a
Christian! My sister is in his hands, curse him! Help me, for the sake
of your name, to find them out. I am a stranger, and they will give me
no information; but they will tell you. For God's sake, ask and let me
go after them. If ever you were beholden to the help of Christian men,
help me! for it is life and death!"

"Mildmay! Rachel Russell's husband? under my name?" said Mr. Fordham,
slowly. "I _have_ been beholden to Christian men, and that for very
life. You make a strong appeal: who are you that are so desperate? and
what was that you said?"

"I am Susan Vincent's brother," said the young Nonconformist; "that is
enough. This devil has taken your name; help me, for heaven's sake, to
find him out!"

"Mildmay?--devil? yes, he is a devil! you are right enough: I owe him no
love," said Fordham; then he paused and turned away, as if in momentary
perplexity. "To help that villain to his reward would be a man's duty;
but," said the stranger, with a heavy sigh, upon which his words came
involuntarily, spoken to himself, breathing out of his heart--"he is
_her_ brother, devil though he is!"

"Yes!" cried Vincent, with passion, "he is _her_ brother." When he had
said the words, the young man groaned aloud. Partly he forgot that this
man, who looked upon him with so much curiosity, was the man who had
brought tears and trembling to Her; partly he remembered it, and forgot
his jealousy for the moment in a bitter sense of fellow-feeling. In his
heart he could see her, waving her hand to him out of her passing
carriage, with that smile for which he would have risked his life. Oh,
hideous fate! it was _her_ brother whom he was bound to pursue to the
end of the world. He buried his face in his hands, in a momentary
madness of anguish and passion. Susan floated away like a mist from that
burning personal horizon. The love and the despair were too much for
Vincent. The hope that had always been impossible was frantic now. When
he recovered himself, the stranger whom he had thus unawares taken into
his confidence was regarding him haughtily from the other side of the
table, with a fiery light in his thoughtful eyes. Suspicion, jealousy,
resentment, had begun to sparkle in those orbs, which in repose looked
so far away and lay so calm. Mr. Fordham measured the haggard and
worn-out young man with a look of rising dislike and animosity. He was
at least ten years older than the young Nonconformist, who stood there
in his wretchedness and exhaustion entirely at disadvantage, looking, in
his half-clerical dress, which he had not changed for four-and-twenty
hours, as different as can be conceived from the scrupulously dressed
gentleman in his easy morning habiliments, which would not have been out
of place in the rudest scene, yet spoke of personal nicety and
high-breeding in every easy fold. Vincent himself felt the contrast with
an instant flush of answering jealousy and passion. For a moment the two
glanced at each other, conscious rivals, though not a word of
explanation had been spoken. It was Mr. Fordham who spoke first, and in
a somewhat hasty and imperious tone.

"You spoke of a lady--Lady Western, I think. As it was you yourself who
sought this interview, I may be pardoned if I stumble on a painful
subject," he said, with some bitterness. "I presume you know that lady
by your tone--was it she who sent you to me? No? Then I confess your
appeal to a total stranger seems to me singular, to say the least of it.
Where is your proof that Colonel Mildmay has used my name?"

"Proof is unnecessary," said Vincent, firing with kindred resentment; "I
have told you the fact, but I do not press my appeal, though it was made
to your honour. Pardon me for intruding on you so long. I have now no
time to lose."

He turned away, stung in his hasty youthfulness by the appearance of
contempt. He would condescend to ask no farther. When he was once more
outside the parlour, he held up the half-sovereign, which he had kept
ready in his hand, to the slovenly fellow in the striped jacket. "Twice
as much if you will tell where Colonel Mildmay is gone," he said,
hurriedly. The man winked and nodded and pointed outside, but before
Vincent could leave the room a hasty summons came from the parlour which
he had just left. Then Mr. Fordham appeared at the door.

"If you will wait I will make what inquiries I can," said the stranger,
with distant courtesy and seriousness. "Excuse me--I was taken by
surprise: but if you have suffered injury under my name, it is my
business to vindicate myself. Come in. If you will take my advice, you
will rest and refresh yourself before you pursue a man with all his wits
about him. Wait for me here and I will bring you what information I can.
You don't suppose I mean to play you false?" he added, with prompt
irritation, seeing that Vincent hesitated and did not at once return to
the room. It was no relenting of heart that moved him to make this
offer. It was with no softening of feeling that the young Nonconformist
went back again and accepted it. They met like enemies, each on his
honour. Mr. Fordham hastened out to acquit himself of that obligation.
Vincent threw himself into a chair, and waited for the result.

It was the first moment of rest and quiet he had known since the morning
of the previous day, when he and his mother, alarmed but comparatively
calm, had gone to see Mrs. Hilyard, who was now, like himself,
wandering, with superior knowledge and more desperate passion, on the
same track. To sit in this house in the suspicious silence, hearing the
distant thrill of voices which might guide or foil him in his search; to
think who it was whom he had engaged to help him in his terrible
mission; to go over again in distracted gleams and snatches the brief
little circle of time which had brought all this about, the group of
figures into which his life had been absorbed,--rapt the young man into
a maze of excited musing, which his exhausted frame at once dulled and
intensified. They seemed to stand round him, with their faces so new,
yet so familiar--that needle-woman with her emphatic
mouth--Mildmay--Lady Western--last of all, this man, who was not Susan's
lover--not Susan's destroyer--but a man to be trusted "with life--to
death!" Vincent put up his hands to put away from him that wonderful
circle of strangers who shut out everything else in the world--even his
own life--from his eyes. What were they to him? he asked, with an
unspeakable bitterness in his heart. Heaven help him! they were the real
creatures for whom life and the world were made--he and his poor Susan
the shadows to be absorbed into, and under them; and then, with a wild,
bitter, hopeless rivalry, the mind of the poor Dissenting minister came
round once more to the immediate contact in which he stood--to Fordham,
in whose name his sister's life had been shipwrecked, and by whom, as he
divined with cruel foresight, his own hopeless love and dreams were to
be made an end of. Well! what better could they come to? but it was hard
to think of him, with his patrician looks, his negligent grace, his
conscious superiority, and to submit to accept assistance from him even
in his sorest need. These thoughts were in his mind when Mr. Fordham
hastily re-entered the room. A thrill of excitement now was in the long,
lightly-falling step, which already Vincent, with the keen ear of
rivalry almost as quick as that of love, could recognise as it
approached. The stranger was disturbed out of his composure. He shut the
door and came up to the young man, who rose to meet him, with a certain
excited repugnance and attraction much like Vincent's own feelings.

"You are quite right," he said, hastily; "I find letters have been
coming here for some months, addressed as if to me, which Mildmay has
had. The man of the house is absent, or I should never have heard of it.
I don't know what injury he may have done _you_; but this is an insult
I don't forgive. Stop! I have every reason to believe that he has gone,"
said Fordham, growing darkly red, "to a house of mine, to confirm this
slander upon me. To prove that I am innocent of all share of it--I don't
mean to you--you believe me, I presume?" he said, with a haughty sudden
pause, looking straight in Vincent's face--"I will go----" Here Mr.
Fordham stopped again, and once more looked at Vincent with that
indescribable mixture of curiosity, dislike, resentment, and interest,
which the eyes of the young Nonconformist repaid him fully,--"with
you--if you choose. At all events, I will go to-night--to Fordham, where
the scoundrel is. I cannot permit it to be believed for an hour that it
is I who have done this villany. The lady you mentioned, I presume,
knows?"--he added, sharply--"knows what has happened, and whom you
suspect? This must be set right at once. If you choose, we can go
together."

"Where is the place?" asked Vincent, without any answer to this
proposition.

Fordham looked at him with a certain haughty offence: he had made the
offer as though it were a very disagreeable expedient, but resented
instantly the tacit neglect of it shown by his companion.

"In Northumberland--seven miles from the railway," he said, with a kind
of gratification. "Once more, I say, you can go with me if you will,
which may serve us both. I don't pretend to be disinterested. My object
is to have my reputation clear of this, at all events. Your object, I
presume, is to get to your journey's end as early as may be. Choose for
yourself. Fordham is between Durham and Morpeth--seven miles from
Lamington station. You will find difficulty in getting there by
yourself, and still greater difficulty in getting admission; and I
repeat, if you choose it, you can go with me--or I will accompany you,
if that pleases you better. Either way, there is little time to
consider. The train goes at eight or nine o'clock--I forget which. I
have not dined. What shall you do?"

"Thank you," said Vincent. It was perhaps a greater effort to him to
overcome his involuntary repugnance than it was to the stranger beside
him, who had all the superior ease of superior rank and age. The
Nonconformist turned away his eyes from his new companion, and made a
pretence of consulting his watch. "I will take advantage of your offer,"
he said, coldly, withdrawing a step with instinctive reserve. On these
diplomatic terms their engagement was made. Vincent declined to share
the dinner which the other offered him, as one duellist might offer
hospitality to another. He drove away in his hansom, with a restrained
gravity of excitement, intent upon the hour's rest and the meal which
were essential to make him anything like a match for this unexpected
travelling companion. Every morsel he attempted to swallow when in
Carlingford under his mother's anxious eyes, choked the excited young
man, but now he ate with a certain stern appetite, and even snatched an
hour's sleep and changed his dress, under this novel stimulant. Poor
Susan, for whom her mother sat hopelessly watching with many a thrill of
agony at home! Poor lost one, far away in the depths of the strange
country in the night and darkness! Whether despair and horror enveloped
her, or delirious false happiness and delusion, again she stood
secondary even in her brother's thoughts. He tried to imagine it was she
who occupied his mind, and wrote a hurried note to his mother to that
purport; but with guilt and self-disgust, knew in his own mind how often
another shadow stood between him and his lost sister--a shadow bitterly
veiled from him, turning its sweetness and its smiles upon the man who
was about to help him, against whom he gnashed his teeth in the anguish
of his heart.




CHAPTER XX.


They were but these two in the railway-carriage; no other passenger
broke the silent conflict of their companionship. They sat in opposite
corners, as far apart as their space would permit, but on opposite sides
of the carriage as well, so that one could not move without betraying
his every movement to the other's keen observation. Each of them kept
possession of a window, out of which he gazed into the visible blackness
of the winter night. Two or three times in the course of the long
darksome chilly journey, a laconic remark was made by one or the other
with a deadly steadiness, and gravity, and facing of each other, as they
spoke; but no further intercourse took place between them. When they
first met, Fordham had made an attempt to draw his fellow-traveller into
some repetition of that first passionate speech which had secured his
own attention to Vincent; but the young Nonconformist perceived the
attempt, and resented it with sullen offence and gloom. He took the
stranger's indifference to _his_ trouble, and undisguised and simple
purpose of acquitting himself, as somehow an affront, though he could
not have explained how it was so; and this notwithstanding his own
consciousness of realising this silent conflict and rivalry with
Fordham, even more deeply in his own person than he did the special
misery which had befallen his house. Through the sullen silent midnight
the train dashed on, the faint light flickering in the unsteady
carriage, the two speechless figures, with eyes averted, watching each
other through all the ice-cold hours. It was morning when they got out,
cramped and frozen, at the little station, round which miles and miles
of darkness, a black unfathomable ocean, seemed to lie--and which shone
there with its little red sparkle of light among its wild waste of moors
like the one touch of human life in a desert. They had a dreary hour to
wait in the little wooden room by the stifling fire, divided between the
smothering atmosphere within and the thrilling cold without, before a
conveyance could be procured for them, in which they set out shivering
over the seven darkling miles between them and Fordham. Vincent stood
apart in elaborate indifference and carelessness, when the squire was
recognised and done homage to; and Fordham's eye, even while lighted up
by the astonished delight of the welcome given him by the driver of the
vehicle who first found him out, turned instinctively to the Mordecai in
the corner who took no heed. No conversation between them diversified
the black road along which they drove. Mr. Fordham took refuge in the
driver, whom he asked all those questions about the people of the
neighbourhood which are so interesting to the inhabitants of a district
and so wearisome to strangers. Vincent, who sat in the dog-cart with his
face turned the other way, suffered himself to be carried through the
darkness by the powerful horse, which made his own seat a somewhat
perilous one, with nothing so decided in his thoughts as a dumb sense of
opposition and resistance. The general misery of his mind and body--the
sense that all the firmament around him was black as this sky--the
restless wretchedness that oppressed his heart--all concentrated into
conscious rebellion and enmity. He seemed to himself at war, not only
with Mr. Fordham who was helping him, but with God and life.

Morning was breaking when they reached the house. The previous day, as
it dawned chilly over the world, had revealed his mother's ashy face to
Vincent as they came up from Lonsdale with sickening thrills of hope
that Susan might still be found unharmed. Here was another horror of a
new day rising, the third since Susan disappeared into that darkness
which was now lifting in shuddering mists from the bleak country round.
Was she here in her shame, the lost creature? As he began to ask himself
that question, what cruel spirit was it that drew aside a veil of years,
and showed to the unhappy brother that prettiest dancing figure, all
smiles and sunshine, sweet honour and hope? Poor lost child! what sweet
eyes, lost in an unfathomable light of joy and confidence--what truthful
looks, which feared no evil! Just as they came in sight of that hidden
house, where perhaps the hidden, stolen creature lay in the darkness,
the brightest picture flashed back upon Vincent's eyes with an
indescribably subtle anguish of contrast; how he had come up to her
once--the frank, fair Saxon girl--in the midst of a group of
gypsies--how he found she had done a service to one of them, and the
whole tribe did homage--how he had asked, "Were you not afraid, Susan?"
and how the girl had looked up at him with undoubting eyes, and
answered, "Afraid, Arthur?--yes, of wild beasts if I saw them, not of
men and women." Oh Heaven!--and here he was going to find her in shame
and ruin, hidden away in this secret place! He sprang to the ground
before the vehicle had stopped, jarring his frozen limbs. He could not
bear to be second now, and follow to the dread discovery which should be
his alone. He rushed through the shrubbery without asking any question,
and began to knock violently at the door. What did it matter to him
though its master was there, looking on with folded arms and
unsympathetic face? Natural love rushed back upon the young man's heart.
He settled with himself, as he stood waiting, how he would wrap her in
his coat, and hurry her away without letting any cold eye fall upon the
lost creature. Oh, hard and cruel fate! oh, wonderful heart-breaking
indifference of Heaven! The Innocents are murdered, and God looks on
like a man, and does not interfere. Such were the broken thoughts of
misery--half-thought, half-recollection--that ran through Vincent's mind
as he knocked at the echoing door.

"Eugh! you may knock, and better knock, and I'se undertake none comes at
the ca'," said the driver, not without a little complacence. "I tell the
Squire, as there han't been man nor woman here for ages; but he don't
believe me. She's deaf as a post, is the housekeeper; and her daughter,
she's more to do nor hear when folks is wanting in--and this hour in the
morning! But canny, canny, man! he'll have the door staved in if we all
stand by and the Squire don't interfere."

Vincent paid no attention to the remonstrance--which, indeed, he only
remembered afterwards, and did not hear at the moment. The house was
closely shut in with trees, which made the gloom of morning darker here
than in the open road, and increased the aspect of secrecy which had
impressed the young man's excited imagination. While he went on
knocking, Fordham alighted and went round to another entrance, where he
too began to knock, calling at the same time to the unseen keepers of
the place. After a while some answering sounds became audible--first the
feeble yelping of an asthmatic dog, then a commotion up-stairs, and at
last a window was thrown up, and a female head enveloped in a shawl
looked out. "Eh, whae are ye? vagabond villains,--and this a gentleman's
house," cried a cracked voice. "I'll let the Squire know--I'll rouse the
man-servants. Tramps! what are you wanting here?" The driver of the
dog-cart took up the response well pleased. He announced the arrival of
the Squire, to the profound agitation of the house, which showed itself
in a variety of scuffling sounds and the wildest exclamations of wonder.
Vincent leaned his throbbing head against the door, and waited in a dull
fever of impatience and excitement, as these noises gradually came
nearer. When the door itself was reached and hasty hands began to
unfasten its bolts, Susan's brother pressed alone upon the threshold,
forgetful and indifferent that the master of the house stood behind,
watching him with close and keen observation. He forgot whose house it
was, and all about his companion. What were such circumstances to him,
as he approached the conclusion of his search, and thought every moment
to hear poor Susan's cry of shame and terror? He made one hasty stride
into the hall when the door was open, and looked round him with burning
eyes. The wonder with which the women inside looked at him, their outcry
of disappointment and anger when they found him a stranger, coming first
as he did, and throwing the Squire entirely into the shade, had no
effect upon the young man, who was by this time half frantic. He went up
to the elder woman and grasped her by the arm. "Where is she? show me
the way!" he said, hoarsely, unable to utter an unnecessary word. He
held the terrified woman fast, and thrust her before him, he could not
tell where, into the unknown house, all dark and miserable in the
wretchedness of the dawn. "Show me the way!" he cried, with his broken
hoarse voice. A confused and inarticulate scene ensued, which Vincent
remembered afterwards only like a dream; the woman's scream--the
interference of Fordham, upon whom his fellow-traveller turned with
sudden fury--the explanation to which he listened without understanding
it, and which at first roused him to wild rage as a pretence and
falsehood. But even Vincent at last, struggling into soberer
consciousness as the day broadened ever chiller and more grey over the
little group of strange faces round him, came to understand and make
out that both Fordham and he had been deceived. Nobody had been
there--letters addressed both to Fordham himself, and to Colonel
Mildmay, had been for some days received; but these, it appeared, were
only a snare laid to withdraw the pursuers from the right scent. Not to
be convinced, in the sullen stupor of his excitement, Vincent followed
Fordham into all the gloomy corners of the neglected house--seeing
everything without knowing what he saw. But one thing was plain beyond
the possibility of doubt, that Susan was not there.

"I am to blame for this fruitless journey," said Fordham, with a touch
of sympathy more than he had yet exhibited; "perhaps personal feeling
had too much share in it; now I trust you will have some breakfast
before you set out again. So far as my assistance can be of any use to
you----"

"I thank you," said Vincent, coldly; "it is a business in which a
stranger can have no interest. You have done all you cared to do,"
continued the young man, hastily gathering up the overcoat which he had
thrown down on entering; "you have vindicated yourself--I will trouble
you no further. If I encounter any one interested in Mr. Fordham," he
concluded, with difficulty and bitterness, but with a natural generosity
which, even in his despair, he could not belie, "I will do him justice."
He made an abrupt end, and turned away, not another word being possible
to him. Fordham, not without a sentiment of sympathy, followed him to
the door, urging refreshment, rest, even his own society, upon his
companion of the night. Vincent's face, more and more haggard--his
exhausted excited air--the poignant wretchedness of his youth, on which
the older man looked, not without reminiscences, awoke the sympathy and
compassion of the looker-on, even in the midst of less kindly emotions.
But Fordham's sympathy was intolerable to poor Vincent. He took his seat
with a sullen weariness once more by the talkative driver, who gave him
an unheeded history of all the Fordhams. As they drove along the bleak
moorland road, an early church-bell tingled into the silence, and
struck, with horrible iron echoes, upon the heart of the minister of
Salem. Sunday morning! Life all disordered, incoherent, desperate--all
its usages set at nought and duties left behind. Nothing could have
added the final touch of conscious derangement and desperation like the
sound of that bell; all his existence and its surroundings floated about
him in feverish clouds, as it came to his mind that this wild morning,
hysterical with fatigue and excitement, was the Sunday--the day of his
special labours--the central point of all his former life. Chaos gloomed
around the poor minister, who, in his misery, was human enough to
remember Beecher's smile and Phoebe Tozer's invitation, and to realise
how all the "Chapel folks" would compare notes, and contrast their own
pastor, to whom they had become accustomed, with the new voice from
Homerton, which, half in pride and half in disgust, Vincent acknowledged
to be more in their way. He fancied he could see them all collecting
into their mean pews, prepared to inaugurate the "coorse" for which
Tozer had struggled, and the offence upon their faces when the
minister's absence was known, and the sharp stimulus which that offence
would give to their appreciation of the new preacher--all this, while he
was driving over the bleak Northumberland wilds, with the cutting wind
from the hills in his face, and the church-bell in his distracted ear,
breaking the Sunday! Not a bright spot, so far as he could perceive, was
anywhere around him, in earth, or sky, or sea.

Sunday night!--once more the church-bells, the church-going groups, the
floating world, which he had many a time upbraided from the pulpit
seeking its pleasure. But it was in London now, where he stood in utter
exhaustion, but incapable of rest, not knowing where to turn. Then the
thought occurred to him that something might be learned at the railway
stations of a party which few people could see without remarking it. He
waited till the bustle of arrival was over, and then began to question
the porters. One after another shook his head, and had nothing to say.
But the men were interested, and gathered in a little knot round him,
trying what they could recollect, with the ready humanity of their
class. "I'd speak to the detective police, sir, if I was you," suggested
one; "it's them as finds out all that happens nowadays." Then a little
gleam of light penetrated the darkness. One man began to recall a
light-haired gentleman with a mustache, and two ladies, who "went off
sudden in a cab, with no luggage." "An uncommon swell he did look," said
the porter, instinctively touching his cap to Vincent, on the strength
of the connection; "and, my eyes! she was a beauty, that one in the blue
veil. It was--let me see--Wednesday night; no--not Wednesday--that day
as the up-train was an hour late--Friday afternoon, to be sure. It was
me as called the cab, and I won't deny as the gen'leman _was_ a
gen'leman. Went to the London Bridge station, sir; Dover line; no
luggage; I took particular notice at the time, though it went out o' my
head first minute as you asked me.--Cab, sir? Yes. Here you are--here's
the last on the stand.--London Bridge Station, Dover line."

Vincent took no time to inquire further. In the impatience of his utter
weariness and wretchedness, he seized on this slight clue, and went off
at once to follow it out. London Bridge station!--what a world swarmed
in those streets through which the anxious minister took his way, far
too deeply absorbed in himself to think of the flood of souls that
poured past him. The station was in wild bustle and commotion; a train
just on the eve of starting, and late passengers dashing towards it with
nervous speed. Vincent followed the tide instinctively, and stood aside
to watch the long line of carriages set in motion. He was not thinking
of what he saw; his whole mind was set upon the inquiry, which, as soon
as that object of universal interest was gone, he could set on foot
among the officials who were clanging the doors, and uttering all the
final shrieks of departure. Now the tedious line glides into gradual
motion. Good Heaven! what was that? the flash of a match, a sudden gleam
upon vacant cushions, the profile of a face, high-featured, with the
thin light locks and shadowy mustache he knew so well, standing out for
a moment in aquiline distinctness against the moving space. Vincent
rushed forward with a hoarse shout, which scared the crowd around him.
He threw himself upon the moving train with a desperate attempt to seize
and stop it; but only to be himself seized by the frantic attendants,
who caught him with a dozen hands. The travellers in the later carriages
were startled by the commotion. Some of them rose and looked out with
surprised looks; he saw them all as they glided past, though the passage
was instantaneous. Saw them all! Yes; who was that, last of all, at the
narrow window of a second-class carriage, who looked out with no
surprise, but with a horrible composure in her white face, and
recognised him with a look which chilled him to stone. He stood passive
in the hands of the men, who had been struggling to hold him, after he
encountered those eyes; he shuddered with a sudden horror, which made
the crowd gather closer, believing him a maniac. Now it was gone into
the black night, into the chill space, carrying a hundred innocent souls
and light hearts, and among them deadly crime and vengeance--the doomed
man and his executioner. His very heart shuddered in his breast as he
made a faltering effort to explain himself, and get free from the crowd
which thought him mad. That sight quenched the curses on his own lips,
paled the fire in his heart. To see her dogging his steps, with her
dreadful relentless promise in her eyes, overwhelmed Vincent, who a
moment before had thrilled with all the rage of a man upon whom this
villain had brought the direst shame and calamity. He could have dashed
him under those wheels, plunged him into any mad destruction, in the
first passionate whirl of his thoughts on seeing him again; but to see
Her behind following after--pale with her horrible composure, a
conscious Death tracking his very steps--drove Vincent back with a
sudden paralysing touch. He stood chilled and horror-stricken in the
crowd, which watched and wondered at him: he drew himself feebly out of
their detaining circle, and went and sat down on the nearest seat he
could find, like a man who had been stunned by some unexpected blow. He
was not impatient when he heard how long he must wait before he could
follow them. It was a relief to wait, to recover his breath, to realise
his own position once more. That dreadful sight, diabolical and out of
nature, had driven the very life-blood out of his heart.

As he sat, flung upon his bench in utter exhaustion and feebleness,
stunned and stupified, leaning his aching head in his hands, and with
many curious glances thrown at him by the bystanders, some of whom were
not sure that he ought to be suffered to go at large, Vincent became
sensible that some one was plucking at his sleeve, and sobbing his name.
It was some time before he became aware that those weeping accents were
addressed to him; some time longer before he began to think he had heard
the voice before, and was so far moved as to look up. When he did raise
his head it was with a violent start that he saw a little rustic
figure, energetically, but with tears, appealing to him, whom his
bewildered faculties slowly made out to be Mary, his mother's maid, whom
Susan had taken with her when she left Lonsdale. As soon as he
recognised her he sprang up, restored to himself with the first gleam of
real hope which had yet visited him. "My sister is here!" he cried,
almost with joy. Mary made no answer but by a despairing outbreak of
tears.

"Oh no, Mr. Arthur; no--oh no, no! never no more!" cried poor Mary, when
she found her voice. "It's all been deceitfulness and lyin' and
falsehood, and it ain't none o' her doing--oh no, no, Mr. Arthur,
no!--but now she's got nobody to stand by her, for he took and brought
me up this very day; oh, don't lose no time!--he took and brought me up,
pretending it was to show me the way, and he sent me right off, Mr.
Arthur, and she don't know no more nor a baby, and he'll take her off
over the seas this very night--he will; for I had it of his own man.
She's written letters to her Ma, Mr. Arthur, but I don't think as they
were ever took to the post; and he makes believe they're a-going to be
married, and he'll have her off to France to-night. Oh, Mr. Arthur, Mr.
Arthur, don't lose no time. They're at a 'otel. Look you here--here's
the name as I wrote down on a bit o' paper to make sure; and oh, Mr.
Arthur, mind what I say, and don't lose no time!"

"But Susan--Susan--what of her?" cried her brother, unconsciously
clutching at the girl's arm.

Mary burst into another flood of tears. She hid her face, and cried
with storms of suppressed sobs. The young man rose up pale and stern
from his seat, without asking another question. He took the crumpled
paper out of her hand, put some money into it, and in few words directed
her to go to his mother at Carlingford. What though the sight of her
would break his mother's heart--what did it matter? Hearts were made to
be broken, trodden on, killed--so be it! Pale and fierce, with eyes
burning red in his throbbing head, he too went on, a second Murder,
after the first which had preceded him in the shape of the Carlingford
needlewoman. The criminal who escaped two such avengers must bear a
charmed life.

END OF VOL. I.

PRINTING OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHER.

       *       *       *       *       *


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

the charmming breakfasts=> the charming breakfasts {pg 11}

stupified=> stupefied {pg 103}

downfal=> downfall {pg 103}

their ain't no=> there ain't no {pg 118}

the litte parlour=> the little parlour {pg 260}

a man get's a charge=> a man gets a charge {pg 279}






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Salem Chapel, v.1/2, by Mrs. Oliphant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALEM CHAPEL, V.1/2 ***

***** This file should be named 42013.txt or 42013.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/0/1/42013/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Salem Chapel, v. 2/2, by Mrs. Oliphant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Salem Chapel, v. 2/2

Author: Mrs. Oliphant

Release Date: February 7, 2013 [EBook #42044]
[Last updated: July 5, 2013]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALEM CHAPEL, V. 2/2 ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)







                               COLLECTION

                                   OF

                            BRITISH AUTHORS

                           TAUCHNITZ EDITION.

                               VOL. 1092.

                     SALEM CHAPEL BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

                            IN TWO VOLUMES.

                               VOL. II.




                       Chronicles of Carlingford

                              SALEM CHAPEL

                                   BY

                             MRS. OLIPHANT.

                           COPYRIGHT EDITION.

                            IN TWO VOLUMES.

                                VOL. II.

                                LEIPZIG

                           BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ

                                 1870.

                 The Right of Translation is reserved.




                             SALEM CHAPEL.




CHAPTER I.


MRS. VINCENT rose from the uneasy bed, where she had not slept, upon
that dreadful Sunday morning, with feelings which it would be vain to
attempt any description of. Snatches of momentary sleep more dreadful
than wakefulness had fallen upon her during the awful night--moments of
unconsciousness which plunged her into a deeper horror still, and from
which she started thinking she heard Susan call. Had Susan called, had
Susan come, in any dreadful plight of misery, her mother thought she
could have borne it; but she could not, yet did, bear this, with the
mingled passion and patience of a woman; one moment rising up against
the intolerable, the next sitting down dumb and steadfast before that
terrible necessity which could not be resisted. She got up in the dim
wintry morning with all that restless anguish in her heart, and took out
her best black silk dress, and a clean cap to go under her bonnet. She
offered a sacrifice and burnt-offering as she dressed herself in her
snow-white cuffs, and composed her trim little figure into its Sunday
neatness; for the minister's mother must go to chapel this dreadful
day. No whisper of the torture she was enduring must breathe among the
flock--nothing could excuse her from attending Salem, seeing her son's
people, and hearing Mr. Beecher preach, and holding up Arthur's standard
at this dangerous crisis of the battle. She felt she was pale when she
came into the sitting-room, but comforted herself with thinking that
nobody in Salem knew that by nature she had a little tender winter bloom
upon her face, and was not usually so downcast and heavy-eyed.
Instinctively, she rearranged the breakfast-table as she waited for the
young minister from Homerton, who was not an early riser. Mr. Beecher
thought it rather cheerful than otherwise when he came in somewhat late
and hurried, and found her waiting by the white covered table, with the
fire bright and the tea made. He was in high spirits, as was natural. He
thought Vincent was in very comfortable quarters, and had uncommonly
pleasant rooms.

"Don't you think so? And one has just as great a chance of being
uncomfortable as not in one's first charge," said the young preacher;
"but we were all delighted to hear that Vincent had made an 'it.
Liberal-minded people, I should say, if I may judge by Mr. Tozer, who
was uncommonly friendly last night. These sort of people are the
strength of our connection--not great people, you know, but the flower
of the middle classes. I am surprised you did not bring Miss Vincent
with you for a little cheerful society at this time of the year."

"My daughter may perhaps come yet, before--before I leave," said Mrs.
Vincent, drawing herself up, with a little hauteur, as Mr. Beecher
thought, though in reality it was only a physical expression of that sob
of agony to which she dared not give vent in audible sound.

"Oh, I thought it might be more cheerful for her in the winter," said
the preacher, a little affronted that his interest in Vincent's pretty
sister should be received so coldly. He was interrupted by the arrival
of the post, for Carlingford was a profane country town, and had its
letters on Sunday morning. The widow set herself desperately down in an
arm-chair to read Arthur's letter. It made her heart beat loud with
throbs so violent that a blindness came over her eyes, and her very life
failed for an instant. It was very short, very assured and certain--he
was going to Northumberland, where the fugitives had gone--he was going
to bring Susan back. Mr. Beecher over his egg watched her reading this,
and saw that she grew ashy, deathly pale. It was not possible for him to
keep silent, or to refrain from wondering what it was.

"Dear me, I am afraid you are ill--can I get you anything?" he said,
rising from the table.

Mrs. Vincent folded up her letter. "Thank you; my tea will refresh me,"
she said, coming back to her seat. "I did not sleep very much last
night, and my head aches: when people come to my time of life," said the
little woman, with a faint heroical smile, "they seldom sleep well the
first few nights in a new place. I hope you rested comfortably, Mr.
Beecher. Mr. Vincent, Arthur's dear papa, used to say that he never
preached well if he did not sleep well; and I have heard other
ministers say it was a very true rule."

"If that is all, I hope you will be pleased to-day," said the preacher,
with a little complaisance. "I always sleep well; nothing puts me much
out in that respect. Perhaps it is about time to start now? I like to
have a few minutes in the vestry before going into the pulpit. You know
the way perhaps? or we can call at Mr. Tozer's and get one of them to
guide us."

"I think I know the way," said Mrs. Vincent, faintly. It was a slight
comfort, in the midst of her martyrdom, to leave the room and have a
moment to herself. She sank down by her bedside in an inarticulate agony
of prayer, which doubtless God deciphered, though it never came to
words, and rose up again to put on her bonnet, her neat shawl, her best
pair of gloves. The smile that might have come on the face of a martyr
at the stake dawned upon the little woman's lips as she caught sight of
her own pale face in the glass, when she was tying her bonnet-strings.
She was not thrusting her hand into the scorching flames, she was only
pulling out the bows of black ribbon, and giving the last touch to that
perfection of gentle neatness in which Arthur's mother, for his sake,
must present herself to his people. She took Mr. Beecher's arm
afterwards, and walked with him, through the wintry sunshine and streams
of churchgoers, to Salem. Perhaps she was just a little sententious in
her talk to the young preacher, who would have stared had anybody told
him what active and feverish wretchedness was in her heart. She quoted
Arthur's dear father more than usual; she felt a little irritated in
spite of herself by the complaisance of the young man from 'Omerton.
Notwithstanding the dreadful pressure of her trouble, she felt that his
excitement in the prospect of preaching to Arthur's people was quite
ill-timed. What did it matter to him whether the Salem flock liked him
or not? Were they not Arthur's people, pre-engaged to their own pastor?
The gentle widow did what she could to bring Mr. Beecher down as they
walked through Grove Street. She remarked, gently, that where a minister
was very popular, a stranger had but little chance of appreciation. "You
must not be mortified if you see the congregation look disappointed when
you come into the pulpit," said Mrs. Vincent; "for my son, if he had not
been called away so suddenly, was to commence a course of lectures
to-day, and I believe a good deal of expectation was raised about them."
The new preacher was perhaps a shade less buoyant when he resigned his
friend's mother to Tozer at the door of the chapel, to be conducted to
her pew. Salem was already about half filled; and the entering flock
looked at Mrs. Vincent, as she stood with the deacon in the porch,
asking, with the courtesy of a royal personage, humble yet affable,
after his wife and daughter. Tozer was a little overawed by the
politeness of the minister's mother. He concluded that she was "quite
the lady" in his private heart.

"If you tell me where the minister's seat is, I need not trouble you to
go in," said Mrs. Vincent.

"Mrs. Tufton's uncommon punctual, and it's close upon her time," said
Tozer; "being a single man, we've not set apart a seat for the
minister--not till he's got some one as can sit in it; it's the old
minister's seat, as is the only one we've set aside; for we've been
a-letting of the pews uncommon this past month, and it don't answer to
waste nothing in a chapel as is as expensive to keep up as Salem. It's
our pride to give our minister a good salary, as you know, ma'am, and
we've all got to pay up according, so there ain't no pew set apart for
Mr. Vincent--not till he's got a wife."

"Then I am to sit in Mr. Tufton's pew?" said the minister's mother, not
without a little sharpness.

"There ain't no more of them never at Salem, but Mrs. Tufton," said
Tozer. "Mr. Tufton has had a shock, and the only one of a family they've
at home is a great invalid, and never was within the chapel door in my
time. Mr. Tufton he do come now and again. He would have been here
to-day, I make bold to say, but for the minister being called away. I
hope you've 'eard from Mr. Vincent, ma'am, and as he'll soon be back. It
ain't a good thing for a congregation when the pastor takes to going off
sudden. Here she is a-coming. Mrs. Tufton, ma'am, this is Mrs. Vincent,
the minister's mother; she's been waiting for you to go into your pew."

"I hope I shall not be in your way," said Mrs. Vincent, with her
dignified air. "I have always been accustomed to see a seat for the
minister, but as I am a stranger, I hope for once I shall not be in your
way."

"Don't say a word!" cried Mrs. Tufton. "I am as glad as possible to see
Mr. Vincent's mother. He is a precious young man. It's not a right
principle, you know, but it's hard not to envy people that are so happy
in their families; nothing would make my Tom take to the ministry,
though his papa and I had set our hearts upon it; and he's in Australia,
poor dear fellow! and my poor girl is such an invalid. I hope your
daughter is pretty well? Come this way. I hope I shall see a great deal
of you. Mr. Tufton takes such an interest in his young brother; all that
he wants is a little good advice--that is what the minister always tells
me. All that Mr. Vincent wants, he says, is a little good advice."

The latter part of this was communicated in a whisper, as the two ladies
seated themselves in the minister's pew. After a momentary pause of
private devotion, Mrs. Tufton again took up the strain where she had
left it off.

"I assure you, we take the greatest interest in him at the cottage. He
doesn't come to see us so often as Mr. Tufton would wish, but I daresay
he has other things to do. The minister often says to me that he is a
precious young man, is Mr. Vincent, and that a little good advice and
attention to those that know better is all he wants to make him a
shining light; and I am sure he will want no good advice Mr. Tufton can
give him. So you may keep your mind easy--you may keep your mind quite
easy. In any difficulty that could occur, I am sure the minister would
act as if he were his own son."

"You are very kind; but I hope no difficulty will occur," said Mrs.
Vincent, with a little quiver in her lip.

"I hope not, indeed; but there are so many people to please in a flock,"
said the late minister's wife, with a sigh. "We always got on very well,
for Mr. Tufton is not one to take a deal of notice of any
unpleasantness; but you know as well as I do that it takes a deal of
attention to keep all matters straight. If you'll excuse me, it's a
great pity Mr. Vincent has gone away to-day. Nothing would have made my
husband leave his post just as he was intimated to begin a course of
lectures. It's very excusable in Mr. Vincent, because he hasn't that
experience that's necessary. I always say he's very excusable, being
such a young man; and we have no doubt he'll get on very well if he does
but take advice."

"My son was very unwilling to go; but it was quite necessary. His
sister," said Mrs. Vincent, clasping her hands tight under her shawl to
balance the pang in her heart, "was with some friends--whom we heard
something unpleasant about--and he went to bring her home. I expect
them--to-morrow."

The poor mother shut her lips close when she had said the words, to keep
in the cry or sob that seemed bursting from them. Yes, God help her, she
expected them; perhaps to-morrow--perhaps that same dreadful night; but
even in the height of her anguish there occurred to Mrs. Vincent a
forlorn prayer that they might not come back that Sunday. Rather another
agonising night than that all the "Chapel folks" should be aware that
their pastor was rushing wildly along distant railways on the day of
rest. The fact that he was doing so added a pang to her own trouble.
Total disarrangement, chaos, all the old habitudes of life gone to
wreck, and only desperation and misery left, was the sensation produced
by that interruption of all religious use and wont. It came upon her
with an acute sting, to think that her poor young minister was
travelling that Sunday; just as in Arthur's own experience at that same
moment, the utter incoherence, chaos, and wretchedness into which his
life had suddenly fallen, breathed upon him in the sound of the
church-bells.

"Dear me, I am very sorry!" said Mrs. Tufton; "some fever or something,
I suppose--something that's catching? Dear, dear me, I am so sorry! but
there are some people that never take infection; a little camphor is
such a nice thing to carry about--it can't do any harm, you know. Mrs.
Tozer tells me he is a very nice young man, Mr. Vincent's friend from
'Omerton. I don't like to say such a thing of a girl, but I do believe
your son could have that Phoebe any day for asking, Mrs. Vincent. I
can't bear forward girls, for my part--that is her just going into the
pew, with the pink bonnet; oh, you know her!--to be sure, Mrs. Pigeon
remarked you were sure to go there; though I should have hoped we would
have seen you as soon as any one in Carlingford."

"Indeed, I have been much disappointed not to call. I--I hope I
shall--tomorrow," said the widow, to whom tomorrow loomed dark like
another world, and who could not help repeating over and over the
dreaded name.

"That is Maria Pigeon all in white--to be only tradespeople they do
dress more than I approve of," said Mrs. Tufton. "My Adelaide, I am
sure, never went like that. Many people think Maria a deal nicer-looking
than Phoebe Tozer, but her mother is so particular--more than
particular--what I call troublesome, you know. You can't turn round
without giving her offence. Dear me, how my tongue is going! the
minister would say I was just at my old imprudent tricks--but you, that
were a minister's wife, can understand. She is such a difficult woman to
deal with. I am sure Mr. Tufton is always telling them to wait, and that
Mr. Vincent is a young man yet, and experience is all he wants. I wish
he had a good wife to keep him straight; but I don't know that that
would be advisable either, because of Phoebe and the rest. Dear, dear,
it is a difficult thing to know what to do!--but Mr. Tufton always says,
If he had a little more experience---- Bless me, the young man is in the
pulpit!" said Mrs. Tufton, coming to a sudden standstill, growing very
red, and picking up her hymn-book. Very seldom had the good woman such a
chance of talk. She ran herself so out of breath that she could not join
in that first hymn.

But Mrs. Vincent, who had a sensation that the pew, and indeed the whole
chapel, trembled with the trembling that was in her own frame, but who
felt at the same time that everybody was looking at her, and that
Arthur's credit was involved, stood up steadfastly, holding her book
firm in both her hands, and with an effort almost too much for her, the
heroism of a martyr, added her soft voice, touched with age, yet still
melodious and true, to the song of praise. The words choked her as she
uttered them, yet with a kind of desperate courage she kept on.
Praise!--it happened to be a very effusive hymn that day, an utterance
of unmitigated thanksgiving; fortunately she had not sufficient command
of her mind or wits to see clearly what she was singing, or to enter
into the wonderful bitter difference between the thanks she was uttering
and the position in which she stood. Could she give God thanks for
Susan's ruin, or rejoice in the light He had given, when it revealed
only misery? She was not called upon to answer that hard question. She
stood up mechanically with her white face set in pale steadfastness, and
was only aware that she was singing, keeping the tune, and making
herself noways remarked among the crowd of strange people, many of whom
turned curious eyes towards her. She stood with both her feet set firm
on the floor, both her hands holding fast to the book, and over the ache
of frightful suspense in her heart came the soft voice of her singing,
which for once in her life meant nothing except a forlorn determination
to keep up and hold herself erect and vigilant, sentinel over Arthur's
fortunes and his people's thoughts.

Mr. Beecher's sermon was undeniably clever; the Salem folks pricked up
their ears at the sound of it, recalling as it did that period of
delightful excitation when they were hearing candidates, and felt
themselves the dispensers of patronage. That was over now, and they
were wedded to one; but the bond of union between themselves and their
pastor was far from being indissoluble, and they contemplated this new
aspirant to their favour with feelings stimulated and piquant, as a not
inconsolable husband, likely to become a widower, might contemplate the
general female public, out of which candidates for the problematically
vacant place might arise. Mrs. Pigeon, who was the leader of the
opposition, and whose daughter Mr. Vincent had not distinguished, whose
house he had not specially frequented, and whom, most of all, he had
passed in the street without recognition, made a note of this man from
'Omerton. If the painful necessity of dismissing the present pastor
should occur--as such things did occur, deplorable though they were--it
might be worth while sending for Mr. Beecher. She made a note of him
privately in her mind, as she sat listening with ostentatious attention,
nodding her head now and then by way of assent to his statements. Mrs.
Vincent remarked her as she watched the congregation from the minister's
pew, with her jealous mother's eyes. The Tozers were not so devoted in
their listening. Mrs. Tozer's brilliant cherry-coloured bonnet visibly
drooped once or twice with a blessed irregularity of motion; all these
signs Mrs. Vincent perceived as she sat in preternatural acute
consciousness of everything round her, by Mrs. Tufton's side. She was
even aware that the sermon was clever; she remembered expressions in it
long after, which somehow got burned in, without any will of hers, upon
her breaking heart. The subdued anguish that was in her collected fuel
for its own silent consuming fire, even in the congregation of Salem,
where, very upright, very watchful, afraid to relax her strained nerves
even by leaning back or forward, she lived through the long service as
if through a year of suffering.

The congregation dispersed in a buzz of talk and curiosity. Everybody
wanted to know where the minister had gone, and what had taken him away.
"I can't say as I think he's using of us well," said somebody, whom Mrs.
Vincent could hear as she made her way to the door. "Business of his
own! a minister ain't got no right to have business of his own,
leastways on Sundays. Preaching's his business. I don't hold with that
notion. He's in our employ, and we pays him well----"

Here a whisper from some charitable bystander directed the speaker's
eyes to Mrs. Vincent, who was close behind.

"Well! it ain't nothing to me who hears me," said this rebellious
member, not without a certain vulgar pleasure in his power of insult.
"We pays him well, as I say; I have to stick to my business well or ill,
and I don't see no reason why the minister should be different. If he
don't mind us as pays him, why, another will."

"Oh, I've been waiting to catch your eye," said Mrs. Pigeon, darting
forward at this crisis to Mrs. Tufton; "wasn't that a sweet sermon?
that's refreshing, that is! I haven't listened to anything as has roused
me up like that--no, not since dear Mr. Tufton came first to
Carlingford; as for what we've been hearing of late, I don't say it's
not clever, but, oh, it's cold! and for them as like good gospel
preaching and rousing up, I must confess as Mr. Vincent----"

"Hush! Mrs. Pigeon--Mrs. Vincent," said Mrs. Tufton, hurriedly; "you two
ladies should have been introduced at the first. Mr. Pigeon is one of
our deacons and leading men, Mrs. Vincent, and I don't doubt you've
often and often heard your son talking of him. We are always discussing
Mr. Vincent, because he is our own pastor now, you know; and a precious
young man he is--and all that he wants is a little experience, as Mr.
Tufton always says."

"Oh, I am sorry!-- I beg your pardon, I'm sure," cried Mrs. Pigeon; "but
I am one as always speaks my mind, and don't go back of my word. Folks
as sees a deal of the minister," continued the poulterer's wife, not
without a glance at that cherry-coloured bonnet which had nodded during
the sermon, and to which poor Mrs. Vincent felt a certain gratitude,
"may know different; but me as don't have much chance, except in chapel,
I will say as I think he wants speaking to: most folks do--specially
young folks, when they're making a start in the world. He's too high, he
is, for us plain Salem folks; what we want is a man as preaches gospel
sermons--real rousing-up discourses--and sits down pleasant to his tea,
and makes hisself friendly. I never was one as thought a minister
couldn't do wrong. I always said as they were just like other men,
liking grand dinners and grand folks, and the vanities of this
world; not meaning no offence, Mrs. Vincent, neither to you nor the
minister--but I must say as I think, he's a deal too high."

"My son has had very good training," said the widow, not without
dignity. "His dear father had many good friends who have taken an
interest in him. He has always been accustomed to good society, and I
must say, at the same time," added Mrs. Vincent, "that I never knew
Arthur to fail in courtesy to the poorer brethren. If he has done so, I
am sure it has been unintentionally. It is quite against my principles
and his dear father's to show any respect to persons. If he has shown
any neglect of Mrs. Pigeon's family," continued the mild diplomatist,
"it must have been because he thought them less, and not more in need of
him than the rest of the flock."

Mrs. Pigeon listened with open mouth, but total discomfiture: whether
this was a compliment or a reprimand was totally beyond her power to
make out. She cried, "Oh, I'm sure!" in a tone which was half defensive
and half deprecating. Mrs. Pigeon, however, intended nothing less than
to terminate the conversation at this interesting point, and it was with
utter dismay that she perceived Mrs. Vincent sweep past before she had
recovered herself--sweep past--though that black silk gown was of very
moderate dimensions, and the trim little figure was noways majestic. The
minister's mother made a curtsy to the astonished wife of the poulterer;
she said "good morning" with a gracious bow, and went upon her way
before Mrs. Pigeon had recovered her breath. Perfect victory attended
the gentle widow in this little passage of arms. Her assailant fell
back, repeating in a subdued tone, "Well, I'm sure!" Mrs. Pigeon, like
Tozer, granted that the minister's mother was "quite the lady,"
henceforward, in her heart.

And Mrs. Vincent passed on victorious; yes, victorious, and conscious of
her victory, though giddy with secret anguish, and feeling as if every
obstacle that hindered her return was a conscious cruelty. They could
not have arrived this morning--it was impossible; yet she burned to get
back to see whether impossibility might not be accomplished for once,
and Susan be there awaiting her. The first to detain her was Mrs.
Tufton, who hurried, with added respect, after her, triumphing secretly
in Mrs. Pigeon's defeat.

"I am so glad you gave her her answer," said Mrs. Tufton; "bless me! how
pleased Adelaide will be when I tell her! I always said it would be well
for a minister's wife to have a spirit. Won't you come and take a bit of
dinner with us, as Mr. Vincent is not at home? Oh, I daresay somebody
will ask Mr. Beecher. It does not do to pay too much attention to the
young men that come to preach--though I think he was clever. You won't
come?--a headache?--poor dear! You're worrying about your daughter, I am
sure; but I wouldn't, if I were you. Young girls in health don't take
infection. She'll come back all right, you'll see. Well--good-bye. Don't
come in the evening if you have a headache. I shouldn't, if I were you.
Good-bye--and to-morrow, if all is well, we'll look for you. Siloam
Cottage--just a little way past Salem--you can't miss the way."

"Yes, thank you--to-morrow," said Mrs. Vincent. If only anybody could
have known what dreadful work it was keeping up that smile, holding
upright as she did! Then she went on a little way in peace, half-crazed
with the misery that consumed her, yet unnaturally vigilant and on the
alert, always holding up Arthur's standard at that critical hour when he
had no representative but herself in his field of battle. But the poor
mother was not long allowed this interval of peace. After a few minutes,
the Tozers, who were going the same way, came up to her, and surrounded
her like a bodyguard.

"I liked that sermon, ma'am," said Tozer; "there was a deal that was
practical in that sermon. If ever we should be in the way of hearing
candidates again--and shortsighted creatures like us never knows what's
a-going to happen--I'd put down that young man's name for an 'earing.
There ain't a word to be said again' the minister's sermons in the
matter of talent. They're full of mind, ma'am--they're philosophical,
that's what they are; and the pews we've let in Salem since he come,
proves it, let folks say what they will. But if there is a want, it's in
the application. He don't press it home upon their consciences, not as
some on us expected; and Mr. Tufton being all in that line, as you may
say, makes it show the more. If I was going to make a change again--not
as I mean nothing of the kind, nor as the Salem folks has ever took it
into their heads-- I'd like to have a little o' both ways, that's what
I'd like."

"When you get a minister of independent-mind, Mr. Tozer, if he gives you
the best he has, he ought to be allowed to choose his own way," said
Mrs. Vincent. "My dear husband always said so, and he had great
experience. Mr. Vincent's son, I know, will never want friends."

"I am sure as long as the minister keeps to his duty, he'll always find
friends in Tozer and me," said the deacon's wife, striking in; "and
though there may be folks in a finer way, there ain't no such good
friends a pastor can have as in his own flock. As for hearing candidates
and that, Tozer ought to know as none on us would hear of such a thing.
I don't see no reason why Mr. Vincent shouldn't settle down in
Carlingford and make himself comfortable. We're all his friends as long
as he's at his post."

"Oh, ma, I am sure he is at his post," cried Phoebe; "he has gone away
because he could not help it. I am quite sure," continued the modest
maiden, casting down her eyes, "that he would never have left but for a
good reason! Oh, I am confident he is fond of Carlingford now. He would
not go away if he had not some duty-- I am certain he would not!"

"If Phoebe is better informed than the rest of us, it ain't nobody's
business as I can see," said the father, with a short laugh. "I always
like the young folks to manage them matters among themselves; but I take
my own view, miss, for all that."

"Oh, Pa, how can you talk so," cried Phoebe, in virgin confusion, "to
make Mrs. Vincent think----"

"Indeed, nothing will make me think otherwise than I know," said Mrs.
Vincent, with a voice which extinguished Phoebe. "I understand my son.
He does not bestow his confidence very easily; and I am sure he is quite
able to manage all the matters he may have in hand," added the widow,
not without significance. Not all her anxiety for Arthur, not all her
personal wretchedness, could unwoman the minister's mother so much as to
make her forgive or overlook Phoebe's presumption. She could not have
let this pretendant to her son's affections off without transfixing her
with a passing arrow. Human endurance has its limits. Mrs. Vincent could
bear anything for Arthur except this pretence of a special interest in
him.

"Oh, I am sure I never meant----!" faltered Phoebe; but she could get
no further, and even her mother did not come to the rescue.

"Them things had much best not be talked of," said Mrs. Tozer, sharply.
"Mr. Beecher is coming in to have a bit of dinner. You mightn't have
things comfortable where you are, the minister being away, and you used
to your own house. Won't you come in with us and eat a bit of dinner? I
never can swallow a morsel when I'm by myself. It's lonesome for you in
them rooms, and us so near. There ain't no ceremony nor nonsense, but
we'll be pleased if you'll come."

"Thank you very much," said Mrs. Vincent, who could not forget that the
cherry-coloured bonnet had nodded during Mr. Beecher's sermon, "but I
slept badly last night. At my time of life a new bed often makes one
sleepless, and I have a bad headache. I think I will go and lie down.
Many thanks. It is very kind of you to ask me. I hope I shall see you,"
said the widow, with a slight shiver, repeating her formula,
"to-morrow."

"You can't take us amiss," said Mrs. Tozer; "there's always enough for
an extra one, if it isn't grand or any ceremony; or if you'll come to
tea and go to church with us at night? Phoebe can run over and see how
you find yourself. Good mornin'. I'm sorry you'll not come in."

"Oh, I wish you would let me go with you and nurse you," said Phoebe,
not without a glance in the other direction at the approaching form of
the young man from 'Omerton, "I am so frightened you don't like me!--but
I'll come over before tea, and sit with you if your headache is not
better. If I could only make you fancy I was Miss Vincent!" said
Phoebe, with pink pleading looks.

Mrs. Vincent turned away more smartly under the effect of that
stimulant. She crossed George Street, towards her son's rooms, a
solitary little figure, in the flood of winter sunshine--not dismal to
look at, save for its black dress, trim, alert, upright still. And the
heart within, which ached with positive throbs of pain, had roused up
under that last provocation, and was stinging with indignation and
anger, pure womanly, and not to be deadened by any anguish. Phoebe's
impertinence, as she called it to herself, took her out of her own far
heavier trouble. To think of that pink creature having designs upon her
boy, and taking upon herself little airs of conquest! To encounter
Phoebe's wiles overwhelmed Arthur with shame and annoyance; but they
exasperated his mother. She went home with a steadier ring in her little
light footstep. But the fumes of that temporary excitement had faded
when the door opened upon her--the blank door, with the little maid
open-mouthed behind, who did not look her in the face, and who had
nothing to communicate: the sitting-room up-stairs lay blank in utter
solitude--all the books put away according to Sunday custom, and the
cover of Arthur's letter lying on the table startling his mother into
wild hopes that some other communication had come for her. She sank down
upon a chair, and covered her pale face with her hands--torture
intolerable, unendurable; but oh, how certainly to be endured and put up
with! This poor mother, who had met with many a heavy sorrow in her day,
though never any so hideous as this, was no excitable, passionate
creature, but a wholesome, daylight woman, in whom no strain of
superlative emotions had choked up the natural channels of relief. She
wept a few bitter, heavy tears under cover of her clasped hands--tears
which took away the dreadful pressure upon her brain, and made it easier
to bear for the moment. Then she went away in her patience, and took off
her bonnet, and prepared herself for the calm of the dreadful day of
which so small a portion had yet passed. She pretended to dine, that no
outlet might be left to gossip on that score. She took a good book and
lay down upon the sofa in the awful silence--the moments creeping,
stealing over her in a tedious procession which she could almost
see--the silence throbbing all around as if with the beats of her own
heart; how was it that the walls of the house stood steady with those
throbs palpitating within their dull enclosure? But there was this
comfort at least, that nobody fathomed Mrs. Vincent in that speechless
martyrdom of hers--nobody guessed the horror in her heart--nobody
imagined that there was anything of tragic meaning under that composed
aspect. She went to church again in the evening to escape Phoebe's
"nursing," and sat there choking with the anticipation that meantime her
son was bringing Susan home. She walked home with Beecher, devoured by
feverish hopes and fears, found still no one there, with an unutterable
pang, yet relief, and sat with the young man from 'Omerton for a
horrible hour or two, till the strain had all but killed her. But nobody
came; nobody came all through the hideous night. Holding with
half-frantic hands to the thread of life, which could ill bear this
total want of all its usual sustenance, but which must not be sacrificed
for her children's sake--keeping alive, she could not tell how, without
food, without rest, without even prayer--nothing but a fever of dumb
entreaty coming to her mind when she sought some forlorn comfort from
the mere fact of going on her knees-- Mrs. Vincent lived through the
night and the morning. Another horrible, sunshiny, cheerful day; but no
sound in earth or heaven to say they were coming--no arrival, no
letter--nothing but hopeless, sickening, intolerable suspense--suspense
all the more intolerable because it had to be borne.




CHAPTER II.


TO-MORROW! to-morrow was Monday morning, a new day, a new
work-week--cheerful, healthful, and exhilarating--bright with that
frosty sunshine, which carried comparative comfort to many a poor house
in Carlingford. The widow's face was sharper, paler, of a wonderful ashy
colour. Nature could not go on under such a struggle without showing
signs of it. Beecher, who was not to go until a late train, took leave
of her as soon as he could, not without a little fright, and betook
himself to Tozer's, where he said she overawed him with her grand
manners, and where he was led to admit that Vincent had always been a
little "high." If she could have abandoned herself to her dreadful
vigil, perhaps Mrs. Vincent might have found it easier, perhaps
harder--she herself thought the former; but she dared not give up to it.
She had to set her face like a flint--she was Arthur's representative,
and had still to show a steadfast front of battle for him, and if not
discomfit, still confront his enemies. She had to call at Siloam
Cottage, at Mrs. Tozer's, to do what else might be necessary for the
propitiation of the flock. She never dreamed of saying to herself that
she could not do it; there was no question of that; the flag had to be
kept flying for Arthur. No friend of his must be jeopardised, no
whisper allowed to rise which his mother could prevent: she had been a
minister's wife for thirty years; well had she learned in that time,
like Mrs. Tufton, that a deal of attention was needed to keep all things
straight.

Accordingly, in the height of her excitement and anxiety, believing that
any moment the poor fugitive might be brought home, the widow, in her
unflinching martyrdom, once more put on her bonnet, and drew out her
black ribbon into bows of matchless neatness. Though she wrung her poor
hands in speechless anguish as she went out of the room, it was with
composed, though colourless lips, that she spoke to the little maid in
the hall. "Mr. Vincent may come home any time to-day," said the widow;
"you must have some lunch ready, and tea; perhaps his sister may be with
him--or--or she may come alone. Any one who comes is to be taken
up-stairs. I will not be long gone; and I am going to Mrs. Tufton's, if
anybody should want me----"

At this moment a knock came to the door--a hurried single knock, always
alarming, and sounding like an evil omen. Mrs. Vincent's voice failed
her at that sound--most likely her face went into convulsive twitches,
for the maid stood staring at her, too much startled to open the door,
until a wild gesture from the speechless woman, who was herself unable
to move, her breath almost forsaking her, and coming in sobs, recalled
the girl to her senses. The door was opened, and Mrs. Vincent stood with
burning eyes gazing out. Ah, not Susan! never Susan!--a little, stout,
rustic figure, all weary and dishevelled, looking ashamed, frightened,
almost disreputable in utter forlornness and unhappiness. Mrs. Vincent
gave a great sob to get breath, and dropped upon the chair, and held out
her hand to Mary. She had forgotten Mary--forgotten her momentary
comfort in the fact that Susan's flight was not alone. Now was it life
or death the girl was bringing? She drew the frightened creature near,
close, and shrieked, as she thought, her question in her ear. "What?
what?" said Mrs. Vincent in her own mind; but no sound came to Mary's
ears.

"O missis dear, missis dear!" sobbed the girl. "I've been and told Mr.
Arthur exact where she is--he's gone to fetch her home. O missis, don't
take on! they'll soon be here. Miss Susan's living, she ain't dead. O
missis, missis, she ain't dead--it might be worse nor it is."

At these words Mrs. Vincent roused herself up once more. "My daughter
has been ill," she said in gasps, turning a dreadful look upon the
servant of the house. Then she rose, took hold of Mary's arm, and went
up-stairs with her, holding her fast. She shut the door with her own
hands when they got back to the lonely parlour full of daylight and
silence. "Miss Susan has been ill?" she said once more with parched
lips, looking again, with that full blank gaze which seemed to deny and
defy any other answer, in Mary's frightened face.

"O missis, don't take on!" sobbed the terrified girl.

"No, oh no, no, that is impossible. I can't take on, Mary, if I
would--oh no, not now," said the poor widow, with what seemed a
momentary wandering of her strained senses. "Tell me all-- I am ready to
hear it all."

And then Mary began the pitiful story, the same they had heard in
Lonsdale--the sudden arrival of the girl and her governess, and innocent
Susan's puzzled interest in them; Mr. Fordham's appearance afterwards,
his sudden snatch at the stranger, his ready use of Arthur's letter,
which Susan was disturbed about, to persuade her that she must instantly
go to her mother and set all right; the journey bringing them late at
night to an unknown place, which, with the boom of the unexpected sea in
their ears, the defenceless deceived creatures found out not to be
Carlingford. Mary knew nothing of the scene which had been enacted
up-stairs, when the villanous scheme was made known to the unhappy
victim. She could tell nothing but by guesses of what had passed and
followed, and Mary, of course, by a natural certainty, guessed the
worst. But next day Susan had written to her mother, either because she
was still deceived or still innocent; and the next day again Mary was
sent away under a pretence of being sent to church, and the false
Fordham himself had conducted her to town and left her there. Such was
Mary's tale. Last night she had met Mr. Arthur and given him the
address. Now, no doubt, they were on their way,--if only missis would
not take on! "No," said the widow once more, with speechless lips. Take
on! oh no, never more. Surely all these light afflictions that could
bring tears were over now--nothing but horror and agony remained. The
poor mother sat for a little in a dreadful silence, aching all over her
anguished frame. Nothing was to be said or done; the pause of utter
misery, in which thought itself had no place, but one horrible sensation
of suffering was all that remained of life, passed over her; then a
faint agonised smile fluttered upon her white lips. She drew on her
glove again slowly and with pain. "I must go out, Mary," said Arthur's
mother. "I must do my duty if the world were all breaking up, as I--I
think it is; and you must stay here and tell my poor darling her mother
will come back to her directly. And don't talk to the other servant,
Mary. You shall be like my own child if you will stand by us now."

"O missis dear, not a word--not if it was to save my life!" said poor
Mary, through her tears.

And in her bravery and desperation the widow went out to her other
forlorn hope. She went away out of the doors which enclosed at least the
knowledge of this event, through the everyday streets, where, if there
were other tragedies, nobody knew of them any more than of hers. She had
her veil over her face, on which that shadow had settled, and no one
could have suspected her of carrying a broken heart through those
sunshiny ways. She could not think or anticipate or even fear anything
further. Susan might die under that load of shame and anguish, but her
mother apprehended, was sensible of, nothing more. The worst had come,
except for Arthur, who might be helped out of his troubles. So, stunned
and hopeless, she set out to visit Arthur's people, with a courage more
desperate than that of battle. That was the duty which must be done if
the world went to pieces--to talk to Adelaide Tufton and hear her sharp
criticism and bitter gossip--to listen to the old minister dawdling
forth his slow sentiments--to visit the Tozers and soothe their
feelings, and hear what they had to say. An auto-da-fe in the old
Spanish fashion would have been easier, to be sure; but this was how the
minister's mother, in the depths of unknown anguish and calamity, was
expected to exert herself, the only way she could serve her son.

The parlour in Siloam Cottage was as green and obscure, as warm and
close, as of old. The big geranium had grown, and covered the little
window still more completely, and the fire burned with virulence,
conscious of the frost. The minister's invalid daughter, with the
colourless face and sharp eyes, was still knitting, leaning back upon
her pillows. Poor Mrs. Vincent, when she sat down, as near the door as
possible, feeling as if she could not get breath, became immediately
aware that to confront those eyes was a more dangerous process than any
which she had yet been subjected to in Carlingford. They penetrated
through her, keen with the restless life and curiosity, which made up to
that disabled woman for the privations of her existence. In the dim
green parlour the minister's mother saw nothing but Adelaide Tufton's
eyes. If they had been beautiful eyes the effect would have been less
surprising; but they were not beautiful; they were pale blue, and had
something of the shrill shining of a rainy sky in the glistening white,
which counted for far more than the faint watery colour. Mrs. Vincent
gave way before them as she had never yet done. She cast down her own
eyes, and drew back her chair, and even faltered in her speech, when she
was obliged to face their observation. The danger was all the greater
for being unexpected. As for Mrs. Tufton, that good woman was in a
flutter of interest and sympathy. She wanted to know whether Susan had
gone through all the orthodox number of fevers and youthful ailments,
and was in her element talking of the merits of camphor as a preventive,
and of all the means that might be used to avoid infection.

"When my children were young, and their papa always being noted for so
active a man among his people, I don't know what I should have done if I
had been easily frightened," said Mrs. Tufton. "Don't worry--keep her
quiet, and give her----"

"Mrs. Vincent never said she was afraid of infection," said Adelaide.
"Is it typhus fever? My mother jumps at everything, and never stops to
inquire. I daresay it's something quite different. Love affairs? Oh no;
of course we don't want you to tell us. I don't think Phoebe Tozer
will die of her failure. This young man from Homerton will console her.
Has your son recovered his little affair with the young Dowager, Mrs.
Vincent? He dined there, you know. I daresay his head was turned; but
there is one safeguard with those fine ladies. If a man has his wits
about him, he can always know that they mean nothing all the time."

"Indeed, I don't know what you mean. My son knows Lady Western, I
believe; I remember one time he dined there. My Arthur," said the
mother, with a faint smile, "is not one to have his head turned. He has
been used to be thought a great deal of at home."

"Ah, he's a precious young man!" said Mr. Tufton, see-sawing the air
with his large grey hand. "I am much interested in my dear young
brother. He thinks too much, perhaps--too much--of pleasing the carnal
mind; and my people, that have been used to practical preaching so long,
find the difference. But when he has deeper experiences----"

"Stuff!" said the invalid, turning her head half aside; "you know the
chapel has filled since he came. Even when they are asses like your
Salem people, you know they like a man with brains. I don't see that it
matters much what Mr. Vincent goes wrong in; he was sure to go wrong
somehow. I gave him six months, but he has got through the six months,
and they have not killed him off yet. What does he mean, thrusting
himself into other people's messes? As far as I can make out, it's quite
a little tragedy. There was that Mrs. Hilyard, you know--the woman in
Back Grove Street. Ah, you know her!" said Adelaide, keenly, seeing the
little shiver with which the visitor received the name.

"I have heard my son speak of her," said the widow, faintly.

"She was some connection of the Bedford family," said Adelaide, going
on, with her curious eyes fixed on Mrs. Vincent's face, who quailed
before her, "and she married a half brother of Lady Western's--a
desperate rascal he was. They had one baby, and then she left him--one
baby, a girl, that has grown up an idiot; and here this lady lives--a
poor needle-woman--to keep the girl safe, somehow, out of her father's
hand. Why he should want to have her I can't exactly tell. I suspect,
because she's pretty, to make a decoy of her, and sell her somehow,
either to be married, or worse----"

"Adelaide!" cried Mrs. Tufton; "oh, my dear, do mind what you're saying;
Mrs. Vincent does not know you. What can she think if you talk like
that?"

"Mrs. Vincent sees well enough I am not a girl to be frightened for
words," said the sick woman. "Now, what I want to know is, what has your
son to do with it? He's gone off after them, now, for some reason or
other; of course I don't expect you to tell me. Perhaps Lady Western has
sent him?--never mind, I will find out; but I know it has something to
do with Mrs. Hilyard, for they both went off from Carlingford the same
day. I have no share in life for myself," said Adelaide, with another
keen look at the stranger; "and so, instead of comforting myself that
it's all for the best, as papa says, I interfere with my
fellow-creatures. Oh, pray, don't be sorry for me! I get on as well as
most people. Nobody in this place ever succeeds in concealing anything
from me."

"Indeed it is a pity when people have anything to conceal," said poor
Mrs. Vincent, thinking, with a sensation of deadly sickness at her
heart, of the awful secret which was in Mary's keeping, and faltering,
in spite of all her self-command. She rose up hurriedly, when she met
once more the glance of those sharp eyes: she could not bear that
investigation; all her dreadful suspense and excitement seemed to ooze
out unawares, and betray themselves; her only safety seemed in flight.

"This is a very short visit," said Mr. Tufton. "My dear anxious sister,
we can only pray you may be comforted. All things work together for
good; you don't need to be told that. It's sure to be for the best,
whatever happens: take that consolation to your heart--it's sure to be
for the best."

"If her daughter dies and her son is dismissed, I wonder will that be
for the best?" said Adelaide Tufton, as soon as the widow had left the
room. Mrs. Vincent's ears, made acute by suffering, caught enough of
this valedictory address to realise, if that were possible, an
additional pang. Kind Mrs. Tufton did not hear it, not being in any such
state of feverish susceptibility. She, on the contrary, kissed the
mother, whom she pitied with all her heart, and entreated her not to
worry. "A young healthy girl does not fall ill for nothing. You'll see
things will turn out all right," said the kind soul; and Mrs. Vincent
went upon her forlorn way.

At Mrs. Tozer's the minister's mother found a little committee
assembled. Mrs. Brown was there from the Devonshire Dairy, and Mrs.
Pigeon, whose gratification in being able to hail Mrs. Vincent as an
acquaintance, to the confusion of the dairywoman and amazement of Mrs.
Tozer, almost restored the minister to that lady's favour. They were in
the drawing-room, where, in honour of the expected visitors, a fire had
been lighted; and as Mrs. Vincent ascended the dark staircase, she
obtained a passing glimpse of Mr. Beecher seated at the table in the
parlour studying "The Railway Guide," which Phoebe expounded to him,
until they were both sent for up-stairs. Altogether the conjunction did
not look promising for Arthur's interests. She went in thrilling with a
touch of exasperation and defiance. Now was the time to make a final
stand for Arthur. This covert rebellion could be deprecated no longer.

"I expect my son home to-day," said the brave mother, gulping down all
the pangs of her expectation. "I think, now that I see for myself how
much he is thought of in Carlingford, I ought to make an apology to the
Salem people. It was I that induced him to go away, not thinking that
one Sunday would be such a great matter; but indeed it was very
gratifying to me to see how disappointed everybody was. I hope Mr.
Beecher will pardon me, for I am sure he preached us a very nice sermon,
and we were all grateful for it; but, naturally on my dear boy's
account, to see how disappointed everybody was, was a great
gratification to me."

"Oh! I did not mind," said Mr. Beecher, with a little laugh of
embarrassment; but the young man was much taken aback, and stared with
astonished looks before he answered, at this totally unexpected address.
Having thus floored one of her adversaries, and seeing the female foe
more voluble and ready, quite prepared to answer her, Mrs. Vincent
blandly proceeded.

"And this, you know, Mrs. Tozer, was all the more gratifying to me,
because I was not quite sure that Arthur had done wisely in choosing
Carlingford. His dear father had so many friends in our denomination,
and people are so kind as to speak of my boy as such a rising young man.
Before I knew Carlingford," said the widow, looking round her with an
air of gentle superiority, "I used to regret my son had not accepted the
invitation from Liverpool. Many people said to me that his talents would
have had so much more room there; but I am reconciled now," she added,
turning her mild eyes upon Mrs. Pigeon, who showed symptoms of
resistance. "I may say I am quite satisfied now. He would have been
better off, and had more opportunity of making himself a position in
Liverpool, but what is that in comparison with the attachment of a
flock?"

"Well, indeed, that's just the thing, ma'am," said Mrs. Brown, who
imagined herself addressed; "we are fond of him. I always said he was an
uncommon nice young man; and if he was but to settle down----"

"That will come in time," said the minister's mother, graciously; "and I
am glad, for my part, that he has been away, for it shows me how his
dear people feel towards him; and though he would have been, of course,
better off in Liverpool, I would never consider that in comparison. They
still want to have him, you know, and keep writing me letters, and him
too, I don't doubt; but after what I have seen, I could never advise him
to break the link that has been formed here. The connection between
pastor and people is a sacred tie; it should never be broken," said Mrs.
Vincent, with mild grandeur, "for anything so poor as a money object;
but my dear boy is far above any such consideration as that."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Pigeon, drawing a long breath of involuntary awe and
admiration; "and I don't doubt as the pastor would have been a deal
better off in Liverpool," she added, after a pause, quite overpowered by
that master-stroke.

"It's a deal bigger a place," suggested Mrs. Tozer; "and grander folks,
I don't have a doubt," she too added, after an interval. This new idea
took away their breath.

"But, ah! what is that to affection," said Arthur's artful mother, "when
a minister has the love of his flock! My dear Mrs. Pigeon, though a
mother is naturally anxious for her son, nothing on earth would induce
me to advise him to break such a tie as that!"

"And indeed, ma'am, it's as a Christian mother should act," gasped the
poulterer's subdued wife. Mrs. Brown made a little movement of admiring
assent, much impressed with the fine sentiments of the minister's
mother. Phoebe put her handkerchief to her eyes, and Mr. Beecher found
it was time for his train. "Tell Vincent I am very glad to have been of
use to him. We were all delighted in 'Omerton to hear of him making such
an 'it," said Mr. Beecher, friendly but discomfited. He made his
leave-taking all round, before Mrs. Vincent, at the height of victory,
rose and went her way. Then she, too, shook hands, and blandly parted
with the astonished women. They remained behind, and laid their heads
together, much subdued, over this totally new light. She departed,
gently victorious. This little demonstration had done her good. When she
got out into the street, however, she fell down again into those depths
of despair out of which she had risen so bravely for Arthur's sake. She
began to plan how she and Susan could go away--not to Lonsdale--never
again to Lonsdale--but to some unknown place, and hide their
shame-stricken heads. She was so weary and sick in her heart, it was
almost a comfort to think of creeping into some corner, taking her poor
darling into her arms, healing those dreadful wounds of hers, hiding her
from the sight of men. This was what they must do as soon as her dearest
child came back--go to Scotland, perhaps, or into the primitive south
country, where nobody knew them, or---- but softly, who was this?

A new claim upon the overworked anxious soul. At the door of her son's
house stood a carriage--an open carriage--luxurious and handsome, with
two fine horses impatiently pawing the air, and a very fine footman at
the door, talking to the little maid. Within the carriage, the same
beautiful young woman whom Mrs. Vincent remembered to have seen waving a
lovely hand to Arthur. No doubt it was Lady Western. The beauty did not
bewilder Mrs. Vincent as she had bewildered Mrs. Vincent's son; but,
with a thrill of mingled pride, admiration, and disapproval, she
hastened forward at sight of her. Could she be asking for Arthur?--and
could Arthur have ventured to love that lovely creature in her radiance
of wealth and rank? With a mother's involuntary self-delusion Mrs.
Vincent looked at the beautiful vision as at Arthur's possible bride,
and was proud and displeased at the same moment; proud, that anything so
lovely and splendid was to fall to her son's lot--disapproving, that
Arthur's chosen should offer a mark of favour even to Arthur, so much
more decided than accorded with the widow's old-fashioned notion of what
became a woman. Mrs. Vincent did not think of the other figure by Lady
Western's side--a man of great height, very slight, and rapid in his
movements, with a long brown beard, and thoughtful eyes--eyes which
lightened up and became as keen as they were dreamy, whenever occasion
arose. Why should the widow look at him? She had nothing to do with him.
This once in their life they were to come into momentary contact--never
more.

"Mr. Vincent ain't at home--but oh, look year!--here's his mother as can
tell you better nor me," cried the half-frightened maid at the door.

"His mother?" said the beautiful creature in the carriage; she had
alighted in a moment, and was by Mrs. Vincent's side--"Oh, I am so glad
to see Mr. Vincent's mother! I am Lady Western--he has told you of me?"
she said, taking the widow's hand; "take us in, please, and let us talk
to you--we will not tease you--we have something important to say."

"Important to us--not to Mrs. Vincent," said the gentleman who followed
her, a remarkable figure, in his loose light-coloured morning dress; and
his eyes fell with a remorseful pity upon the widow, standing,
drawn-back, and self-restrained, upon the ground of her conscious
misery, not knowing whether to hope that they brought her news, or to
steel herself into a commonplace aspect of civility. This man had a
heart; he looked from the brilliant creature before him, all flushed and
radiant with her own happiness, to the little woman by her side, in her
pitiful widow's dress, in her visible paleness and desperation of
self-control. It was he who had brought Lady Western here to put his own
innocence beyond doubt, but the cruelty of that selfish impulse struck
him now as he saw them stand together. "Important to us--not to Mrs.
Vincent," he said again, taking off his hat to her with devout respect.

"Ah, yes! to us," said Lady Western, looking up to him with a momentary
gleam of love and happiness. Then the pretty tender-hearted creature
changed her look, and composed her countenance into sympathy. "I am so
sorry for you, dear Mrs. Vincent!" she said, with the saddest voice. At
this the widow on her part started, and was recalled to herself.

"I am a stranger in Carlingford," said the mild little woman, drawing up
her tiny figure. "I do not know what has procured me this pleasure--but
all my son's friends are welcome to me. I will show you the way
up-stairs," she continued, going up before them with the air of dignity
which, after the hard battles and encounters and bitter wounds of this
day, became the heroic little figure. She sent Mary, who started up in
dismay at her entrance, into another room, and gave Lady Western a
chair, but herself continued standing, always the conservator of
Arthur's honour. If Arthur loved her, who was this man? why did such
glances pass between them? Mrs. Vincent stood erect before Lady Western,
and did not yield even to the winning looks for which poor Arthur would
have given his life.

"Oh, dear Mrs. Vincent, I am so sorry for you!" said Lady Western again;
"I know it all, and it makes my heart bleed to think of it. I will be
your friend and your daughter's friend as long as I live, if you will
let me. Oh, don't shut your heart against me! Mr. Vincent trusts me, and
so must you; and I am heartbroken to think all that you must have gone
through----"

"Stop!" said Mrs. Vincent, with a gasp. "I--I cannot tell--what you
mean," she articulated, with difficulty, holding by the table to support
herself, but looking with unflinching eyes in her new persecutor's face.

"Oh, don't shut your heart against me!" cried the young dowager, with
genuine tears in her lovely eyes. "This gentleman was with Mr. Vincent
yesterday--he came up here this morning. He is--Mr. Fordham." She broke
off abruptly with a terrified cry. But Mrs. Vincent had not died or
fainted standing rigid there before her, as the soft creature thought.
Her eyes had only taken that blank lustreless gaze, because the force of
emotion beneath was too much for them, and inexpressible. Even in that
extremity, it was in the widow's heart, wrung to desperation, to keep
her standing-ground of assumed ignorance, and not to know what this
sudden offer of sympathy could mean.

"I do not know--the gentleman," she said, slowly, trying to make the
shadow of a curtsy to him. "I am sorry to seem uncivil; but I am tired
and anxious. What--what did you want of me?" she asked, in a little
outburst of uncontrollable petulance, which comforted Lady Western. It
was a very natural question. Surely, in this forlorn room, where she had
passed so many wretched hours, her privacy might have been sacred; and
she was jealous and angry at the sight of Fordham for Arthur's sake. It
was another touch in the universal misery. She looked at Lady Western's
beauty with an angry heart. For these two, who ventured to come to her
in their happiness, affronting her anguish, was Arthur's heart to be
broken too?

"We wanted--our own ends," said Fordham, coming forward. "I was so cruel
as to think of myself, and that you would prove it was another who had
assumed my name. Forgive me--it was I who brought Lady Western here; and
if either of us can serve you, or your daughter--or your son--" added
Fordham, turning red, and looking round at his beautiful companion----

Mrs. Vincent could bear it no longer. She made a hasty gesture of
impatience, and pointed to the door. "I am not well enough, nor happy
enough, to be civil," cried Arthur's mother; "we want nothing--nothing."
Her voice failed her in this unlooked-for exasperation. A few bitter
tears came welling up hot to her eyes. It was very different from the
stupor of agony--it was a blaze of short-lived passion, which almost
relieved, by its sense of resentment and indignation, a heart worn out
with other emotions. Fordham himself, filled with compunction, led Lady
Western to the door; but it was not in the kind, foolish heart of the
young beauty to leave this poor woman in peace. She came back and seized
Mrs. Vincent's trembling hands in her own; she begged to be allowed to
stay to comfort her; she would have kissed the widow, who drew back,
and, half fainting with fatigue and excitement, still kept her erect
position by the table. Finally, she went away in tears, no other means
of showing her sympathy being practicable. Mrs. Vincent dropped down on
her knees beside the table as soon as she was alone, and leaned her
aching, throbbing head upon it. Oh, dreadful lingering day, which was
not yet half gone! Unconsciously groans of suffering, low but repeated,
came out of her heart. The sound brought Mary, with whom no concealment
was possible, and who gave what attendance and what sympathy she might
to her mistress's grievous trouble. Perhaps the work of this dreadful
day was less hard than the vigil to which the mother had now to nerve
her heart.




CHAPTER III.


WAS it possible that she had slept? A moment ago and it was daylight--a
red sunset afternoon: now the pale half-light, struggling with the black
darkness, filled the apartment. She was lying on the sofa where Mary had
laid her, and by her side, upon a chair within her reach, was some tea
untasted, which Mary must have brought after she had fallen into that
momentary slumber. The fire burned brightly, with occasional little
outbreaks of flame. Such a silence seemed in the house--silence that
crept and shuddered--and to think she should have slept!

The night had found covert in all the corners, so dark they were; but
one pale line of light came from the window, and the room had a little
ruddy centre in the fire. Mrs. Vincent, in the poignant anguish of her
awakening, grew superstitious; some other breath--some other
presence--seemed in the room besides her own. She called "Mary," but
there was no answer. In her excited condition anything was possible--the
bounds of the living world and the possible seemed gone for ever. She
might see anything--hear anything--in the calm of her desperation. She
got up, and hastily lighted the candle which stood on the table. As she
looked over the little light a great cry escaped her. What was it?
rising darkly, rising slowly, out of the shadows in which it had been
crouching, a huddled indistinct figure. Oh God! not Susan! not her
child! As it rose slowly facing her, the widow cried aloud once more,
and put her hand over her eyes to shut out the dreadful vision. Ghastly
white, with fixed dilated eyes--with a figure dilated and
grandiose--like a statue stricken into marble, raised to grandeur--could
it be Susan who stood there, without a word, without a movement, only
with a blank dark gaze at the horrified woman, who dared not meet those
dreadful eyes? When life rallied in Mrs. Vincent's horror-stricken
heart, she went to the ghastly creature, and put warm arms round it, and
called it Susan! Susan! Had it any consciousness at all, this dreadful
ghost? had it come from another world? The mother kissed it with lips
that woke no answer--held it motionless in her trembling arms. She cried
again aloud--a great outcry--no longer fearing anything. What were
appearances now? If it was Susan, it was Susan dead whom she held, all
unyielding and terrible in her warm human arms.

Mary heard and came with exclamations of terror and sympathy. They got
her between them to the fire, and chafed her chill hands and feet.
Nobody knew how she had got in, where she had come from; no one was with
her--no one had admitted her. She sat a marble woman in the chair where
they had placed her, unresistant, only gazing, gazing--turning her awful
eyes after her mother. At last she drew some long gasping breaths, and,
with a shudder which shook her entire frame, seemed to come to herself.
"I am Susan Vincent," said the awful ghost. No tears, nor cries, nor
wild pressure of her mother's arms, nor entreaties poured into her cold
ear, could extract any other words. Mrs. Vincent lost her
self-possession: she rushed out of the room for remedies--rung the
bell--called for Arthur in a voice of despair--could nobody help her,
even in this horrible crisis? When she had roused the house she
recollected herself, and shut the door upon the wondering strangers, and
returned once more to her hopeless task. "Oh, Mary! what are we to do?
Oh, Susan, my child, my darling! speak to your poor mother," cried the
widow; but the marble figure in the chair, which was Susan, made no
reply. It began to shiver with dreadful trembling fits--to be convulsed
with long gasping sobs. "I am--Susan--Susan Vincent"--it said at
intervals, with a pitiful iteration. The sight of her daughter in this
frightful condition, coming after all her fatigue and strain of
excitement, unnerved Mrs. Vincent completely. She had locked the door in
her sudden dismay. She was kneeling, clasping Susan's knees--wasting
vain adjurations upon her--driven beyond hope, beyond sense, beyond
capacity. Little rustic Mary had all the weight of the emergency thrown
upon her shoulders. It was she who called to the curious landlady
outside to send for the doctor, and who managed to get Susan put into
her mother's bed. When they had succeeded in laying her down there, a
long interval, that seemed like years, passed before Dr. Rider came. The
bed was opposite the window, through which the pale rays of the
twilight were still trembling. The candle on the other side showed Mrs.
Vincent walking about the room wringing her hands, now and then coming
to the bedside to look at the unconscious form there, rent by those
gasping sobs, uttering those dreadful words. Mary stood crying at the
foot of the bed. As for the widow, her eyes were tearless--her heart in
an intolerable fever of suffering. She could not bear it. She said aloud
she could not bear it--she could not bear it! Then she returned again to
call vainly upon her child, her child! Her strength had given way--she
had spent all her reserves, and had nothing to resist this unexpected
climax of misery.

It was quite dark when Dr. Rider came. Mary held the candle for him as
he felt Susan's pulse, and examined her wide-open eyes. The doctor knew
nothing about her any more than if he had not been a doctor. He said it
must have been some dreadful mental shock, with inquiring looks at Mrs.
Vincent, who began to recover herself. He put back the heavy locks of
golden brown hair, which had been loosened down from Susan's head, and
said he was afraid there was pressure on the brain. What could he
say?--he knew nothing more about it. He left some simple directions,
said he would send some medicine, and took Mrs. Vincent into a corner to
ask what it was. "Some severe mental shock?" asked Dr. Rider; but,
before she could reply, a cab drove rapidly up to the door, and sounds
of a sudden arrival were audible in the house. "Oh, doctor, thank God,
my son is come--now I can bear it," said the widow. Dr. Rider, who was
of a compassionate nature, waited with pitying eyes till the minister
should come up, and went to take another look at the patient, relieved
to think he could speak to her brother, instead of racking her mother's
heart. Mrs. Vincent grew calm in the sudden consolation of thinking
Arthur at hand. She sat down by the bedside, with her eyes fixed on the
door, yearning for her son, the only living creature from whom she could
have entire sympathy. Was it necessary that they should speak so loudly
as they came up-stairs?--could he be bringing a stranger with him to
Susan's sickroom? Her heart began to beat louder with mingled
expectation and displeasure. It was not like Arthur--and there was no
sound of his voice in the noise that swept up the stair. She rose up
instinctively as the footsteps approached--heavy steps, not like her
son's. Then the door was thrown open. It was not Arthur who stood upon
the dim threshold. It was a stranger in a rough travelling-coat,
excited, resolute, full of his own errand. He made a stride into the
room to the bedside, thrusting Mrs. Vincent aside, not wittingly, but
because she was in his way. Mary stood at the other side with the
doctor, holding up the one pale candle, which threw a flickering light
upon the marble white figure on the bed, and the utter consternation and
surprise in Dr. Rider's face. Mrs. Vincent, too much alarmed and
astonished to offer any resistance, followed the man who had thus
entered into her sanctuary of anguish. He knew what he was doing, though
nobody else did. He went straight forward to the bed. But the sight of
the unconscious figure there appalled the confident stranger. "It is
she, sure enough," he said; "are you a doctor, sir? is the lady taken
ill? I've come after her every step of the way. She's in my custody now.
I'll not give any trouble that I can help, but I must stay here."

Mrs. Vincent, who scarcely could endure to hear, and did not understand,
rushed forward while he was speaking, and seized him by the arm--"Leave
the room!" she cried with sudden passion--"He has made some impudent
mistake, doctor. God help me!--will you let my child be insulted? Leave
the room, sir--leave the room, I say! This is my daughter, Miss Vincent,
lying here. Mary, ring the bell--he must be turned out of the room.
Doctor, doctor! you are a man; you will never let my child be insulted
because her brother is away."

"What does it mean?" cried Dr. Rider--"go outside and I will come and
speak to you. Miss Vincent is in a most dangerous state--perhaps dying.
If you know her----"

"Know her, doctor! you are speaking of my child," cried Mrs. Vincent,
who faced the intruder with blazing eyes. The man held his ground, not
impertinently, but with steadiness.

"I know her fast enough," he said; "I've tracked her every step of the
way; not to hurt the lady's feelings, I can't help what I'm doing, sir.
It's murder;--I can't let her out of my sight."

Mrs. Vincent clasped her hands together with a grasp of desperation.
"What is murder?" she said, in a voice that echoed through the room. The
doctor, with an exclamation of horror, repeated the same question.
Murder! it seemed to ring through the shuddering house.

"It's hard upon a lady, not to say her mother," said the man,
compassionately; "but I have to do my duty. A gentleman's been shot
where she's come from. She's the first as suspicion falls on. It often
turns out as the one that's first suspected isn't the criminal. Don't
fret, ma'am," he added, with a glance of pity, "perhaps it's only as a
witness she'll be wanted--but I must stay here. I daren't let her out of
my sight."

There was a dreadful pause. Mrs. Vincent looked up at the two men before
her with a heartrending appeal in her eyes. Would anybody tell her what
it meant?--would nobody interfere for Susan? She moaned aloud
inarticulate in her voiceless misery. "And Arthur is not here!" was the
outcry which at last burst from her heart. She was beyond feeling what
this was--her senses were confused with extremity of suffering. She only
felt that another blow had been dealt at her, and that Arthur was not
here to help to bear it. Then the stranger, who had put himself so
horribly in possession of Susan's sickroom, once more began to speak.
The widow could not tell what he said--the voice rang in her ears like a
noise of unmeaning sound, but it stirred her to a flush of female
passion, as violent as it was shortlived. She sprang forward and took
hold of his arm with her white little trembling hand: "Not here--not
here!" cried the mother in her passion. With her feeble force excited
into something irresistible, she put the astonished stranger out of the
room before he knew what she was doing. If an infant had done it the man
could not have been more utterly astonished. Outside, the people of the
house were standing in an excited group. She thrust the dreadful
messenger of justice out with those hands that shook with tremors of
anguish and weakness. She shut the door upon him with all her feeble
strength, locked it, put a chair against it; then she stumbled and fell
as she stretched out for another--fell down upon her knees, poor soul!
and remained so, forgetting, as it seemed, how she came there, and
gradually, by instinct, putting together the hands which trembled like
leaves in the wind--"Lord, Lord!" cried the mother, hovering on the wild
verge between passion and insensibility. She called Him by name only as
utter anguish alone knows how; she had nothing to tell Him; she could
only call upon Him by His name.

Dr. Rider took the half-insensible form up in his arms and carried her
to the bedside, where Susan still lay motionless with her eyes wide
open, in an awful abstraction and unconsciousness. He put Mrs. Vincent
tenderly into the chair, and held the hands that shook with that palsied
irrestrainable tremor. "No one can bring her to life but you," said the
doctor, turning the face of the miserable mother towards her child. "She
has kept her senses till she reached you; when she was here she no
longer wanted them; she has left her life in your hands." He held those
hands fast as he spoke; pressed them gently, but firmly; repeated his
words over again. "In your hands," said the doctor once more, struck to
his heart with horror and pity. Susan's bare beautiful arm lay on the
coverlid, white, round, and full, like marble. The doctor, who had never
seen the fair Saxon girl who was Mrs. Vincent's daughter a week ago,
thought in his heart that this full developed form and face, rapt to
grandeur by the extremity of woe, gave no contradiction to the
accusation he had just heard with so much horror. That week had
obliterated Susan's soft girlish innocence and the simplicity of her
eighteen years. She was a grand form as she lay there upon that
bed--might have loved to desperation--fallen--killed. Unconsciously he
uttered aloud the thought in his heart--"Perhaps it would be better she
should die!"

Then the mother rose. Once more her painful senses came back to the
woman who was still the minister's mother, and, even in this hideous
dream of misery, had not forgotten the habits of her life. "When my son
comes he will settle it all," said Mrs. Vincent. "I expect him--any
time--he may come any minute. Some one has made--a mistake. I don't know
what that man said; but he has made--a mistake, doctor. My son, Mr.
Vincent, will see to all that. It has nothing to do with us. Tell me
what we are to do for my child. Cut off her hair? Oh, yes, yes,
anything! I don't mind it, though it is a sacrifice. She has had--a--a
great fright, doctor. She could not tell me particulars. When her
brother comes home, we will hear all--" said the widow, looking with a
jealous gaze in his eyes to see if he believed her. The scene altogether
overcame Dr. Rider. He turned away and went to the other side of the
room, and took a glass of water from the table before he could answer
her or meet that appeal. Then he soothed her as he best could with
directions about Susan. He went away immediately to come back in an
hour, if perhaps there might be any change--so he said; but, in reality,
he wanted to escape, to hear this dreadful story, to think what was
best. Friendless, with nobody near to protect them, and the officer of
justice waiting at the door, what were these women to do? perhaps death
waited closer than the visible messenger of fate. Would it be well to
stay that more merciful executioner on his way?

The doctor found the officer outside the door, waiting, not without
pity, at his post. He heard what was this man's version of the strange
tragedy--strange, and yet not unfamiliar to human ears. The young woman
had been betrayed and ruined. In wild vengeance and misery she had
seized one of her seducer's pistols and shot him through the head--such
was the story. And now she had fled from the scene of the murder,
tracked step by step by the avenger. The whole house was in a tumult, as
may be supposed. The indignant landlady, who was a member of Salem,
could scarcely be prevented going into the jealously-closed room and
turning out the unhappy criminal. Another lodger, a nervous woman, had
already collected her goods to fly from the place. Outside, some
mysterious instinct had collected a few people about the door of the
hitherto irreproachable house, which imagination magnified into a
crowd. Already Tozer had set out from his shop, red with anger, to
inquire into this incipient excitement, which nobody could explain. And
still Arthur had not appeared to stand by the miserable women in this
horrible climax of fate.

When the doctor went back to the room where Susan was, he found Mrs.
Vincent in a state of agitated activity. Mary and she were flitting
about the room, moving lights before Susan's eyes, making what noises
they could with the furniture, keeping a fantastic commotion about the
bed. "She stirred, doctor, and we were trying to rouse her," said the
widow, who had put everything but Susan's bodily extremity from her eyes
at the moment. The doctor, who was desperate, and whose heart was moved,
resorted to desperate measures. He gathered them about the bed, set Mrs.
Vincent to support the insensible form, and raising that white marble
arm which had developed into such glorious proportion, touched the
swollen blue vein with his lancet. The touch acted like magic. In
another moment she had struggled up out of her mother's grasp, and
thrown out the arm, from which the blood flowed, up above her head: the
crimson stream caught her wild eye as she raised her arm in the air. A
convulsive shudder shook her frame. She threw herself over on her face
with a cry of horror, far more than a match, in her strength of youth
and passion, for the agitated arms that held her. "Mother, mother,
mother! it is his blood! it is his life!" cried that despairing voice.
The confused bed, the convulsed frame, the flowing blood, all pitifully
lighted up by Mary's candle, made up of themselves a scene like murder;
and Dr. Rider vainly tried to forget the dreadful words which forced
upon his mind their untimely testimony. He shuddered at the touch of
that white woman's hand as he bound up the wounded arm. He withdrew his
eyes from the pallid grandeur of the stricken face. In spite of himself,
horror mingled with his pity. A heavier stain was upon her than those
crimson traces on her pearly skin. Other words followed in an incoherent
stream. Fever of the heart and brain, burning up into consuming frenzy,
had seized upon this lost creature, who was no longer a girl or
innocent. Ere long they had to send for nurses, to restrain her
delirium. She, raving with a wild madness which betrayed in every
wandering exclamation the horror upon her soul, lay desperate in the
room which had enclosed for so many lingering hours her mother's anguish
of suspense and fear. In an adjoining room, the man who had followed her
to this refuge still waited, watchful yet pitiful, intent that his
prisoner should not escape him. While outside a few gazers lingered,
looking up at the lights in the windows, with a strange perception that
something unusual had happened, though nobody knew what it was. Such was
the scene upon which Arthur Vincent, not unwarned, yet incredulous, came
suddenly with eyes of horror and wild indignation as he reached his own
door.




CHAPTER IV.


WHEN Vincent was set down, in the darkness and silence of the Sunday
night, in the Dover railway station, it was some minutes before he could
collect himself, and understand where he was. He had fallen into a
feverish sleep during the journey, little as he could have supposed
himself capable of sleeping at such a moment; but he was young, and
unused to the ceaseless fatigue and excitement and total want of rest
which had obliterated for him the natural distinction between night and
day. While his fellow-passengers trooped away with all the bustle and
excitement of travellers, who had then only completed the first stage of
their journey, to the pier and the night-boat which waited to carry them
across the Channel, he, whom various porters and attendants stimulated
with adjurations to make haste, and warnings that he would be late,
stumbled out into the dark, collecting his faculties, and trying to
think what he must do first. He was giddy and feverish with that
insufficient snatch of sleep which had lost him the time in which he
might have been laying his plans. But when he got outside the station
into the unknown place, into the gloom of night, and heard the "moanings
of the homeless sea" sounding sullen against the unseen shore,
recollection and energy came back to him. That very sound, booming
through the darkness, inspired Susan's brother. He thought of her
forlorn, desolate, succourless, a weary wanderer seeking rest and
finding none, shrouded up in darkness and danger, lost in the mysterious
gloom--such was the sentiment of the night. The minister went on rapidly
to the town, with its restless lights, through which everybody seemed to
be passing towards the unseen sea. Should he follow with the stream, or
should he stop at the hotel of which Mary had told him? He quickened his
steps as he reached the open door of the inn, and plunged in to make
rapid inquiries. Nobody knew either Colonel Mildmay or Mr. Fordham, but
the party which he described had been there, and had left only an hour
before--not for the boat, the attendants thought: but the boat was
ringing its bells through the night; and if by chance they had gone
there, no time was to be lost. He rushed from the inn as fast as his
wearied limbs could carry him to the pier, where the lookers-on stood
aside out of his way, recognising his excitement. He went through among
all the passengers with the rough captain and his lantern, having
briefly explained to that functionary what he wanted. But they were not
there. When he had satisfied himself, he left the boat, and stood with
suspicious reluctance, unwilling to lose sight of it, on the pier, and
watched the coloured lamp on the mast of the steamer gradually gliding
through the darkness out of the sheltering harbour, till it began to
plunge and heave on the unseen sea. Then he took his troubled way back
to the inn. It was very late, and all the population seemed to
disappear out of the streets, with the little attendant crowd which had
been waiting upon the last event of the day, the departure of this
night-boat. The inn itself looked half asleep, and was half closed when
he returned. No further arrivals, no incidents in the shape of trains or
boats, were to be looked for till the morning. It was the first time
that Arthur had encountered this compulsory pause of night. He struggled
against it for some time, questioning the waiters, and gleaning some
particulars which did but increase his anxiety, but the waiters
themselves were sleepy, and all the world around had closed itself up in
utter quietness and rest.

Vincent went out again, but he could get admittance nowhere, save at the
office of the police, where he went in desperation to ask the services
of some one skilful in such inquiries. He found this not without
difficulty, but nothing was to be done that night. He had to go back to
the hotel to consent to the necessary rest for which, notwithstanding
the fever of his mind, his worn-out frame craved. Weariness, indeed, had
gradually overpowered and absorbed him--stronger than anxiety, more
urgent even than his love for his sister, was this present and
over-powering exhaustion which began to occupy all his thoughts. Though
he struggled with it he could not but feel in his heart, with a certain
guilt, how this overwhelming desire to throw himself down somewhere and
rest possessed him to the exclusion of more worthy impulses. After he
had ordered some refreshment, of which, indeed, he stood as much in
need, the young man threw himself upon a sofa, and there fell into a
deep sleep of utter weariness. He could do no more. He slept as youth
must sleep, were it on the edge of a precipice, were it at the deathbed
of its dearest friend. The very waiter who brought in the food he had
ordered, took pity upon the worn-out slumberer. The man heaped up the
fire, and covered Vincent with his railway wrapper before he withdrew;
and it was not till morning that the young minister awoke out of that
profound slumber--awoke chilled and aching, and confused, in the dark,
with the untouched meal still on the table, the candle flaming in its
socket, and he himself totally unaware how long he had been asleep.

In the interval that elapsed before the first sounds of awakening life
in the house, he had time to collect himself, and when he went
down-stairs to the coffee-room, still in the dark of the winter morning,
had regained more command of himself and his powers than at any previous
moment since this misery came upon him.

But it was still so early that the fire was scarcely alight, and he had
to wait for the cup of coffee he ordered. Vincent went to the window, as
was natural--a large window looking into the dark street, faintly
lighted with lamps, which somehow burned less bright in the chill of the
morning than they did at night. Looking out vaguely, yet with the
vigilance of anxiety, without being able to discriminate anything except
here and there a dark figure passing in the darkness, the young man
waited with his face close to the uncurtained panes. There was nothing
in that blank undecipherable street to interest him, and yet he gazed
out mechanically in the anxious pre-occupation of his mind. When the
attendant came into the room with his coffee, his attention was
temporarily distracted. He got up to go to the table where breakfast was
being arranged for him; but, as he rose, his eye was caught by the gleam
of a passing face, ghastly white in the darkness, looking in. Before he
could draw breath, the apparition was gone. Without saying a word to the
astonished waiter, who began to think him mad, Vincent dashed out after
this vanished vision. Two female figures were visible a little further
on in the gloomy street. He pursued them with breathless, noiseless
speed, and grasped at the arm of a terrified woman who, gasping with
sudden fright, turned upon him a face he had never seen before. Nobody
else was to be seen in any direction. The minister made an inarticulate
apology, and turned back to search for some opening or passage through
which that face could have disappeared. It was no fancy of his that
painted that pale countenance upon the darkness--the same face that he
had seen in the railway carriage following Colonel Mildmay--the same,
but with a new look of horror and desperation in its eyes. The young man
investigated, as he thought, every doorway, every corner which could
have given shelter to such a fugitive. He returned, excited and
agitated, to the inn, to ask if there was any passage through the line
of houses which he might have overlooked, but could hear of none. It was
on his lips to ask if they had heard of any crime or accident during
the night--any--murder; but prudence restrained the incautious
utterance. He went out with the wildest agitation in his mind; something
had happened. Mrs. Hilyard's face, gleaming in unconscious at the
window, betrayed to him much more clearly than any confession, that some
new and awful event had been added to that woman's strange experiences
of life; and in the darkness he had been aware of some shadowy figure
beside her, accompanying her ghostly way. Perhaps her child--perhaps--could
it be Susan? The young man went out, not knowing where he went, into the
darkness of the winter morning; he hastened to the pier, to the railway,
startling the half-awakened people about, but nowhere could either see
or hear of her. Could it be a delusion? but the wildest imagination in
the world could not have inspired with such a new horror of expression
the eyes that gleamed out of that ghastly pale face.

The grey daylight had just got final mastery of the dark, when Vincent
met the man whom he had employed the night before to help him in his
inquiries. This agent, more skilful than the minister, had found out the
cab-driver who conveyed the party from the hotel on the previous
evening. Colonel Mildmay seemed to have made the precipitate retreat of
a man suddenly startled and frightened out of his plans. The cabman gave
a detailed account of the strange conduct of his fare. "We was a-going
to the pier to the Ostend steamer, sir," said the driver, "when I was
pulled up sharp, and got my directions to turn about sudden and go to
the railway. There was a lady as I see keeping her eye on us,
a-standing by the pier gates with her bag in her hand; but it was dark,
and she couldn't have seen who was in the cab. The same occurred, sir,
as we came up to the railway. I don't say as I see the lady there--but
sure enough I was pulled up second time, and ordered out along the
Folkestone road, a matter o' three mile or so. Then I was turned back
again; and the end of all was that I took them to the Swan in Walmer
Street, as is a place where there's well-aired beds and chops, and that
style o' thing. That ain't the style of thing as is done in the Lord
Warden. To take a fare, and partic'lar along with ladies, from the one
of them places to the other, looks queer--that's what it does; it looks
very queer, sir. It made me take a deal of notice. Gen'leman tall,
light-haired, hook nose, awful swell to look at. Ladies, one on 'em
pretty tall, one little; pretty creatures, but dreadful skeared as far
as I could see. The little one had a blue veil. That's them, sir;
thought as I was right."

"And you can take me to the place?" said Vincent.

"Jump into my cab, and I'll have you there, sir, in five minutes," said
the man.

The minister sprang into the cab alone. He no longer wanted the aid of a
stranger; the darkling streets seemed to glide past him, and not he past
them, as he dashed on at last to find his sister, this time there could
be no mistake. After they had threaded several obscure streets, the
driver came to a sudden pause, got off his box, and touched his hat
with an alarmed look. "I can't drive up to the very 'ouse, sir--there's
a crowd around the door; they do say as something has happened. I hope
it ain't to any of your friends?" said the cabman. Vincent flung the
door open as he was speaking, and rushed out. A horrified and excited
crowd was besieging the door of the shabby public-house to which he had
been brought. Seeing his hasty arrival, and the passionate anxiety in
his eyes, the crowd gave way before him, recognising his right of entry;
the very policeman at the door yielded to him in the force of his
passion. "What is it?" he cried, aware of putting away some women and
babies from the door with mechanical kindness, but unconscious that he
had stumbled up the steps like a man in a dream, and was demanding an
answer to his question with an almost wild vehemence. The question was
answered by a dozen eager voices. It was murder--murder! He could make
out nothing but the word in the confusion of many speakers and of his
own mind. Nobody opposed his entrance or asked what business he had
there. He sprang up the stairs in two or three steps, pressed forward to
a half-open door, within which he saw some people assembled, and,
unawares thrusting aside a man who stopped him, went into that chamber
of death. Several people were around the bed--one, a surgeon, occupied
with the prostrate figure there. Vincent, over the heads of the
spectators, gazed with burning eyes at this horrible spectacle. Susan
herself, whom he did not expect to find there, nor could associate in
any way with such a scene, faded out of his mind as he gazed with
haggard face and horror-stricken soul at the shattered head, bound up in
bloody-bandages, scarce recognisable except by sharp eyes of love or
hate, which rested on that mean pillow. He asked no questions for the
moment. To him alone the business needed no explanation. He was not even
surprised--he stood gazing in a momentary trance of horror at the
lamentable sight. It was a wretched room, shabby and meagre, such a
place as only terror could have driven Mildmay to. Villain as he was,
his punishment had begun before that pistol-shot brought it to a
climax--even in his success he had been conscious that she would keep
her word.

The policeman at the door touched Vincent on the sleeve, just as he
turned from the dreadful spectacle before him. "Nobody is allowed in
here but for a good reason," said this man, gazing suspiciously at the
stranger; "unless you knows something about it, or have come to identify
the poor gentleman, or are of some use somehow, I can't let you stay
here."

"I do not wish to stay here," said Vincent, turning away with a shudder.
"I want to see the ladies who were with him. Yes, I know who he is--but
I am not a friend of his; I have nothing to do with the matter. Where
are the ladies who were with him? Miss Vincent," said the minister with
a pang, "and--and Miss Mildmay. I have come to take them away."

"The ladies as were with him? Oh, it's them as you're awanting; perhaps
you'll stop a minute and talk to the inspector," said the policeman.
"The ladies as were with him? Maybe you can tell the inspector
something as will help justice? You didn't know the reason as brought
out two young women a-travelling with a gen'leman, did you? They'll want
all the friends they can collect afore all's done. You come this way
with me."

It was a relief to get out of sight of that which horrified yet
fascinated his eyes. Vincent followed the man into another room without
observing the evident suspicion with which he was regarded. "Where are
they?" he asked again. "I have a cab below. This is not a place for
women. I have come to take them away. Where are the people of the house?
What do you mean by keeping your hand on me? I want Miss Vincent. Do you
hear me? I have nothing to do with Colonel Mildmay. He has plenty of
friends to avenge him. I want my sister. Where is she? Call the people
of the house."

Vincent threw off the policeman's hand from his arm, and, looking for a
bell, rang violently. He was too much horror-stricken, and too secure of
finding Susan, weeping and helpless in some corner, to show any of the
passionate eagerness with which he had started on his search. Little
doubt she was there, poor lost soul. He shrank from meeting with her,
now that the meeting was so near; and his thoughts went after that other
desperate wretched woman, flying--who could tell where?--in despair and
darkness. The house was in utter disorder, as was natural; none of its
humble occupants being capable, at the present exciting moment, of
attending to their usual duties. Vincent rang the bell again, till it
pealed and echoed through the place. Then he bethought himself, with a
natural shudder, of the death-chamber close by. He turned to the man by
his side, with an instinctive involuntary curiosity. "Is any one
suspected?" said the minister, feeling his face grow pale with a
dreadful consciousness of the secret which he shared. But before he
could hear the answer, his second summons had brought up the terrified
mistress of the house, attended half way up the stair by a throng of
curious women. He went hurriedly to meet her at the door.

"Where are the ladies?" said the minister. "I have just heard that my
sister was brought here last night. Tell her I am here. Take me to her.
Don't be alarmed. You know what I mean? The two ladies--young ladies who
came here with Colonel Mildmay last night--where are they? Good heavens!
do you not understand what I mean?"

"The young ladies, sir?" faltered the landlady, gasping and looking at
the man who still kept by Vincent's side. "Oh, Lord bless us! The young
ladies----"

"Make haste and let them know I am here," said Vincent, gradually
growing more and more anxious. "I will undertake to produce them if they
are wanted as witnesses. Where are they?--where is my sister? I tell you
she is my sister. I have come for her. Tell Miss Vincent. Surely I am
speaking plain English," said the young man, with a flush of sudden
dread. "The elder one, Miss Vincent--you understand me? Let her know
that I am here."

"His sister! Oh, Lord bless us; and he don't know no more than the
unborn," cried the woman of the house. "Oh, Lord! p'liceman, can't you
tell the poor gentleman? His sister! oh, that's worse than ever, that
is. Some poor young thing as has been beguiled and led astray. Lord
bless us! don't look at me o' that way. I ain't to blame. Oh, gracious
me, that I should have to tell the gentleman, and you standing there!
Oh, sir, it's her as has done it. She's gone away from here afore break
of day. I don't blame her; oh, I don't blame her; don't look o' that
dreadful way at me. He's drove her to it with bad usage. She'll have to
suffer for it; but I don't blame her. I don't blame her if it was my
last word in life."

Vincent felt his tongue cleave to his mouth. He was stunned; he did not
know what he said--what he was hearing. "Blame her? whom? for what?" he
said, with a mechanical effort. He seemed to himself to be suddenly
engulfed in some horrible cloud, but he did not know what it meant.

"Oh, Lord! don't look o' that dreadful way at me; she's gone off from
here as soon as she done it," cried the woman. "She had that much sense
left, poor soul. He's drove her mad; he's drove her to it. My man says
it can't be brought in no worse than manslaughter----"

"You don't understand me," Vincent broke in; "you are talking of the
criminal. Who are you talking of?--but it does not matter. I want Miss
Vincent. Do you hear me?--the young lady whom he brought here last
night. Where is my sister? Gone away before daybreak! You mean the
criminal, but I want my sister. Susan! take me to where she is. She had
nothing to do with it. I will give you anything--pay you anything, only
take me to where she is."

He moved towards the door as he spoke, half believing that, if he could
but hold out and refuse to credit this horror, Susan might still be
found. "Lord bless us! the poor young gentleman's gone out of his
senses," cried the landlady. "Let him go through all the house if that's
what he wants. There ain't nothing to conceal in my house. I'll take you
to the room as they were in--she and the other one. This way, sir. They
hadn't nothing with them but two little bags, so there wasn't much to
leave; but such as it is, being her night-things, is there. She wasn't
thinking of bags, nor any of her little comforts, when she went away.
Here, sir; walk in here."

The woman took him to a room up-stairs, where Vincent followed her
mechanically. The room had evidently been occupied a very short time
before. Upon a chair, open, with the contents only half thrust in, was a
travelling-bag, which the minister recognised at once--a piece of family
property dreadful to see in such a place. Susan had been putting her
things away with the orderly instinct of her mother's daughter when this
sudden shock of terror came upon her. "Do you mean to tell me that it is
she who has gone away," said Vincent, with a look of incredulous wonder
and appeal--"she--Susan Vincent, my sister? Take time to think. It was
not she--somebody else. Tell me where she is----"

"Oh, sir, don't say anything as may come against her," cried the
landlady. "It's nobody but her, poor soul, poor soul. If it was possible
to think as it could be another, I would--but there was nobody else to
do it. As soon as we heard the shot and the groan the master got up. He
met her on the stair, sir, if you'll believe me, like a woman as was
walking in her sleep. He was that struck he daren't say a word to her.
He let her pass by him and go out at the door--and when he went into the
gentleman's room and found him there a-dying, she was gone clean off,
and couldn't be heard of. Folks say as my husband should have stopped
her, but it wasn't none of his business. Oh, sir, don't say nothing
as'll put them on her track! There's one man gone off after her
already--oh, it's dreadful!--if you'll be advised by me, you'll slip out
the back way, and don't come across that policeman again. If she did
kill him," cried the weeping landlady, "it was to save herself, poor
dear. I'll let you out the back way, if you'll be guided by me."

The horror of this accusation had come home to Vincent's mind at last.
He saw, as if by a sudden flash of dreadful enlightenment, not guilt
indeed, or its awful punishment, but open shame--the disgrace of
publicity--the horrible suspicions which were of themselves more than
enough to kill the unhappy girl. He made a great effort to speak, but
could not for the moment. He thrust in the white soft garments which
were hanging out of it, into that familiar bag, which somehow gave him a
pang more acute than all the terrible news he was hearing. He had
travelled with it himself on innocent boyish journeys, had seen it in
his mother's innocent hands--and now to find it in this shuddering
atmosphere of crime and mystery! He too shuddered as he roused himself
to speak. "Hush--hush," said Vincent, "you mistake, my sister has
nothing to do with it; I--I can prove that--easily," said the minister,
getting the words out with difficulty. "Tell me how it all
happened--when they came here, what passed; for instance----" He paused,
and his eye caught another evidence of the reality of his horrible
position. It was the blue veil which he had followed and described, and
looked for through all these weary hours. He took it up in his hand,
crushing it together with an almost ungovernable impulse of rage, from
where it had been thrown down on the shabby carpet. "For instance," said
Susan's brother, restraining himself, "where is the girl who wore this?
You said Miss Vincent went away alone--where was the other? was she left
behind--is she here?"

The policeman had followed them up into the room in natural curiosity
and suspicion. The landlady's husband had sworn that Susan left the
house by herself. Then, where was the girl? The fugitive had been
tracked to the railway, the policeman said; but she was alone. Nobody
had thought before of her helpless companion. The inspector arrived
while they were going over the house trying if it were possible to find
any traces of this forlorn creature. Vincent was much too profoundly
concerned himself to keep silence about the mysterious movements of the
woman whom he had seen on his way to Dover--whom he had seen that very
morning in the darkness--whom he knew to be the bitterest enemy of the
murdered man. It was only when he described her--when he tried to
collect all the information he had ever had about her for the guidance
of justice--that he saw how little he knew of her in reality. His very
description was tinged with a touch of fancy; and in this frightful
emergency he perceived, for the first time, how much his imagination had
supplied of the interest he felt in this woman. When he had done all it
was possible to do to set the pursuer on her track, and gathered all he
could of the supposed proofs against Susan, he left the place where he
could do nothing further. He had to describe himself fully--to prove his
identity by a reference to the Dissenting minister of the place, and
explain whence he had come and whither he was going, before the officers
in charge of the house, although conscious that they had no grounds for
detaining him, would let him go. But he was permitted to leave at last.
While he waited for the next train to Carlingford, he questioned the
cabman, who could give but a very faint and indistinct description of
the lady whom he had seen at the pier-gates, whose appearance had
stopped Colonel Mildmay in the prosecution of his journey. She was
standing under a lamp, the man said: the gentleman might see her, but he
didn't think as she could see him; but dim as the vision was, this was
another little link in the chain of evidence. If it did but vindicate
Susan--save her, not from the penalty, but from the very shadow and
suspicion of such a horror! It was this which filled the minister's
mind with every sort of frightful apprehension. To have Susan's name
exposed to such a horrible publicity--to have such a scene, such a crime
anyhow connected with his sister--the idea shook Vincent's mind utterly,
and almost disabled him from thought at all. And where was she, poor
horror-stricken fugitive? He scarcely dared hope that she had gone to
her mother. Sudden death, madness, any misery, seemed possible to have
overtaken the unhappy girl thus suddenly reft out of the peacefulness of
her youth into circumstances so horrible. When he entered Carlingford,
late at night, it was with insupportable pangs of suspense and alarm
that he looked into the faces he met on the lighted streets. Were they
looking at him already with a consciousness that some frightful shadow
enveloped him? Tozer's shop was already shut--earlier than usual,
surely--and two or three people stood talking at the open door, clearly
visible against the gaslight, which still burned bright within. Farther
up, opposite his own house, two or three passengers had stopped to look
up at the lighted windows. When Vincent thrust aside a lad who happened
to be in his way, asking, with uncontrollable irritation, what he wanted
there, the door opened suddenly at the sound of his voice. All was
excited and confused within--common life, with its quiet summonses and
answers, was over there. Wild confusion, agitation, reproach, surrounded
the unfortunate minister. His landlady came forward to meet him, to
bewail her own misfortune, and upbraid him with the wrong he had done
her. "I took in the pastor for a lodger, because he was sure to be
steady and respectable, and this is what he has brought to me!" cried
the hysterical woman. "What is the meaning of all this?" cried Vincent,
looking round him with restrained fury, but he did not wait for an
answer. He went up to his rooms to know the worst. As he rushed
breathless up-stairs, loud outcries of delirium reached him. In his
horror and anguish he could not recognise the voice--was it his mother
who had given way under the terrible burden? He dashed open the door of
the sitting-room in which he had spent so many quiet hours--neither
mother nor sister were there; instead of them a rough-featured man, in a
blue travelling-coat, and Tozer, flushed and argumentative, standing by
the table. Vincent had not time to ask what the controversy was that was
going on between the two. The butterman grasped his hand with an almost
violent pressure, and took the stranger's arm. "Beg your pardon for
being in your room, Mr. Vincent, but me and this gentleman has a little
business. I'll be back presently and explain," said the good deacon,
with a compassionate look at the young man, whose weary eyes sought with
instinctive suspicion that unknown face. "I'm your friend, Mr.
Vincent-- I always was; I'm not one as will desert a friend in trouble,"
said Tozer, with another shake of his hand, lowering his voice. Then he
disappeared with his strange companion. The minister was alone with
those cries, with this agitation. He threw himself down in momentary
despair. The worst, it appeared, had happened--the horror had travelled
before him. He gave up everything in the anguish of that moment. There
seemed to be no use for any further struggle. To this sensitive,
spotless, inexperienced household, suspicion was worse than death.




CHAPTER V.


WHEN Vincent came to himself, and began to see clearly the true horrors
of his position, his mind, driven to its last stronghold, rallied
convulsively to meet the worst. It was Susan who was raving close by;
but her brother, in the sickening despair of his heart, had not the
courage to go into that agitated sick-room. He sat waiting for Tozer's
return with a sense of helplessness, a sense of irritation, against
which he had no strength to contend. In that bitter moment he gave up
everything, and felt himself no longer capable of striving against his
fate. He felt in his heart that all Carlingford must already be
discussing the calamity that had come upon him, and that his innocent
honourable name was already sullied by the breath of the crowd; and,
with a strange mixture of intolerance and eagerness, he waited the
return of the man who had first, as it appeared, thrust himself into the
secret--a man whom the minister must not affront, must not defy, on
peril of all he had in the world. These few silent moments were more
terrible to Vincent than any that had gone before them. Was it any good
holding out, attempting to keep a brave face to the world, struggling
against this crushing blow?--or would it not be easiest to give in, to
drop the useless arms, to fly from the inevitable downfall? Some corner
of the earth there surely remained where he could hide his head and find
a shelter for the two poor women who were greater sufferers than he. It
was with such feelings that he awaited the return of Tozer--feelings
aggravated by the consciousness that somehow the butterman was engaged
in his service at this very moment, and by a shadowy and unexpressed
suspicion in his mind as to the character of the stranger whom Tozer had
taken away. The excellent deacon returned at last with looks of
conscious importance. He was very sorry and anxious, but he could not
help looking confidential, and standing a little higher upon the ground
of this mystery, which nobody shared but himself. Once more he shook
hands with Vincent, sympathetically, and with a grasp full of meaning.

"The thing for us to do is to keep it quiet--to keep it quiet, sir,"
said Tozer, lowering his voice as he spoke. "Nothing must be said about
it--no more nor can be helped, Mr. Vincent. As far as it has gone,
there's nobody as has heard but me. If it could be kept private from the
Salem folks," continued the butterman, taking a seat at the table, and
looking cautiously round him, as if to make sure that no one was within
hearing, "it would be for the best. Them women do make such a talk about
everything. Not to tell a falsehood, sir, as I wouldn't, not to save my
own, if so be as my own could be in such a position--we'll say as your
sister's took bad, sir, that's what we'll say. And no lie neither--hear
to her, poor soul!-- But, Mr. Vincent," said Tozer, drawing closer, and
confiding his doubt in a whisper, "what she says is best not to be
listened to, if you'll take my advice. It ain't to be built upon what a
poor creature says in a fever, but them sort of words and screechings
don't come out of nothing but a troubled mind. She was aggravated
awful--so the man tells me."

"Who was the man?" asked Vincent, hurriedly.

"The man? oh!--which man was you meaning, sir?" asked Tozer, with a
little fright, recurring to his more generous intention of keeping this
intruder altogether from the knowledge of the minister; "nobody in
particular, Mr. Vincent--nobody as is worth mentioning. One as was sent
to inquire--that's all. I've cleared him away out of the road," said the
butterman, not without some natural complacency: "there ain't no matter
about him. Don't ask me no more, Mr. Vincent, for it's losing time as is
precious. If there's anything as can be done, it's best to do it
directly. I'd speak to John Brown as is the cleverest attorney in
Carlingford, sir, if I was you. She's young, and, as I was saying, she
was aggravated awful. She might be got off."

"Hush!" said Vincent, who had to put a desperate curb upon himself, lest
the restrained rage with which he heard this implication of guilt should
burst out; "you think there is something in this horrible business--that
my sister has something to do with it. It is all a frightful
delusion--an infernal----"

"Mr. Vincent, sir, you mustn't swear. I'm as sorry for you as a man can
be; but you're a minister, and you mustn't give way," said Tozer. "If
there ain't nothing in it, so much the better; but I'm told as the
evidence is clean again' her. Well, I won't say no more; it's no
pleasure to me to think of a young creature, and a minister's daughter,
with a mother like what she's got, going any ways astray--far the
contrary, Mr. Vincent: your own father, if he was living, couldn't be
more sorry than me. But my advice is, keep quiet, and don't let anything
get out no more nor can be helped. I don't mean to say as it can be
altogether kep' quiet--that ain't in the nature of things; nor I don't
mean to make you suppose as all is likely to go smooth, and no fault
found. There's pretty sure to be some unpleasantness, one way or
another; and the only thing as I can see is just to put up with it, and
stand your ground, and do your duty all the same. And I for one will
stand by you, sir," said Tozer, rising to his feet with a little glow of
conscious generosity and valour, and shaking the hand of the poor young
minister with cordial kindness--"I'll stand by you, sir, for one,
whatever happens; and we'll tide it out, Mr. Vincent, that's what we'll
do, sir, if you can but hold on."

"Thank you," said poor Vincent, moved to the heart--"thank you. I dare
not think how it is all to end, but thank you all the same; I shall not
forget what you say."

"And tell your mother," continued Tozer, swelling to a little triumph in
his own magnanimity--"tell your mother as I said so; tell her as I'll
stand by you through thick and thin; and we'll pull through, we'll pull
through!" said the butterman, slowly disappearing, with a face radiant
with conscious bounty and patronage, through the open door.

Vincent had followed him with an instinct of civility and gratitude.
Just as Tozer withdrew, a fresh burst of outcry came from the sick-room,
ringing through the excited house. The deacon turned round half-way down
the stair, held up his hands, listened, and made a movement of wondering
pity towards the closed door which hid Susan, but did not keep in her
cries. The wretched minister drew back from that compassionate gesture
as if some one had struck him a blow. He went back and threw himself
down on the sofa, and covered his face with his hands. The pity and the
patronage were the last drop of humiliation in his bitter cup. Hot tears
came to his eyes; it seemed to him more than flesh and blood could bear.

Some time elapsed, however, before Vincent had the courage to meet his
mother. When those dreadful outcries sank into exhaustion, and all for
the moment was quiet in the sick-room, he sent to tell her he had
arrived, and went to the dreadful door which she kept closed so
jealously. He was afraid to meet her eye when she came to him, and
noiselessly drew him within. Judging by himself, he had not ventured to
think what his mother's horror and despair would be. But Mrs. Vincent
put her arms round her son with an exclamation of thanksgiving. "Oh,
Arthur! thank God, you are come. Now I shall be able to bear it," cried
his mother. She cried a little upon his breast, and then wiped her eyes
and looked up at him with quivering lips. "Oh, Arthur, what my poor
darling must have come through!" said Mrs. Vincent, with a wistful
appeal to him in her tender eyes. She said nothing of the darker horror.
It lay upon her soul a frightful, inarticulate shadow; but in the mean
time she could only think of Susan and her fever--that fever which
afforded a kind of comfort to the mother--a proof that her child had not
lost her innocence lightly, but that the shock had been to Susan a
horrible convulsion, shaking earth and heaven. The mother and son went
together to the bedside to look at the unhappy cause of all their
sorrows--she clinging with her tender hand to his arm, wistful now, and
afraid in the depths of her heart lest Arthur, who was only a man, might
be hard upon Susan in her terrible abasement. It was more than a year
since Vincent had seen his sister. Was it Susan? The grandeur of the
stricken form, the features sublimed and elevated, the majestic
proportions into which this awful crisis of fate had developed the
fair-haired girl of Lonsdale, struck her brother with unspeakable awe
and pity. Pity and awe: but yet another feeling mingled in the wonder
with which he gazed upon her. A thrill of terror came over him. That
frightful, tropical blaze of passion, anguish, and woe which had
produced this sudden development, had it developed no unknown qualities
in Susan's heart? As she lay there in the majesty of unconsciousness,
she resembled more a woman who could avenge herself, than a soft girl,
the sudden victim of a bad man. Vincent turned away from the bed with an
involuntary shudder. He would not, could not, look at her again: he left
his mother to her unceasing vigil, and himself went to his own room, to
try if rest were possible. Rest was not easy in such a terrible
complication of affairs; but weariness is omnipotent with youth. He did
sleep by snatches, in utter fatigue and exhaustion--slept long enough to
secure for himself the unspeakable torture of waking to the renewed
horror of a new day.




CHAPTER VI.


NEXT morning the minister rose to the changed life and world which now
surrounded his way, if not with much less excitement, at least with a
more familiar knowledge of all the troubles which encompassed him. As he
sat over the pretended breakfast, for which he had no appetite, and not
even heart enough to make a show of eating, hearing close by the voice
of his sister's delirium, sometimes in faint murmurs, sometimes rising
into wild outcries of passion, and pondered all the circumstances of
this frightful calamity, it is not wonderful that his heart fainted
within him. He had found out quickly enough that it was an officer of
justice whom Tozer had succeeded, by what means he could not tell, in
removing from his house. His landlady knew all the facts sufficiently
well to be by times reproachful and by times sympathetic. The other
lodgers in the house, some of whom had already left for fear of
pollution, were equally aware of all the circumstances of the case; and
it was impossible to hope that a tale so exciting, known to so many,
could be long of spreading. The minister seemed to himself to look ruin
in the face, as he sat in profound dejection, leaning his head in his
hands. He had committed his sister's interests into the hands of the
best attorney he could hear of in Dover, that watch and search might be
made on the spot for any further information; and now the only thing
possible to be done was to secure some still more skilful agent in
London to superintend the case, and set all the machinery of detection
in motion to discover Mrs. Hilyard. Vincent had nothing in the world but
the income which he drew from the liberality of Salem; an income which
could ill stand the drain of these oft-repeated journeys, not to speak
of the expenses of Susan's defence. All that the minister had would not
be enough to retain a fit defender for her, if she had to undergo the
frightful ordeal of a trial. The very thought of it drove her unhappy
brother desperate. Would it not be better if she died and escaped that
crowning misery, which must kill her anyhow, if she survived to bear it?
But these ponderings were as unprofitable as they were painful. When he
had seen his mother, who whispered to him accounts of Susan's illness,
which his mind was too much preoccupied to understand, he went away
immediately to the railway, and hastened to town. While he stood waiting
in the lawyer's office, he took up listlessly, without knowing what he
was doing, the newspaper of the day. There he found the whole terrible
tale made into a romance of real life, in which his sister's name,
indeed, was withheld, but no other particular spared. As he stood wiping
the heavy dew from his forehead, half frantic with rage and despair, the
quick eye of his misery caught a couple of clerks in another corner of
the office, talking over another newspaper, full of lively interest and
excitement. It was Susan's story that interested them; the compiler had
heightened with romantic details those hideous bare facts which had
changed all his life, and made the entire world a chaos to Vincent; and
all over the country by this time, newspaper readers were waking up into
excitement about this new tale of love, revenge, and crime. The poor
minister put down the paper as if it had stung him, and drew back,
tingling in every nerve, from the table, where he could almost hear the
discussion which was going on about Miss----; where she could have
escaped to, and whether she would be found. It restored him to his
senses and self-command when he found himself face to face with the cool
lawyer, who waited for his tragic story as a matter of business, and who
had nothing to do with the heartbreaks or the disgrace which it
involved. He was detained there for some time, giving as full an account
as he could of all the circumstances, and describing as well as he could
his reasons for suspecting Mrs. Hilyard, and her mysterious appearance
at the scene of the murder. Vincent perceived, with a sensation of
comfort at his heart, that his story interested the acute attorney,
accustomed to the tricks and expedients of crime, who perceived at once
the circumstances of suspicion, and understood at once how to go about
it, and ferret the secret out. The minister himself grew steadier as he
entered into his narrative. No shivers of wonder or pain convulsed the
calm lawyer as he listened. Under his touch, Susan's dreadful position
became one not unprecedented, to be dealt with like any other condition
of actual life; and when Vincent, after furnishing all the information
he could, and satisfying himself that no time was to be lost in the
prosecution of the search for the real criminal, left the office to
return to Carlingford, it was with a mind somewhat calmed out of its
first horror. He went back again by the train, deeply depressed and
anxious, but not so susceptible to every glance and word as he had been
an hour or two before. He tried, indeed, to take a certain gloomy
satisfaction from the idea that now everything was known. Fear of
discovery could no longer appal the stricken household; and to meet the
horror in the face was less dreadful than to feel themselves skulking
under a secret shadow which might at any moment be found out. He set his
face sternly, and looked everybody full in the eyes who looked at him,
as he once more alighted at the familiar station. He accepted the fact
that people were talking of him, pitying him, contemplating him with
wonder and fright, as somehow involved in an atmosphere of tragedy and
crime. With this feeling he went slowly along George Street on his
homeward way, with no susceptibility left in him, so far as he was
aware, except as concerned this sudden calamity which had swallowed up
his life.

When suddenly the sound of a carriage stopping came dully upon his ears;
he would not have noted or heard it but for the sound that followed of
some one calling his own name, and the soft rush of footsteps on the
pavement; even then he did not turn round to see who called him. It was
accordingly with a thrill of strange emotion--a strange, sudden, guilty
suffusion of delight over all his tingling frame and aching heart, even
in the midst of his suffering, that he felt the light touch of Lady
Western's hand first laid on his arm, then softly stealing within it in
the sudden sympathy which possessed her as she looked up into his
colourless face. It was pity and natural kindness which prompted the
young Dowager to this unwonted familiar touch. She was sorry for him to
the bottom of her heart--she would fain have made him amends somehow for
the terrible evil which had come upon him. With the natural impulse of a
woman to caress or soothe, or cheat a man anyhow out of that look of
suffering which it is intolerable to her to see on his face, Lady
Western acted instinctively, without thinking what she did. She did her
beautiful hand into his arm, clung to him, looked up with her lovely
appealing face and eyes full of tears to the pale face of the minister,
which that touch moved beyond all expression. If he did not stop and
take her into his arms, and lean his great anguish upon her in a
sweetness of relief unspeakable and measureless, it was only because
ordinary rule and custom are stronger than even passion. He was as much
deceived as if he had done it, the poor young deluded soul. Out of the
thunder and storm, all at once, without prelude or warning, he thought
it was the light of love that broke upon him all radiant and glorious.
With that he could brave all, overcome all; for that he could be content
to fathom any depths of wretchedness. So he thought, as he looked down
from those sudden heights of unhoped-for tremulous blessedness into that
lovely face, and saw it trembling with divine compassion and tenderness.
So he thought the ice breaking, the depths stirring in his own soul.
Hope, deliverance, happiness, a delight more exquisite still, that
consolation of love which makes anguish itself sweet, breathed over the
poor young Nonconformist as that hand slid within his arm. His very
brain grew dizzy with the sweetness of relief, the sudden ease that
possessed his soul.

"Oh, Mr. Vincent, my heart is breaking; what shall we do--what shall we
do?" cried Lady Western. "If it is true, I shall never dare speak to you
again, and I feel for you to the bottom of my heart. Oh, Mr. Vincent,
you don't think she did it? I am sure she did not do it--your sister! It
was bad enough before," cried the lovely creature, crying without
restraint, but still holding his arm and gazing up into his face, "but
now my heart is broken. Oh, will you tell me what I must do? I will not
go to him, for he has been a bad man; and I dare not go to your dear
mother as I should like to go; and I feel for you, oh, to the very
bottom of my heart!"

"Then I can bear it," said Vincent. Though he did not speak another
word, the sound of his voice, the expression of his face, betrayed him.
He put his hand involuntarily upon the little hand that rested on his
arm. It was all so sudden that his self-command forsook him. A smile
trembled upon his face as he looked down at her with all his heart in
his eyes. "Then I can bear it," said the poor young minister,
overwhelmed and penetrated by that exquisite consolation. Lady Western
gave a little start of alarm as she read the unmistakable meaning in his
face. She withdrew her hand hastily with a flush of radiant colour and
downcast look of fright and shame. What had she done? Her confusion, her
agitation, her sudden withdrawal, did but increase the spell. To
Vincent's charmed soul it seemed that she had betrayed herself, and that
womanly reserve alone drew her back. He attended her to her carriage
with a tender devotion which could not express itself in words. When he
had put her in, he lingered, gazing at the face, now so troubled and
downcast, with a delicious feeling that he had a right to gaze at her.
"You have made me strong to bear all things," he said, in the low tone
of passion and secret joy. In the depth of his delusion he saw no other
meaning than sudden timidity and womanly reticence in her confused and
alarmed looks. When the carriage drove off he stood looking after it
with eyes full of dreamy light. Darkness surrounded him on every side,
darkness more hideous than a nightmare. The poor young soul believed for
that delicious moment that superlative and ineffable, like his misery,
was to be his joy.

Harder thoughts regained the mastery when he got within his own house
again. It was no longer the orderly, calm, well-regulated house which
had taken in the minister of Salem by way of adding yet a finer touch to
its own profound respectability. Susan's unhappy presence pervaded the
place. Boxes of other lodgers going away encumbered the hall, where the
landlady hovered weeping, and admitted the pastor sullenly with an
audible sob.

Though he had imagined himself invested in armour of light against all
these petty assaults, Vincent was not strong enough, even in the
fictitious strength given him by Lady Western's kindness, to bear the
reality of his position. The very face of his landlady brought before
him the whole array of faces at Salem, which he must shortly encounter,
all directed towards him in judicial severity--an awful tribunal. When
he reached the shelter of his room up-stairs, the 'Carlingford Gazette'
lay upon his table, folded out so as to show that mysterious story of
Miss----, which some one in the house had certainly identified. The poor
minister took it in his hands with an impulse to tear it in pieces--to
trample it under foot--to give some outlet, now he was by himself, to
the rage and indignation with which he saw his own calamity turned into
a romance for the amusement of the public. He checked himself with a
bitter smile at his own folly; unconsciously he bethought himself of
Tozer's back-parlour, of Mr. Tufton's sitting-room, of all the places
about where he had seen his people gleaning information and amusement
from the 'Carlingford Gazette.' How the little paper, generally so
harmless, would amuse and excite its readers to-day! What surmises there
would be, and how soon the fatal knowledge would ooze out and be talked
over on all sides! It was no matter of feeling to him--it was ruin in
every way to the poor young minister, whose credit and living depended
solely upon the caprice of his "flock." The sight of the newspaper had
so stunned him, that it was some time before he perceived a letter lying
under it on the table. When he saw that the post-mark was Dover, he
snatched up this letter eagerly and tore it open. It was from the
lawyer whom he had consulted there. For the first moment he did not
comprehend the information it conveyed. Good news!--what news could be
good under his dreadful circumstances? The young man's mind was
stupified, and could not take it in. It was the copy of a doctor's
certificate--the opinion of a famous surgeon who had been summoned from
London--to the effect that Colonel Mildmay's wound was not necessarily
fatal, and that if fever did not come on he might recover. The minister
read it over again and again before he could comprehend it, and when he
did comprehend it, the fact seemed rather an aggravation than a comfort
to his misery. He was not dead--this destroyer. Perhaps at this moment,
when his unhappy victim lay struggling between life and death, he, with
the horrible good fortune of wickedness, was coming back from the edge
of the grave. At the first shock it did not seem good news to Vincent.
Not dead!--"the cursed villain," he said through his clenched teeth. The
earth was not rid of that pitiless wretch. It looked like another grand
injustice in the world, where all the landmarks were overturned, and
only evil seemed to prosper. He did not connect it anyhow with possible
relief or deliverance to Susan; on the contrary, it raised in his own
mind all the resentment and rage which had been quenched by Mildmay's
supposed death. He could scarcely compose himself after that unexpected
information. If all went well, it would naturally change the character
of the case--perhaps, under the circumstances, there might be no
prosecution, said the lawyer's letter. Vincent was young--excited out
of all self-command or prudential considerations. In his soul he
resented even this hope, which might still save his sister, and grudged
what he felt to be the diabolical good-luck of her destroyer. Not
dead!--not going to die!--not punished anyhow. About, after all the
misery he had occasioned, to recover, and go on prosperously again, and
spread wretchedness and ruin upon others. "He shall render me an
account," cried the minister fiercely to himself. "He shall answer for
it to me!" He felt it intolerable, that this guilty soul should escape
its punishment.

Thoughts more reasonable, however, came to him after a time. He began to
see the importance of the intelligence to Susan--and even to himself. At
least she could not be accused of shedding blood--at least she might be
hidden somewhere in her shame, poor lost soul, and kept from the cruel
eyes of the world. When he began to feel the influence of this gleam of
comfort, he ventured to go to the sick-room to tell his mother, whom he
had not yet seen; but Mrs. Vincent was deaf and insensible to everything
but her child, whose need and danger were too urgent to permit more
distant spectres, however terrible, to be visible in her sick-chamber.
Mary, already worn out with fatigue, had gone to bed with a headache,
with the liveliest conviction in her mind that she had taken the fever
too. The widow, who had lived for the past week as though she had no
physical frame at all, sat sleepless, with hot eyes and pallid face, by
her daughter's bed. She could still smile--smiles more heart-breaking
than any outcry of anguish--and leaned her poor head upon her son, as
he came near to her, with a tender pressure of her arms and strain of
absolute dependence which went to his heart. She could not speak, or
say, as she had said so often, that her boy must take care of his
sister--that Susan had no one else to stand by her. Leaning upon him in
an unspeakable appeal of love and weakness, smiling on him with her
wistful quivering lips, was all the poor mother could do now.

All; for in that room no one could speak. One voice filled its silence.
The restless movement of the head on that pillow turning from side to
side in search of the rest which was nowhere to be found, stilled every
other motion. Not even fever could flush the marble whiteness of her
face. Awfully alone, in her mother's anxious presence, with her brother
by her bedside, Susan went on unconscious through the wild distracted
world of her own thoughts--through what had been her own thoughts before
horror and anguish cast them all astray. Vincent stood aside in
breathless attention like the rest, before he had been many minutes in
the room. We say to each other how strange it is that no heart can ever
fully communicate itself to another; but when that revelation does take
place, awful is the spectacle. All unawares, in her dread distraction,
Susan opened up her heart.

"What does it matter what they will say?" said Susan; "I will never see
them again. Unless--yes, put down her veil; she is pretty, very pretty;
but what has Herbert to do with her? He said it was me he wanted; and
why did he bring me away if he did not love me? Love me! and deceived
me, and told me lies. Oh God, oh God! is it not Carlingford? Where is
it? I am taking God's name in vain. I was not thinking of Him--, I was
thinking----. His name is Fordham, Herbert Fordham,--do you hear? What
do you mean by Mildmay? I know no Mildmay. Stop and let me think.
Herbert--Herbert! Oh, where are you--where are you? Do you think it
never could be him, but only a lie? Well! if he did not love me, I could
bear it; but why, why did he cheat me, and bring me away? The door is
locked; they will not let me get out. Herbert! was there never, never
any Herbert in the world? Oh, come back, even if you are only a dream!
Locked! If they would only kill me! What do they mean to do with me? Oh
God, oh God! but I must marry him if he says so. I must, must marry him,
though he has told me lies. I must, whatever he does. Even if I could
get through the window and escape; for they will call me wicked. Oh,
mamma, mamma! and Arthur a minister, and to bring disgrace on him! But I
am not disgraced. Oh no, no; never, never!-- I will die first-- I will
kill him first. Open the door; oh, open the door! Let me go!"

She struggled up in one of her wilder paroxysms. She had thrown herself
half out of bed, rising up wildly, and tossing her arms into the air,
before her startled brother could rush forward to control her. But as
the voice of the unhappy girl rose into frenzy, some unseen attendants
stole in and took her out of his unskilful hands. The sight was too
painful for unaccustomed eyes--for eyes of love, which could scarcely
bear, even for her own sake, to see such means of restraint employed
upon Susan. Mrs. Vincent stood by, uttering unconscious cries, imploring
the two strong women who held her daughter, oh, not to hurt her, not to
grasp her so tightly; while Susan herself beat the air in vain, and
entreated, with passionate outcries, to be set free--to be let go. When
she was again subdued, and sank into the quiet of exhaustion, Vincent
withdrew from this saddest scene of all, utterly depressed and
broken-spirited. The wretch lived who had wrought this dread wreck and
ruin. What did it matter? Within that room it gave no relief, eased no
heart, to say that he was not dead. Forms more terrific still than those
of law and public vengeance--madness and death--stood on either side of
Susan's bed; till they had fought out the desperate quarrel, what matter
to those most immediately concerned whether a greater or a lesser
penalty lowered over her head? The minister went back to his own
retirement with an aching heart, utterly dejected and depressed. He
threw himself into a chair to think it all over, as he said to himself;
but as he sat there, hopeless and solitary, his mind strayed from Susan.
Could any one blame him? Who does not know what it is to have one secret
spot of personal consolation to fly to in the midst of trouble? Vincent
betook himself there in the utter darkness of everything around. Once
more he seemed to feel that sudden touch which took away half his
burden. No words could have spoken to his heart like that fairy hand
upon his arm. He brooded over it, not thinking, only living over again
the moment which had made so great a difference in the world. He forgot
Fordham; he forgot everything; he took neither reason nor likelihood
with him in his self-delusion. A sudden rosy mist suffused once more the
cruel earth upon which he was standing; whatever came, he had something
of his own to fall back upon, an ineffable secret sweetness, which
stanched every wound before it was made. The young minister, out of the
very depths of calamity, escaped into this garden of delights; he put
aside the intolerable misery of the house; he thrust away from him all
the lesser troubles which bristled thick in front of him in the very
name of Salem. He fled to that one spot of joy which he thought remained
to him in the middle of the waste, doubly sweet and precious. It gave
him strength to hold out through his trouble, without being overwhelmed.
He escaped to that delicious resting-place almost against his will, not
able to resist the charm of the indescribable solace he found there. He
alone, of all concerned, had that footbreadth of personal happiness to
take refuge in amid the bitter storm. He did not know it was all
delusion, self-deception, a woeful miserable blunder. He hugged it to
his heart in secret, and took a comfort not to be spoken from the
thought. Vanity of vanities; but nothing else in the world could have
stolen with such fairy balms of consolation and strength to the heart of
the poor minister. It was not long till he was called to face his fate
again, and all the heavy front of battle set in array against him; but
it was with a feeling of sweet guilt that he started up in the winter
twilight, and left his room to see Tozer, who waited for him below. That
room henceforward was inhabited by the fairy vision. When he went back
to it, Love, the consolatrix, met him again, stealing that visionary
hand within his arm. Blank darkness dwelt all around; here, falsest,
fairest mirage of imagination, palpitated one delicious gleam of light.




CHAPTER VII.


SOMEHOW the heavy week stole round without any other fluctuations but
those terrible ones of Susan's fever. Dreadful consolation and terrible
doubt breathed forth in those heartrending revelations which her poor
unconscious soul was continually pouring forth. The unhappy girl showed
her heart all naked and undisguised to the watchers round her--a heart
bewildered, alarmed, desperate, but not overwhelmed with guilty passion.
Through the dreadful haze which enveloped her mind, flashes of
indignation, bursts of hope, shone tragical and fierce; but she was not
a disgraced creature who lay there, arguing pitifully with herself what
she must do; not disgraced--but in an agony of self-preservation could
she have snatched up the ready pistol--could it be true? When Vincent
went into that room, it was always to withdraw with a shuddering dread.
Had she escaped one horror to fall into another yet more horrible? That
evidence of which, with Mrs. Hilyard's face before his eyes, he had been
half contemptuous at first, returned upon him with ever-growing
probability. Driven to bay, driven mad, reason and self-control scared
by the horrible emergency, had the desperate creature resorted to the
first wild expedient within her reach to save herself at last? With
this hideous likelihood growing in his mind, Vincent had to face the
Sunday, which came upon him like a new calamity. He would fain have
withdrawn, and, regardless of anything else which might happen, have
sent once more for Beecher. To confront the people of Salem, to look
down upon those familiar rows of faces, all of them bearing a
consciousness of the story in the newspapers, acquainted with all that
his landlady could tell, and guessing but too distinctly the terrible
misfortune which had befallen his family, seemed more than flesh and
blood could bear. He was sitting alone, pondering all this, with a
letter which he had commenced to write to Beecher before him, when
Tozer, who was now his constant visitor, came in. There could be no
doubt of the butterman's honest and genuine sympathy, but,
unfortunately, there was just as little doubt that Tozer took a pleasure
in managing the minister's affairs at this crisis, and piloting him
through the troubled waters. Tozer did all but neglect his business to
meet the emergency; he carried matters with rather a high hand in the
meetings of the managing committee; he took absolute control, or wished
to do so, of Vincent's proceedings. "We'll tide it over, we'll tide it
over," he said, rubbing his hands. To go in, in this state of mind,
secure in his own resources and in the skill with which he could guide
the wavering and half-informed mind of Salem, fluctuating as it did
between horror and sympathy, doubtful whether to take up the minister's
cause with zeal, or to cast him off and disown him, and to find the
minister himself giving in, deserting his post at the most critical
moment, and making useless all that his patron was doing for him, was
too much for the deacon's patience. He sat down in indignant surprise
opposite Vincent, and struck his stick against the floor involuntarily,
by way of emphasis to his words.

"Mr. Vincent, sir, this ain't the thing to do-- I tell you it ain't the
thing to do. Salem has a right to expect different," cried Tozer, in the
warmth of his disappointment; "a congregation as has never said a word,
and office-bearers as have stuck by you and stood up for you whatever
folks liked to say! I'm a man as will never desert my pastor in trouble;
but I'd like to know what you call this, Mr. Vincent, but a deserting of
me? What's the good of fighting for the minister, if he gives in and
sends for another man, and won't face nothing for himself? It's next
Sunday as is all the battle. Get that over, and things will come
straight. When they see you in the pulpit in your old way, and all
things as they was, bless you, they'll get used to it, and won't mind
the papers no more nor--nor I do. I tell you, sir, it's next Sunday as
is the battle. I don't undertake to answer for the consequences, not if
you gives in, and has Mr. Beecher down for next Sunday. It ain't the
thing to do, Mr. Vincent; Salem folks won't put up with that. Your good
mother, poor thing, wouldn't say no different. If you mean to stay and
keep things straight in Carlingford, you'll go into that pulpit, and
look as if nothing had happened. It's next Sunday as is the battle."

"Look as if nothing had happened!--and why should I wish to stay in
Carlingford, or--or anywhere?" cried Vincent, in a momentary outbreak of
dejection. But he threw down his pen, and closed his blotting-book over
the half-written letter. He was too wretched to have much resolution one
way or another. To argue the matter was worse than to suffer any
consequences, however hard they might be.

"I don't deny it's natural as you should feel strange," admitted Tozer.
"I do myself, as am only your friend, Mr. Vincent, when folks are
a-talking in the shop, and going over one thing and another--asking if
it's true as she belongs to you, and how a minister's daughter ever come
to know the likes of him----"

"For heaven's sake, no more, no more!--you will drive me mad!" cried
Vincent, springing to his feet. Tozer, thus suddenly interrupted, stared
a little, and then changed the subject, though without quite finding out
how it was that he had startled his sensitive companion into such sudden
impatience. "When I was only telling him the common talk!" as he said to
his wife in the privacy of their own parlour. In the mean time he had
other subjects equally interesting.

"If you'll take my advice, you'll begin your coorse all the same," said
Tozer; "it would have a good effect, that would. When folks are in a
state of excitement, and a-looking for something, to come down upon them
as before, and accordin' to intimation, would have a wonderful effect,
Mr. Vincent. You take my word, sir, it would be very telling--would
that. Don't lose no time, but begin your coorse as was intimated. It's
a providence, is the intimation. I wouldn't say nothing about what's
happened--not plain out; but if you could bring in a kind of an
inference like, nothing as had anything to do with the story in the
papers, but just as might be understood----"

The butterman sat quite calmly and at his ease, but really anxious and
interested, making his sober suggestions. The unfortunate minister,
unable otherwise to subdue his impatience and wretchedness, fell to
walking up and down the room, as was natural. When he could bear it no
longer, he came back to the table at which Tozer sat in all the pomp of
advice and management. He took his unfinished letter and tore it in
little pieces, then stopped the calm flow of the deacon's counsel by a
sudden outburst.

"I will preach," cried the young man, scattering the bits of paper out
of his hand unawares. "Is not that enough? don't tell me what I am to
do--the evil is sufficient without that. I tell you I will preach. I
would rather cut off my right hand, if that would do as well. I am
speaking like a child or a fool: who cares for my right hand, I wonder,
or my life, or my senses? No more of this. I will preach--don't speak of
it again. It will not matter a hundred years hence," muttered the
minister, with that sudden adoption of the philosophy of recklessness
which misery sometimes plays with. He threw himself into his chair
again, and covered his face with his hands. He was thinking of Salem,
and all those rows of gazing eyes. He could see them all in their pews,
imagination, with a cruel freak like a mocking spirit, depicting all
the finery of Mrs. Pigeon and Mrs. Brown upon that vivid canvass. The
minister groaned at the thought of them; but to put it down on paper,
and record the pang of exasperation and intolerable wretchedness which
was thus connected with the fine winter bonnets of the poulterer's wife
and the dairy-woman would make a picture rather grotesque than terrible
to unconcerned eyes. It was dreadful earnest to poor Vincent, thinking
how he should stand before them on that inexorable Sunday, and preach
"as if nothing had happened;" reading all the while, in case his own
mind would let him forget them, the vulgarest horrors of all that had
happened in all that crowd of eyes.

"And you'll find a great consolation, take my word, sir, in the thought
that you're a-doing of your duty," said Tozer, shaking his head
solemnly, as he rose to go away; "that's a wonderful consolation, Mr.
Vincent, to all of us; and especially to a minister that knows he's
a-serving his Master and saving souls."

Saving souls! Heaven help him! the words rang in his ears like mocking
echoes long after the butterman had settled into his arm-chair, and
confided to his wife and Phoebe that the pastor was a-coming to
himself and taking to his duties, and that we'll tide it over yet.
"Saving souls!" the words came back and back to Vincent's bewildered
mind. They formed a measure and cadence in their constant repetition,
haunting him like some spiritual suggestion, as he looked over, with
senses confused and dizzy, his little stock of sermons, to make
preparation for the duty which he could not escape. At last he tossed
them all away in a heap, seized his pen, and poured forth his heart.
Saving souls! what did it mean? He was not writing a sermon. Out of the
depths of his troubled heart poured all the chaos of thought and wonder,
which leapt into fiery life under that quickening touch of personal
misery and unrest. He forgot the bounds of orthodox speculation--all
bounds save those of the drear mortal curtain of death, on the other
side of which that great question is solved. He set forth the dark
secrets of life with exaggerated touches of his own passion and anguish.
He painted out of his own aching fancy a soul innocent, yet stained with
the heaviest of mortal crimes: he turned his wild light aside and poured
it upon another, foul to the core, yet unassailable by man. Saving
souls!--which was the criminal? which was the innocent? A wild
confusion of sin and sorrow, of dreadful human complications,
misconceptions, of all incomprehensible, intolerable thoughts, surged
round and round him as he wrote. Were the words folly that haunted him
with such echoes? Could he, and such as he, unwitting of half the
mysteries of life, do anything to that prodigious work? Could words help
it--vain syllables of exhortation or appeal? God knows. The end of it
all was a confused recognition of the One half-known, half-identified,
who, if any hope were to be had, held that hope in His hands. The
preacher, who had but dim acquaintance with His name, paused, in the
half idiocy of his awakened genius, to wonder, like a child, if perhaps
his simple mother knew a little more of that far-off wondrous
figure--recognised it wildly by the confused lights as the only hope in
earth or heaven--and so rose up, trembling with excitement and
exhaustion, to find that he had spent the entire night in this sudden
inspiration, and that the wintry dawn, cold and piercing to the heart,
was stealing over the opposite roofs, and another day had begun.

This was the sermon which startled half the population of Carlingford on
that wonderful Sunday. Salem, had never been so full before. Every
individual of the Chapel folks was there who could by any means come
out, and many other curious inhabitants, full of natural wonder, to see
how a man looked, and what he would preach about, concerning whom, and
whose family, such mysterious rumours were afloat. The wondering
congregation thrilled like one soul under that touch of passion. Faces
grew pale, long sobs of emotion burst here and there from the
half-terrified excited audience, who seemed to see around them, instead
of the every-day familiar world, a throng of those souls whom the
preacher disrobed of everything but passion and consciousness and
immortality. Just before the conclusion, when he came to a sudden pause
all at once, and made a movement forward as if to lay hold of something
he saw, the effect was almost greater than the deacons could approve of
in chapel. One woman screamed aloud, another fainted, some people
started to their feet--all waited with suspended breath for the next
words, electrified by the real life which palpitated there before them,
where life so seldom appears, in the decorous pulpit. When he went on
again the people were almost too much excited to perceive the plain
meaning of his words, if any plain meaning had ever been in that
passionate outcry of a wounded and bewildered soul. When the services
were over, many of them watched the precipitate rush which the young
preacher made through the crowd into his vestry. He could not wait the
dispersion of the flock, as was the usual custom. It was with a buzz of
excitement that the congregation did disperse slowly, in groups, asking
each other had such a sermon ever been preached before in Carlingford.
Some shook their heads, audibly expressing their alarm lest Mr. Vincent
should go too far, and unsettle his mind; some pitied and commented on
his looks--women these. He sent them all away in a flutter of
excitement, which obliterated all other objects of talk for the moment,
even the story in the papers, and left himself in a gloomy splendour of
eloquence and uncertainty, the only object of possible comment until the
fumes of his wild oration should have died away.

"I said we'd tide it over," said Tozer, in a triumphant whisper, to his
wife. "That's what he can do when he's well kep' up to it, and put on
his mettle. The man as says he ever heard anything as was finer, or had
more mind in it," added the worthy butterman to his fellow-deacons, "has
had more opportunities nor me; and though I say it, I've heard the best
preachers in our connection. That's philosophical, that is--there ain't
a man in the Church as I ever heard of as could match that, and not a
many as comes out o' 'Omerton. We're not a-going to quarrel with a
pastor as can preach a sermon like that, not because he's had a
misfortune in his family. Come into the vestry, Pigeon, and say a kind
word--as you're sorry, and we'll stand by him. He wants to be kep' up,
that's what he wants. Mind like that always does. It ain't equal to
doing for itself, like most. Come along with me, and say what's kind,
and cheer him up, as has exerted hisself and done his best."

"It was rousing up," said Pigeon, with a little reluctance; "even the
missis didn't go again' that; but where he's weak is in the application.
I don't mind just shaking hands----"

"If we was all to go, he might take it kind," suggested Brown, the
dairyman, who had little to say, and not much confidence in his own
opinion; and pride and kindness combined won the day. The deacons who
were in attendance went in, in a body, to shake hands with the pastor,
and express their sympathy, and congratulate him on his sermon, the
latter particular being an established point of deacon's duty in every
well-regulated and harmonious community. They went in rather pleased
with themselves, and full of the gratification they were about to
confer. But the open door of the vestry revealed an empty room, with the
preacher's black gown lying tossed upon the floor, as if it had been
thrown down recklessly in his sudden exit. The little procession came to
a halt, and stared in each other's faces. Their futile good intentions
flashed into exasperation. They had come to bestow their favour upon
him, to make him happy, and behold he had fled in contemptuous haste,
without waiting for their approval; even Tozer felt the shock of the
failure. So far as the oligarchs of Salem were concerned, the sermon
might never have been preached, and the pastor sank deeper than ever
into the bad opinion of Mr. Pigeon and Mr. Brown.

In the mean time Vincent had rushed from his pulpit, thrown on his coat,
and rushed out again into the cold mid-day, tingling in every limb with
the desperate effort of self-restraint, which alone had enabled him to
preserve the gravity of the pulpit and conclude the services with due
steadiness and propriety. When he made that sudden pause, it was not for
nought. Effective though it was, it was no trick of oratory which caught
the breath at his lips, and transfixed him for the moment. There, among
the crowded pews of Salem, deep in the further end of the chapel, half
lost in the throng of listeners, suddenly, all at once, had flashed upon
him a face--a face, unchanged from its old expression, intent as if no
deluge had descended, no earthquake fallen; listening, as of old, with
gleaming keen eyes and close-shut emphatic mouth. The whole building
reeled in Vincent's eyes, as he caught sight of that thin head, dark and
silent, gleaming out in all its expressive refinement and intelligence
from the common faces round. How he kept still and went on was to
himself a kind of miracle. Had she moved or left the place, he could not
have restrained himself. But she did not move. He watched her, even
while he prayed, with a profanity of which he was conscious to the
heart. He watched her with her frightful composure finding the hymn,
standing up with the rest to sing. When she disappeared, he rushed from
the pulpit--rushed out--pursued her. She was not to be seen anywhere
when he got outside, and the first stream of the throng of dispersing
worshippers, which fortunately, however, included none of the leading
people of Salem, beheld with amazed eyes the minister who darted through
them, and took his hurried way to Back Grove Street. Could she have gone
there? He debated the question vainly with himself as he hastened on the
familiar road. The door was open as of old, the children playing upon
the crowded pavement. He flew up the staircase, which creaked under his
hasty foot, and knocked again at the well-known door, instinctively
pausing before it, though he had meant to burst in and satisfy himself.
Such a violence was unnecessary--as if the world had stood still, Mrs.
Hilyard opened the door and stood before him, with her little kerchief
on her head, her fingers still marked with blue. "Mr. Vincent," said
this incomprehensible woman, admitting him without a moment's
hesitation, pointing him to a chair as of old, and regarding him with
the old steady look of half-amused observation, "you have never come to
see me on a Sunday before. It is the best day for conversation for
people who have work to do. Sit down, take breath; I have leisure, and
there is time now for everything we can have to say."




CHAPTER VIII.


VINCENT put out his hand to seize upon the strange woman who confronted
him with a calmness much more confounding than any agitation. But her
quick eye divined his purpose. She made the slightest movement aside,
extended her own, and had shaken hands with him in his utter surprise
before he knew what he was doing. The touch bewildered his faculties,
but did not move him from the impulse, which was too real to yield to
anything. He took the door from her hand, closed it, placed himself
against it. "You are my prisoner," said Vincent. He could not say any
more, but gazed at her with blank eyes of determination. He was no
longer accessible to reason, pity, any sentiment but one. He had secured
her. He forgot even to be amazed at her composure. She was his
prisoner--that one fact was all he cared to know.

"I have been your prisoner the entire morning," said Mrs. Hilyard, with
an attempt at her old manner, which scarcely could have deceived the
minister had he preserved his wits sufficiently to notice it, but at the
same time betraying a little surprise, recognising instinctively that
here she had come face to face with those blind forces of nature upon
which no arguments can tell. "You were in much less doubt about your
power of saving souls the last time I heard you, Mr. Vincent. Sit down,
please. It is not long since we met, but many things have happened. It
is kind of you to give me so early an opportunity of talking them over.
I am sorry to see you look excited--but after such exertions, it is
natural, I suppose----"

"You are my prisoner," repeated Vincent, without taking any notice of
what she said. He was no match for her in any passage of arms. Her words
fell upon his ears without any meaning. Only a dull determination
possessed him. He locked the door, while she, somewhat startled in her
turn, stood looking on; then he went to the window, threw it open, and
called to some one below--any one--he did not care who. "Fetch a
policeman--quick--lose no time!" cried Vincent. Then he closed the
window, turned round, and confronted her again. At last a little
agitation was visible in this invulnerable woman. For an instant her
head moved with a spasmodic thrill, and her countenance changed. She
gave a rapid glance round as if to see whether any outlet was left.
Vincent's eye followed hers.

"You cannot escape--you shall not escape," he said, slowly; "don't think
it--nothing you can do or say will help you now."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Hilyard, with a startled, panting breath. "You have come
to the inexorable," she said, after a moment; "most men do, one time or
another. You decline meeting us on our ground, and take to your own.
Very well," she continued, seating herself by the table where she had
already laid down one of the Salem hymn-books; "till this arrival
happens, we may have a little conversation, Mr. Vincent. I was about to
tell you something which ought to be good news. Though you don't
appreciate my regard for you, I will tell it you all the same. What
noise is that? Oh, the boys, I suppose, rushing off for your policeman.
I hope you know what you are going to say to that functionary when he
comes. In the mean time, wait a little--you must hear my news."

The only answer Vincent made was to look out again from the window,
under which a little group of gazers had already collected. His
companion heard the sounds below with a thrill of alarm more real than
she had ever felt before. She sat rigidly, with her hand upon the
hymn-book, preserving her composure by a wonderful effort, intensely
alive and awake to everything, and calculating her chances with a
certain desperation. This one thing alone of all that had happened, the
Back Grove Street needlewoman, confident in her own powers and
influence, had not foreseen.

"Listen!" she cried, with an excitement and haste which she could not
quite conceal. "That man is not dead, you know. Come here--shut the
window! Young man, do you hear what I say to you? Am I likely to indulge
in vain talk now? Come here--here! and understand what I have to say."

"It does not matter," said Vincent, closing the window. "What you say
can make no difference. There is but one thing possible now."

"Yes, you are a man!" cried the desperate woman, clasping her hands
tight, and struggling with herself to keep down all appearance of her
anxiety. "You are deaf, blind! You have turned your back upon reason.
That is what it always comes to. Hush! come here--closer; they make so
much noise in the street. I believe," she said, with a dreadful smile,
"you are afraid of me. You think I will stab you, or something. Don't
entertain such vulgar imaginations, Mr. Vincent. I have told you before,
you have fine manners, though you are only a Dissenting minister. I have
something to tell you--something you will be glad to know----"

Here she made another pause for breath--merely for breath--not for any
answer, for there was no answer in her companion's face. He was
listening for the footsteps in the street--the steps of his returning
messengers. And so was she, as she drew in that long breath, expanding
her forlorn bosom with air, which the quick throbs of her heart so soon
exhausted. She looked in his eyes with an eager fire in her own,
steadily, without once shifting her gaze. The two had changed places. It
was he, in his inexorableness, close shut up against any appeal or
argument, that was the superior now.

"When you hear what I have to say, you will not be so calm," she went
on, with another involuntary heave of her breast. "Listen! your sister
is safe. Yes, you may start, but what I say is true. Don't go to the
window yet. Stop, hear me! I tell you your sister is safe. Yes, it may
be the people you have sent for. Never mind, this is more important. You
have locked the door, and nobody can come in. I tell you again and
again, your sister is safe. That man is not dead--you know he is not
dead. And yesterday--hush! never mind!--yesterday," she said, rising up
as Vincent moved, and detaining him with her hand upon his arm, which
she clutched with desperate fingers, "he made a declaration that it was
not she; a declaration before the magistrates," continued Mrs. Hilyard,
gasping as her strength failed her, and following him, holding his arm
as he moved to the window, "that it was not she--not she! do you
understand me--not she! He swore to it. He said it was another, and not
that girl. Do you hear me?" she cried, raising her voice, and shaking
his arm wildly in the despair of the moment, but repeating her words
with the clearness of desperation--"He said on his oath it was not she."

She had followed him to the window, not pleading for herself by a single
word, but with her desperate hand upon his arm, her face pinched and
pale to the lips, and a horrible anxiety gleaming in the eyes which she
never removed from his face. The two stood together there for a moment
in that silent encounter; he looking down at the group of people below,
she watching his face with her eyes, clutching his arm with her hand,
appealing to him with a speechless suspense and terror, which no words
can describe. Her fate hung upon the merest thread, and she knew it. She
had no more power to move him in her own person than any one of the
ragged children who stood gazing up at the window. There he stood,
silent, blank, immovable; and she, suffering no expression of her
dreadful suspense to escape her, stood clutching his arm, seeing, as
she had never seen before, a pale vision of prisons, scaffolds,
judgments, obscuring earth and heaven. She was brave, and had dared them
all wittingly in the crisis of her fate, but the reality caught the
labouring breath from her lips, and turned her heart sick. This morning
she had woke with a great burden taken off her mind, and, daring as she
was, had faced the only man who had any clue to her secret, confident in
his generous nature and her own power over him. But this confidence had
failed her utterly, and in the very ease and relief of her mind--a
relief more blessed and grateful than she could have acknowledged to any
mortal--lo! here arose before her close and real the spectre which she
had defied. It approached step by step, while she gazed with wild eyes
and panting breath upon the inexorable man who had it in his power to
deliver her over to law and justice. She dared not say a word of
entreaty to him; she could only watch his eyes, those eyes which never
lighted upon her, with speechless dread and anxiety. Many evils she had
borne in her life--many she had confronted and overcome--obstinate will
and unscrupulous resolution had carried her one way or other through all
former dangers. Here for the first time she stood helpless, watching
with an indescribable agony the face of the young man at whom she had so
often smiled. Some sudden unforeseen touch might still set her free. Her
breath came quick in short gasps--her breast heaved--her fate was
absolutely beyond her own control, in Vincent's hands.

Just then there came into the narrow street a sound of carriage-wheels.
Instinctively Vincent started. The blank of his determination was broken
by this distant noise. Somehow it came naturally into the silence of
this room and woke up the echoes of the past in his mind; the past--that
past in which Lady Western's carriage was the celestial chariot, and she
the divinest lady of life. Like a gleam of light there suddenly dawned
around him a remembrance of the times he had seen her here--the times he
had seen her anywhere; the last time--the sweet hand she had laid upon
his arm. Vincent's heart awoke under that touch. With a start he looked
down upon the hand which was at this moment on his arm,--not the hand of
love,--fingers with the blood pressed down to the very tips, holding
with desperation that arm which had the power of life and death. A
hurried exclamation came from his lips; he looked at the woman by him,
and read vaguely in her face all the passion and agony there. Vaguely it
occurred to him that to save or to sacrifice her was in his hands, and
that he had but a moment now to decide. The carriage-wheels came nearer,
nearer, ringing delicious promises in his ears--nearer too came the
servants of that justice he had invoked; and what plea was it, what
strange propitiation, which his companion had put forth to him to stay
his avenging hand? Only a moment now; he shook her hand off his arm, and
in his turn took hold of hers; he held her fast while she faced him in
an agony of restrained suspense and terror. How her worn bosom panted
with that quick coming breath! Her life was in his hands.

"What was that you said?" asked Vincent, with the haste and brevity of
passion, suddenly perceiving how much had to be done in this moment of
fate.

The long-restrained words burst from his companion's lips almost before
he had done speaking. "I said your sister was safe!" she cried; "I said
he had declared her innocent on his oath. It was not she--he has sworn
it, all a man could do. To sacrifice another," she went on breathlessly
with a strong momentary shudder, pausing to listen, "will do nothing for
her--nothing! You hear what I say. It was not she; he has sworn upon his
solemn oath. Do as you will. She is safe--safe!--as safe as--as-- God
help me--as safe as my child,--and it was for her sake----"

She stopped--words would serve her no further--and just then there came
a summons to the locked door. Vincent dropped her arm, and she recoiled
from him with an involuntary movement; unawares she clasped her thin
hands and gave one wild look into his face. Not even now could she tell
what he was going to do, this dreadful arbiter of fate. The key, as he
turned it in the door, rang in her ears like thunder; and his hand
trembled as he set open the entrance of the needlewoman's mean
apartment. On the threshold stood no vulgar messenger of fate, but a
bright vision, sad, yet sweeter than anything else in earth or almost in
heaven to Vincent. He fell back without saying anything before the
startled look of that beautiful face. He let in, not law and justice,
but love and pity, to this miserable room.

"Oh, Rachel! where have you been? have you seen him? have you heard of
him? where have you been?" cried the visitor, going up to the pallid
woman, whose eyes were still fixed on Vincent. Mrs. Hilyard could not
speak. She dropped upon her knees by the table, shivering and crouching
like a stricken creature. She leaned her head upon the hymn-book which
lay there so strangely at variance with everything else around it. Pale
with fright and horror, Lady Western appealed to Vincent. "She is ill,
she is fainting--oh, Mr. Vincent, what have you been saying to her? She
was not to blame," cried the new-comer, in her ignorance. Vincent
attempted no reply, offered no help. In his heart he could have snatched
away those beautiful hands which embraced and comforted his "prisoner,"
thus rescued out of his grasp. It was hard to see her touch that guilty
conscious woman whom his own heart refused to pity. He stood by looking
on, watching her still; the instinct of vengeance had been awakened
within him. He was reluctant to let her go.

"You have been saying something to her," said Lady Western, with tears
in her eyes; "and how could she be to blame? Rachel! Oh, I wonder, I
wonder if she loved him after all?" cried the beautiful creature, in the
bewilderment of her innocence and ignorance. She stood bending over the
kneeling figure, troubled, perplexed almost more than her strange
sister-in-law had ever yet perplexed her. She could not account for this
extraordinary access of agitation. It was nohow explainable, except
upon that supposition which opened at once the warmest sympathies of the
gentle young woman's heart.

"Rachel, dear!" she cried, kissing softly the thin hands worn with toil
that covered Mrs. Hilyard's face--"he is still living, there is hope;
perhaps he will get better; and he is showing a better mind too," she
added, after a little tremulous pause. "I came to see if you had come
home to tell you; he has sworn that it was not--oh, Mr. Vincent, I sent
you word immediately when I got the message--he says it was not your
sister; she had nothing to do with it, he says. Now I can look you in
the face again. The first thing he was able to do when he came to
himself was to clear her; and now she will get better--and your dear
mother?"--said Lady Western, looking wistfully into the young man's
face. In that moment, while her attention was directed otherwise, Mrs.
Hilyard rose up and took her seat again; took her seat because she was
not able to stand, and scarcely able, by all the power of her will, to
compose the nerves which, for the first time in her life, had utterly
got the better of her. She wiped off the heavy moisture from her face
with a furtive hand before the young Dowager turned her eyes again that
way. She grasped fast hold of the only thing on the table, the Salem
hymn-book, and with a vast effort regained some degree of self-command.
For that precious moment she was free from observation, for nothing in
the world could have prevented Vincent from returning with his own
fascinated eyes the look which Lady Western turned upon him. While the
two looked at each other, she was safe; she collected her scattered
forces in that invaluable instant. She was herself again when Lady
Western looked round, somewhat nervous and embarrassed, from the gaze of
passion with which her look of deprecation and sympathy had been met. If
a slight shiver now and then thrilled over Mrs. Hilyard's figure, it was
as like to be cold as emotion. Otherwise, she sat with her arm resting
on the table and her hand clenched upon the hymn-book, her thin lips
clinging spasmodically to each other, and her face pallid, but to an
uncritical observer scarcely changed from the grey and vigilant
composure of her usual appearance. So many storms had passed over that
countenance, that the momentary agony of horror and fright from which
she had scarcely yet emerged did not tell as it would have done on a
face less worn. Her voice was sharp and strained when she spoke, and she
watched Vincent's eye with a keenness of which he was vividly conscious;
but Lady Western, who did not go deep into looks and meanings, found
nothing very unusual in what she said.

"I think Mr. Vincent was doubtful of my information," she said. "I heard
it last night from Langridge, the groom, who once belonged to my family,
you know, Alice; and--and lets me know if anything more than usual
happens," she said, abruptly stopping to draw breath. "I travelled all
night to get here to-day. Mr. Vincent was doubtful of me. Now this
matter is cleared up, I daresay he will understand me when I say that I
never could have allowed things to go further. I am only a
needle-woman, and live in Back Grove Street," continued Mrs. Hilyard,
recovering gradually as she spoke; "but I have certain things still in
my power. Mr. Vincent will understand what I mean," she went on, fixing
her eyes upon him, and unable to repress an occasional gasp which
interrupted her words, "when I say that I should not have suffered it to
go further. I should not have shrunk from any sacrifice. My dear, I have
been a little shaken and agitated, as you perceive. Mr. Vincent wants to
keep his eye upon me. Take me with you, Alice," said the bold woman,
once more looking Vincent full in the face; "take charge of me, keep me
prisoner until all this is cleared up. I am about tired of living a
disguised princess. Send up your people for my possessions here, and
take me with you. You will find me safe, Mr. Vincent, when you happen to
want me, with Lady Western in Grange Lane."

"Oh, Rachel, I am so glad!" cried Lady Western; "I cannot for my life
imagine what you mean by keeping you my prisoner, and all that; but Mr.
Vincent may be very sure you will be safe with me;--since he has so much
interest in your movements," continued the young Dowager, turning her
perplexed eyes from one to the other. She had not the remotest idea what
it all meant. She was perhaps a little surprised to perceive that, after
all, Vincent's interest was less with herself than with this strange
woman, whose calmness and agitation were equally confusing and
unintelligible. "We shall, of course, always be happy to see Mr. Vincent
in Grange Lane," she concluded, with a somewhat stately courtesy. He
did not look at her; he was looking at the other, whose eyes were fixed
upon his face. Between these eyes Lady Western, much amazed, could
perceive a secret communication passing. What could it mean? The
consciousness of this mystery between them which she did not know,
annoyed her, notwithstanding her sweet temper. She withdrew her hand
instinctively from Mrs. Hilyard's, which she had taken in momentary
enthusiasm, and watched their looks of intelligence with half-offended
eyes.

"Yes," said the needlewoman, speaking with her eyes fixed upon Vincent,
though she did not address him, and making a desperate effort after her
usual manner; "I do not think Back Grove Street will do any longer. One
may as well take advantage of the accident which has brought our family
affairs before the world to come alive again. It is a thing one must do
sooner or later. So, if your carriage is close, Alice, I will go home
with you. I shall miss Salem," said the audacious woman, "though you are
so much less sure about doing good than you used to be, Mr. Vincent. If
my soul happens to be saved, however," she continued, with a strange
softening of her fixed and gleaming eyes--"if that is of much
importance, or has any merit in it--you will have had some share in the
achievement. You will?" She said the words with a keen sharpness of
interrogation, much unlike their more obvious meaning. "You will," she
repeated again, more softly--"you will!" Her thin hands came together
for a moment in a clasp of mute supplication; her eyes, always hitherto
looking down upon him from heights of dark knowledge and experience,
looked up in his face with an anguish of entreaty which startled
Vincent. Just at that moment the sounds in the street grew louder, and a
voice of authority was audible ordering some one to clear the way. Mrs.
Hilyard did not speak, but she put out her hand and touched Lady
Western's shawl, lifting its long fringes, and twisting them round those
fingers on which the marks of her long labour were still visible. She
withdrew as she did this her eyes from his face. Her fate was absolutely
in his hands.

"Ladies," said Vincent, hoarsely, after vainly trying to clear his
agitated voice, "it is better you should leave this place at once. I
will see you to your carriage. If I do wrong, the consequences will fall
hardest on me. Don't say anything; either way, talking will do little
good. You are her shield and defence," he said, looking at Lady Western,
with an excitement which he could not quite keep under. "When she
touches you, she becomes sacred. You will keep her safe--safe? you will
not let her go?"

"Yes; I will keep her safe," said the beauty, opening her lovely
astonished eyes. "Is she in danger? Oh, Mr. Vincent, your trouble has
been too much for you! remember your sister is safe now."

"Is she?" said the minister; he was bitter in his heart, even though
that hand was once more laid on his arm, "Safe!--with a broken heart and
a ruined life; but what does that matter? It is all we are good for;
though we may go mad and die."

"Oh, not you! not you!" said Lady Western, gazing at him with the
tenderest pity in her sweet eyes. "You must not say so; I should be so
unhappy." Her beautiful hand pressed his arm with the lightest momentary
pressure. She could not help herself; to see suffering and not to do
what was in her to soothe it was not possible to her soft heart.
Whatever harm that temporary opiate might do, nothing in the world could
have prevented her gentle kindness from administering it. She went down
the humble stairs leaning on his arm, with Mrs. Hilyard following close.
The young man put aside the little crowd he himself had collected, and
put them in the carriage. He saw them drive away with a kind of
despairing exaltation and excitement, and turned to the difficulties
which remained to him--to explain himself and send the tardy ministers
of justice away. He explained, as he best could, that he had been
mistaken, and once more emptied his scanty purse, where there was now
little enough left. When he had got rid of the disappointed group about
the door, he went home slowly in the reaction of his violence and haste.
Susan was safe; was she safe? delivered from this dreadful
accusation--allowed to drop back at least with her broken heart into the
deep silences of privacy and uninvadable domestic life. Well, it was a
mercy, a great mercy, though he could not realise it. He went home
slowly, tingling with the strain of these strange hours; was it Sunday
still? was it only an hour ago that Salem had thrilled to the discourse
in which his passion and despair had found vent? Vincent neither
comprehended himself nor the hours, full of strange fate, which were
gliding over him. He went home exhausted, as if with a great conflict;
conscious of some relief in his heart, but half unwilling to confess to
it, or to realise the means by which it had dawned upon him.




CHAPTER IX.


WHEN Vincent entered the house, the sensation of quiet in it struck him
with a vague consolation which he could scarcely explain. Perhaps only
because it was Sunday, but there was no reproachful landlady, no
distracting sound from above--all quiet, Sunday leisure, Sunday decorum,
as of old. When he went up hurriedly to his sitting-room, he found two
letters lying on his table--one a telegraphic despatch from Dover, the
other a dainty little note, which he opened as a man opens the first
written communication he receives from the woman of all women. He knew
what was in it; but he read it as eagerly as if he expected to find
something new in the mild little epistle, with its gentle attempt at
congratulation. The news was true. Either remorse had seized upon
Mildmay in the prospect of death, or the lingering traditions of honour
in his heart had asserted themselves on Susan's behalf. He had declared
her entirely innocent; he had even gone farther, he had sworn that it
was only as the companion of his daughter that Susan had accompanied
them, and as such that he had treated her. The deposition taken by the
magistrates was sent to Vincent in an abridged form, but what it
conveyed was clear beyond dispute. So far as the words of this
apparently dying man could be received, Susan was spotless--without
blood on her hand, or speck upon her good fame. The lesser and the
greater guilt were both cleared from that young head which had not been
strong enough to wait for this vindication. Though he said, Thank God,
from the bottom of his heart, an unspeakable bitterness filled Vincent's
soul as he read. Here was a deliverance, full, lavish, unlooked for; but
who could tell that the poor girl, crazed with misery, would ever be any
the better for it? who could tell whether this vindication might be of
any further use than to lighten the cloud upon Susan's grave?

With this thought in his mind he went to the sick-room, where everything
seemed quiet, not quite sure that his mother, absorbed as she was in
Susan's present danger, could be able to realise the wonderful
deliverance which had come to them. But matters were changed there as
elsewhere. Between the door and the bed on which Susan lay, a large
folding-screen had been set up, and in the darkened space between this
and the door sat Mrs. Vincent, with Dr. Rider and his wife on each side,
evidently persuading and arguing with her on some point which she was
reluctant to yield to them. They were talking in whispers under their
breath, and a certain air of stillness, of calm and repose, which
Vincent could scarcely comprehend, was in the hushed room.

"I assure you, on my word," said Dr. Rider, lifting his eyes as Vincent
opened the door, and beckoning him softly to come in, "that this change
is more than I dared hope for. The chances are she will wake up out of
danger. Nothing can be done for her but to keep her perfectly quiet; and
my wife will watch, if you will rest;--for our patient's sake!" said the
anxious doctor, still motioning Vincent forward, and appealing to him
with his eyes.

"Mr. Vincent has something to tell you," said the quick little woman,
impetuous even in her whisper, who was Dr. Rider's wife. "He must not
come and talk here. He might wake her. Take him away. Edward, take them
both away. Mrs. Vincent, you must go and hear what he has to say."

"Oh, Arthur! my dear boy," cried his mother, looking up to him with
moist eyes. "It is I who have something to tell. My child is perhaps to
get well, Arthur. Oh! my own boy, after all, she is going to get better.
We shall have Susan again. Hush! doctor, please let me go back again;
something stirred-- I think something stirred; and perhaps she might want
something, and the nurse would not observe. Tired?--no, no; I am not
tired. I have always watched them when they were ill, all their lives.
They never had any nurse in sickness but their mother. Arthur, you know
I am not tired. Oh! doctor, perhaps you would order something while he
is here, for my son; he has been agitated and anxious, and he is not so
strong--not nearly so strong as I am; but, my dear," said the widow,
looking up in her son's face with a wistful eagerness, "when Susan gets
better, all will be--well."

She said the last words with a trembling, prolonged sigh. Poor mother,
in that very moment she had recalled almost for the first time how far
from well everything would be. Her face darkened over piteously as she
spoke. She rose up, stung into new energy by this dreadful thought,
which had been hitherto mercifully obscured by Susan's danger. "Let me
go back--don't say anything. Nobody can watch my child but me," said the
heartbroken woman; and once more she looked in her son's face. She
wanted to read there what had happened--to ascertain from him, without
any one else being the wiser, all the dreadful particulars which now, in
the first relief of Susan's recovery, had burst into sudden shape upon
her sight. "Doctor, we will not detain you; her brother and I will watch
my child," said Mrs. Vincent. The light forsook her eyes as she rose in
that new and darker depth of anxiety; her little figure tottered trying
to stand as she held out her hand to her son. "You and me--only you and
me, Arthur--we must never leave her; though everybody is so kind----"
said the minister's mother, turning with her smile of martyrdom, though
her eyes were blind and she could not see them, to Dr. Rider and his
wife.

Vincent took his mother's hands and put her tenderly back in her chair.
"I have good news, too," he said; "all will be well, mother dear. This
man who has wrought us so much trouble is not dead. I told you, but you
did not understand it; and he declares that Susan----"

"Arthur!" cried Mrs. Vincent, with a sharp outcry of alarm and
remonstrance. "Oh, God forgive me! I shall wake my child. Arthur! The
doctor is very good," added the widow, looking round upon them always
with the instinct of conciliating Arthur's friends; "and so is Mrs.
Rider; but every family has its private affairs," she concluded, with a
wistful, deprecating smile, all the time making signs to Arthur to stop
him in his indiscreet revelations. "My dear, you will tell me presently
when we are alone."

"Ah, mother," said Vincent, with a suppressed groan, "there is nothing
private now in our family affairs. Hush! listen-- Susan is cleared; he
swears she had nothing to do with it; he swears that she was his
daughter's companion only. Mother! Good heavens! doctor, what has
happened? She looks as if she were dying. Mother! What have I done? I
have killed her with my good news."

"Hush, hush--she has fainted--all will come right; let us get her away,"
cried Dr. Rider under his breath. Between them the two young men carried
her out of the room, which Mrs. Rider closed after them with a certain
triumph. The widow was not in so deep a faint but the fresher air
outside and the motion revived her. It was more a sudden failing of her
faculties in the height of emotion than actual insensibility. She made a
feeble effort to resist and return into Susan's room. "You will wake
her," said Dr. Rider in her ear; and the poor mother sank back in their
arms, fixing her wistful misty eyes, in which everything swam, upon her
son. Her lips moved as she looked at him, though he could not hear her
say a word; but the expression in her face, half awakened only from the
incomprehension of her swoon, was not to be mistaken or resisted.
Vincent bent down over her, and repeated what he had said as he carried
her to another room. "Susan is safe--Susan is innocent. It is all over;
mother, you understand me?" he said, repeating it again and again. Mrs.
Vincent leaned back upon his shoulder with a yielding of all her
fatigued frame and worn-out mind. She understood him, not with her
understanding as yet, but with her heart, which melted into unspeakable
relief and comfort without knowing why. She closed her eyes in that
wonderful consciousness of some great mercy that had happened to her;
the first time she had closed them voluntarily for many nights and days.
When they laid her down on the bed which had been hurriedly prepared for
her, her eyes were still closed, and tears stealing softly out under the
lids. She could not break out into expressions of thankfulness--the joy
went to her heart.

Dr. Rider thought it judicious to leave her so, and retired from the
bedside with Vincent, not without some anxious curiosity in his own mind
to hear all "the rights" of the matter. Perhaps the hum of their voices,
quietly though they spoke, aroused her from her trance of silent
gratitude. When she called Arthur faintly, and when they both hurried to
her, Mrs. Vincent was sitting up in her bed wiping off the tears from
her cheeks. "Arthur dear," said the widow, "I am quite sure Dr. Rider
will understand that what he has heard is in the strictest confidence;
for to be sure," she continued, with a faint smile breaking over her wan
face, "nobody could have any doubt about my Susan. It only had to be
set right--and I knew when my son came home he would set it right,"
said Mrs. Vincent, looking full in Dr. Rider's face. "It has all
happened because I had not my wits about me as I ought to have had, and
was not used to act for myself; but when my son came back-- Arthur, my
own boy, it was all my fault, but I knew you would set it right--and as
for my Susan, nobody could have any doubt; and you will both forgive
your poor mother. I don't mind saying this before the doctor," she
repeated again once more, looking in his face; "because he has seen us
in all our trouble, and I am sure we may trust Dr. Rider; but, my dear,
you know our private affairs are not to be talked of before
strangers--especially," said the widow, with a long trembling sigh of
relief and comfort, "when God has been so good to us, and all is to be
well."

The two young men looked at each other in silence with a certain awe.
All the dreadful interval which had passed between this Sunday afternoon
and the day of Susan's return, had been a blank to Mrs. Vincent so far
as the outer world was concerned. Her daughter's illness and danger had
rapt her altogether out of ordinary life. She took up her burden only
where it had dropped off from her in the consuming anxiety for Susan's
life and reason, in which all other fears had been lost. Just at the
point where she had forgotten it, where she had still faced the world
with the despairing assumption that all would be right when Arthur
returned, she bethought herself now of that frightful shadow which had
never been revealed in its full horror to her eyes. Now that Arthur's
assurance relieved her heart of that, the widow took up her old position
instinctively. She knew nothing of the comments in the newspapers, the
vulgar publicity to which poor Susan's story had come. She wanted to
impress upon Dr. Rider's mind, by way of making up for her son's
imprudence, that he was specially trusted, and that she did not mind
speaking before him because he had seen all their trouble. Such was the
poor mother's idea as she sat upon the bed where they had carried her,
wiping the tears of joy from her wan and worn face. She forgot all the
weary days that had come and gone. She took up the story just at the
point where she, after all her martyrdom and strenuous upholding of
Arthur's cause, had suddenly sunk into Susan's sick-room and left it.
Now she reappeared with Arthur's banner once more in her hands--always
strong in that assumption that nobody could doubt as to Susan, and that
Arthur had but to come home to set all right. Dr. Rider held up his
warning finger when he saw Vincent about to speak. This delusion was
salvation to the widow.

"But I must go back to Susan, doctor," said Mrs. Vincent. "If she should
wake and find a stranger there!--though Mrs. Rider is so kind. But I am
much stronger than I look--watching never does me any harm; and now that
my mind is easy-- People don't require much sleep at my time of life.
And, Arthur, when my dear child sees me, she will know that all is
well--all is well," repeated the widow, with trembling lips. "I must go
to Susan, doctor; think if she should wake!"

"But she must not wake," said Dr. Rider; "and if you stay quietly here
she will not wake, for my wife will keep everything still. You will have
a great deal to do for her when she is awake and conscious. Now you must
rest."

"I shall have a great deal to do for her? Dr. Rider means she will want
nursing, Arthur," said Mrs. Vincent, "after such an illness; but she
might miss me even in her sleep, or she might----"

"Mother, you must rest, for Susan's sake; if you make yourself ill, who
will be able to take care of her?" said Vincent, who felt her hand
tremble in his, and saw with how much difficulty she sustained the
nervous shivering of her frame. She looked up into his face with those
anxious eyes which strove to read his without being able to comprehend
all the meanings there. Then the widow turned with a feminine artifice
to Dr. Rider.

"Doctor, if you will bring me word that my child is still asleep--if you
will tell me exactly what you think, and that she is going on well,"
said Mrs. Vincent; "you are always so kind. Oh, Arthur, my dear boy,"
cried the widow, taking his hand and caressing it between her own, "now
that he is gone, tell me. Is it quite true?--is all well again? but you
must never bring in Susan's name. Nobody must have it in their power to
say a word about your sister, Arthur dear. And, oh, I hope you have been
prudent and not said anything among your people. Hush! he will be coming
back; is it quite true, Arthur? Tell me that my dear child has come
safe out of it all, and nothing has happened. Tell me! Oh, speak to me,
Arthur dear!"

"It is quite true," said Vincent, meeting his mothers eyes with a
strange blending of pity and thankfulness. He did not say enough to
satisfy her. She drew him closer, looking wistfully into his face. The
winter afternoon was darkening, the room was cold, the atmosphere
dreary. The widow held her son close, and fixed upon him her anxious
inquiring eyes. "It is quite true, Arthur! There is nothing behind that
you are hiding from me?" she said, with her lips almost touching his
cheek, and her wistful eyes searching his meaning. "Oh, my dear boy,
don't hide anything from me. I am able to bear it, Arthur. Whatever it
is, I ought to know."

"What I have told you is the simple truth, mother," said Vincent, not
without a pang. "He has made a declaration before the magistrates----"

Mrs. Vincent started so much that the bed on which she sat shook.
"Before the magistrates!" she said, with a faint cry. Then after a
pause--"But, thank God, it is not here, Arthur, nor at Lonsdale, nor
anywhere where we are known. And he said that--that--he had never harmed
my child? Oh, Arthur, Arthur--your sister!--that she should ever be
spoken of so! And he was not killed? I do not understand it, my dear. I
cannot see all the rights of it; but it is a great comfort to have you
to myself for a moment, and to feel as if perhaps things might come
right again. Hush! I think the doctor must be coming. Speak very low.
My dear boy, you don't mean it, but you are imprudent; and, oh, Arthur,
with a troublesome flock like yours you must not commit yourself! You
must not let your sister's name be talked of among the people. Hush,
hush, I hear the doctor at the door."

And the widow put her son away from her, and leant her head upon her
hands instead of on his shoulder. She would not even let the doctor
suppose that she had seized that moment to inquire further, or that she
was anything but sure and confident that all was going well.

"She is in the most beautiful sleep," said the enthusiastic doctor, "and
Nettie is by her. Now, Mrs. Vincent, here is something you must take;
and when you wake up again I will take you to your daughter, and I have
very little doubt you will find her on the fair way for
recovery--recovery in every sense," added Dr. Rider, incautiously;
"twice saved--and I hope you will have no more of such uneasiness as you
have suffered on her behalf."

"Indeed, I have had very little uneasiness with my children," said Mrs.
Vincent, drawing up her little figure on the bed. "Susan never had a
severe illness before. When she came here first she was suffering from
a--a bad fright, doctor. I told you so at the time; and I was so weak
and so alarmed, Arthur dear, that I fear Dr. Rider has misunderstood me.
When one is not much used to illness," said the mother, with her
pathetic jesuitry, "one thinks there never was anything so bad as one's
own case, and I was foolish and upset. Yes, I will take it, doctor. Now
that I am easy in my mind, I will take anything you please; and you will
let me know if she wakes, or if she stirs. Whatever happens, you will
let me know that moment? Arthur, you will see that they let me know."

The doctor promised, anxiously putting the draught into her hands: he
would have promised any impossible thing at the moment, so eager was he
to get her persuaded to rest.

"I have not talked so much for-- I wonder how long it is?" said the
widow, with a faint smile. "Oh, Arthur dear, I feel as if somehow a
millstone had been on my heart, and God had taken it off. Doctor, it
is--it is--all your doing, under Providence," said the little woman,
looking full in his face. Perhaps she believed it--at least she meant
him to believe so. She swallowed the draught he gave her with that smile
upon her face, and laid down her throbbing head in the quietness and
darkness. "Go with the doctor, Arthur dear," she said, denying the
yearning in her heart to question her son farther, lest Dr. Rider might
perhaps suppose all was not so well as she said; "and, oh be sure to
tell me the very moment that Susan wakes?" She watched them gliding
noiselessly out of the room, two dark figures, in the darkness. She lay
down alone, throbbing all over with thrills of pain, which were half
pleasure. She began to be conscious again of her own body and life; and
the wistful curiosity that possessed her was not strong enough to
neutralise the positive unmistakable joy. Susan was recovering. Susan
was innocent. What trouble could there be heavy enough to take away the
comfort out of words like these!

"Now she will sleep. Mr. Vincent, I congratulate you on having such pure
blood in your veins; not robust, you know, but far better--such sweet,
perfect health as one rarely meets with nowadays," said the doctor,
under his breath, with professional enthusiasm; "all the better for your
sister that she came of such a stock. My wife, now, is another
example--not robust, as I say--natures delicately organised, but in such
exquisite adjustment, and with such elasticity! Mrs. Vincent will go to
sleep like a baby, and wake able for--anything that God may please to
send her," said Dr. Rider with reverence. "They will both sleep till
to-morrow if all goes well. Hush!-- Well, I may be absurd, for neither of
them could hear us here; but still it is best to err on the safe side."

"But Susan--you are not deceiving us--Susan is----" said Vincent, with
sudden alarm.

"She is asleep," said Dr. Rider; "and, if I can, I will remain till she
wakes; it is life or death."

They parted thus--the doctor to the little room below-stairs, where
Vincent's dinner awaited him, and the young minister himself to his own
room, where he went into the darkness with a kind of bewildered
uncertainty and incomprehension of the events about him. To think that
this day, with all its strange encounters and unexpected incidents, was
Sunday, as he suddenly remembered it to be--that this morning he had
preached, and this evening had to preach again, completed in Vincent's
mind the utter chaos and disturbance of ordinary life. It struck him
dumb to remember that by-and-by he must again ascend the pulpit, and go
through all his duties. Was he an impostor, doing all this mechanically?
He debated the question dully in his own mind, as he sat too much
bewildered to do anything else in the dark in his bed-chamber, pondering
with a certain confused gravity and consolation over all that had
happened. But faculties, which are confused by sudden comfort and
relief, are very different from faculties obscured and confounded by
suffering. He sat vaguely in the dark, wondering over his strange
position. This morning, even in the height of his despair, he had at
least some idea what he was going to do in that pulpit of Salem. It was
a sacrifice--a martyrdom to accomplish--a wild outcry and complaint to
pour forth to the world. This evening he sat wasting the precious
moments in the soft darkness, without knowing a word of what he was to
say--without being able to realise the fact, that by-and-by he should
have to go out through the sharp air echoing with church-bells--to see
once more all those watchful faces turned upon him, and to communicate
such instruction as was in him to his flock. A sense of exhaustion and
satisfaction was in Vincent's heart. He sat listless in a vague comfort
and weariness, his head throbbing with the fumes of his past excitement,
yet not aching. It was only now that he realised the rolling off from
his head of this dark cloud of horror and shame. Susan was
recovering--Susan was innocent. He became aware of the facts much in the
same way as his mother became aware of them ere she dropped to sleep in
the blessed darkness of the adjoining room. Confused as he was, with his
brain still full of the pulsations of the past, he was so far conscious
of what had happened. He sat in his reverie, regardless of the time, and
everything else that he ought to have attended to. The little maid came
and knocked at his door to say his dinner had been waiting for an hour,
and he answered, "Yes; he was coming," but sat still in the darkness.
Then the landlady herself, compunctious, beginning to feel the thrills
of returning comfort which had entered her house, came tapping softly to
say it was near six, and wouldn't Mr. Vincent take something before it
was time for chapel? Mr. Vincent said "Yes" again, but did not move; and
it was only when he heard the church-bells tingling into the night air
that he got up at last, and, stealing first to the door of Susan's room,
where he ascertained that she still slept, and then to his mother's,
where he could hear her soft regular breathing in the darkness, he went
away in an indescribably exalted condition of mind to Salem and his
duty. There is a kind of weakness incident to excitement of mind and
neglect of body, which is akin to the ecstatic state in which men dream
dreams and see visions. Vincent was in that condition to-night. He was
not careful what anybody would say or think; he no longer pictured to
himself the up-turned faces in Salem, all conscious of the tragedy which
was connected with his name. The sense of deliverance in his heart
emancipated him, and gave a contrary impulse to his thoughts. In the
weakness of an excited and exhausted frame, a certain gleam of the
ineffable and miraculous came over the young man. He was again in the
world where God stoops down to change with one touch of His finger the
whole current of man's life--the world of childhood, of genius, of
faith; that other world, dark sphere of necessity and fate, where
nothing could stay the development into dread immortality of the
obstinate human intelligence, and where dreary echoes of speculation
still questioned whether any change were possible in heart and spirit,
or if saving souls were a mere figure of speech, floated away far off
over his head, a dark fiction of despair. In this state of mind he went
back to the pulpit where, in the morning, he had thrilled his audience
with all those wild complications of thought which end in nothing. Salem
was again crowded--not a corner of the chapel remained unfilled; and
again, many of the more zealous members were driven out of their seats
by the influx of the crowd. Vincent, who had no sermon to preach, and
nothing except the fulness that was in his heart to say, took up again
his subject of the morning. He told his audience with the unpremeditated
skill of a natural orator, that while Reason considered all the
desperate chances, and concluded that wonderful work impossible, God,
with the lifting of His countenance, with the touch of His power, made
the darkness light before Him, and changed the very earth and heavens
around the wondering soul. Lifted out of the region of reasonableness
himself, he explained to his astonished audience how Reason halts in her
conclusions, how miracle and wonder are of all occurrences the most
natural, and how, between God and man, there are no boundaries of
possibility. It was a strange sermon, without any text or divisions,
irregular in its form, sometimes broken in its utterance; but the man
who spoke was in a "rapture"--a state of fasting and ecstasy. He saw
indistinctly that there were glistening eyes in the crowd, and felt what
was somewhat an unusual consciousness--that his heart had made
communications to other hearts in his audience almost without his
knowing it; but he did not observe that nobody came to the vestry to
congratulate him, that Tozer looked disturbed, and that the deacons
averted their benign countenances. When he had done his work, he went
home without waiting to talk to anybody--without, indeed, thinking any
more of Salem--through the crowd, in the darkness, passing group after
group in earnest discussion of the minister. He went back still in that
exalted condition of mind, unaware that he passed Mrs. Tozer and
Phoebe, who were much disposed to join him--and was in his own house
sooner than most of his congregation. All within was quiet, lost in the
most grateful and profound stillness. Sleep seemed to brood over the
delivered house. Vincent spoke to the doctor, who still waited, and
whose hopes were rising higher and higher, and then ate something, and
said his prayers, and went to rest like a child. The family, so worn out
with labour, and trial, and sorrow, slept profoundly under the quiet
stars. Those hard heavens, from which an indifferent God saw the
Innocents murdered and made no sign, had melted into the sweet natural
firmament, above which the great Father watches unwearied. The sudden
change was more than mere deliverance to the young Nonconformist. He
slept and took rest in the sweet surprise and thankfulness of his soul.
His life and heart, still young and incapable of despair, had got back
out of hard anguishes and miseries which no one could soften, to the
sweet miraculous world in which circumstances are always changing, and
God interferes for ever.




CHAPTER X.


WHEN Vincent awoke next morning, his mother was standing by his bedside.
Her eyes were dewy and moist, a faint tinge of colour was on her sweet
old cheek, and her steps tottered a little as she came up to his bed,
and stooped to kiss him. "Oh, Arthur, my dear boy, she knows me!" said
Mrs. Vincent, putting up her hand to her eyes. "I must not be away from
her a moment, but I could not resist coming to tell you. She knows me,
dear. Make haste and dress, and come and see your sister, Arthur; and I
will give orders about your breakfast as I go back. My dear, I know you
have been anxious," said the widow, putting back his hair fondly with
the soft little hand which still trembled; "though men have not the way
of showing it, I know you have been very anxious. You looked quite pale
and thin as you slept. But I must speak to the landlady now and see
about your food. Come to Susan's room as soon as you are dressed, and I
will order your breakfast, my dear boy," said his mother, going softly
out again, with her tender little figure all beautified and trembling
with joy. Mrs. Vincent met the landlady near the door, and stopped to
speak to her. "My daughter is a great deal better," said the minister's
mother. "I have been so anxious, I have never been able to thank you as
I ought to have done for your kindness and attention. We have been as
quiet as if we had been at home. We will all remember your attention,
though I have never been able to thank you before; and I am sure it is
very gratifying to my son to think it is one of his own flock who has
taken so much pains for us. Mr. Vincent has been very anxious about his
sister," continued the widow; "I fear he has not been taking his food,
nor keeping his regular time for meals. You would oblige me very much if
you would try to have something nice for his breakfast. We were all much
shaken yesterday, being so anxious;--some new-laid eggs perhaps--though
I know they are scarce in a town at this time of the year--or anything
you can think of that will tempt him to eat. I would not say so much,"
said Mrs. Vincent, smiling upon the astonished landlady, and leaning to
support her own weakness on the rail of the passage upon which the
staircase opened, "but that I know your kind interest in your minister.
I am sure you will take all the pains you can to get him to attend to
his precious health. Thank you. I am very much obliged."

With this the little woman passed on, feeling indeed too weak to stand
longer; and leaving the landlady, who had intended to mingle some
statement of her own grievances with her congratulations, with the plea
quietly taken out of her hands, and the entire matter disposed of. Mrs.
Vincent was moving back again to the sick-room, when the door opened
down-stairs, and some one asked for Mr. Vincent, and came up hurriedly.
The minister's mother recognised Tozer's voice, and made a pause. She
was glad of the opportunity to make sure that all was well in the flock.
She leant over the railing to shake hands with the butterman, moved to a
little effusion of thankfulness by the recollection of the state of
anxiety she was in when she saw him last.

"My son is not up yet," she said. "We were very anxious yesterday. It
was the crisis of the fever, and everything depended upon it. I daresay
you would see how anxious Mr. Vincent was; but, thank heaven, now all is
going on well."

"You see, ma'am," said Tozer, "it must have all been on the nerves, and
to be sure there ain't nothing more likely to be serviceable than good
news. It's in the paper this morning. As soon as I see it, I said to my
missis, 'This is why the minister was so pecooliar yesterday.' I divined
it in a moment, ma'am; though it wasn't to say prudent, Mrs. Vincent,
and not as you would have advised no more nor myself, to fly off like
that out of chapel, without as much as shaking hands with one o' the
deacons. But I make allowances, I do; and when I see it in the paper, I
said to my missis, 'It's all along o' this Mr. Vincent was so queer.' I
don't doubt as it'll be quite looked over, and thought no more of, when
it's known what's the news."

"What news?" said Mrs. Vincent, faintly, holding fast by the railing.
"You mean the news of my dear child's recovery," she added, after a
breathless pause. "Have they put it in the papers? I am sure it is very
good, but I never heard of such a thing before. She has been very ill
to be sure--but most people are very ill once in their lives," said the
widow, gasping a little for breath, and fixing her eyes upon the paper
which Tozer held in his hand.

"Poor soul!" said the deacon, compassionately, "it ain't no wonder,
considering all things. Phoebe would have come the very first day to
say, Could she be of any use? but her mother wasn't agreeable. Women has
their own ways of managing; but they'll both come to-day, now all's
cleared up, if you'll excuse me. And now, ma'am, I'll go on to the
minister, and see if there's anything as he'd like me to do, for Pigeon
and the rest was put out, there's no denying of it; but if things is set
straight directly, what with this news, and what with them sermons
yesterday, I don't think as it'll do no harm. I said to him, as this
Sunday was half the battle," said the worthy butterman, reflectively;
"and he did his best-- I wouldn't say as he didn't do his best; and I'm
not the man as will forsake my pastor when he's in trouble.
Good-morning, ma'am; and my best respects to miss, and I hope as she'll
soon be well again. There ain't no man as could rejoice more nor me at
this news."

Tozer went on to Vincent's room, at the door of which the minister had
appeared summoning him with some impatience and anxiety. "News? what
news?" said Mrs. Vincent, faintly to herself, as she held by the rail
and felt the light forsaking her eyes in a new mist of sudden dread. She
caught the look of the landlady at that moment, a look of half-pity,
curiosity, and knowledge, which startled her back to her defences. With
sudden firmness she gathered herself together, and went on to the
sick-room, leaving behind her, as she closed the door, the whole
troubled world, which seemed to know better about her most intimate
affairs than she did; and those newspapers, which somehow mentioned
Susan's name, that sweet maiden name which it was desecration to see so
much as named in print. Rather the widow carried that uneasy world in
with her to the sick-room which she had left a few minutes before in all
the effusion of unhoped-for joy. Everything still was not well though
Susan was getting better. She sat down by the bedside where Susan lay
languid and pale, showing the change in her by little more than
quietness and a faint recognition of her mother, and in her troubled
heart began to look the new state of affairs in the face, and to make up
her mind that more of the causes of Susan's illness than she had
supposed known, must have become public. And then Arthur and his flock,
that flock which he evidently had somehow affronted on the previous day.
Mrs. Vincent pondered with all the natural distrust of a woman over
Arthur's imprudence. She almost chafed at her necessary confinement by
her daughter's bedside; if she herself, who had been a minister's wife
for thirty years, and knew the ways of a congregation, and how it must
be managed, could only get into the field to bring her son out of the
difficult passages which she had no faith in his own power to steer
through! So the poor mother experienced how, when absorbing grief is
removed, a host of complicated anxieties hasten in to fill up its
place. She was no longer bowed down under an overwhelming dread, but she
was consumed by restless desires to be doing--cravings to know
all--fears for what might at the moment be happening out of her range
and influence. What might Arthur, always incautious, be confiding to
Tozer even now?--perhaps telling him those "private affairs" which the
widow would have defended against exposure with her very life--perhaps
chafing at Salem and rejecting that yoke which, being a minister, he
must bear. It was all Mrs. Vincent could do to keep herself still on her
chair, and to maintain that quietness which was necessary for Susan. If
only she could have been there to soften his impatience and make the
best of his unnecessary confidences! Many a time before this, the widow
had been compelled to submit to that female tribulation--to be shut up
apart, and leave the great events outside to be transacted by those
incautious masculine hands, in which, at the bottom of her heart, a
woman seldom has perfect confidence when her own supervising influence
is withdrawn. Mrs. Vincent felt instinctively that Arthur would commit
himself as she sat resigned but troubled by Susan's bed.

Tozer went directly to the door of Vincent's room, where the minister,
only half-dressed, but much alarmed to see the colloquy which was going
on between his mother and the butterman, was waiting for him. The deacon
squeezed the young man's hand with a hearty pressure. His aspect was so
fatherly and confidential, that it brought back to the mind of the young
Nonconformist a certain rueful half-comic recollection of the suppers
in the back parlour, and all the old troubles of the pastor of Salem,
which heavier shadows had driven out of his mind. Tozer held up
triumphantly the paper in his hand.

"You've seen it, sir?" said the butterman; "first thing I did this
morning was to look up whether there wasn't nothing about it in the
latest intelligence; for the 'Gazette' has been very particular,
knowing, at Carlingford, folks would be interested--and here it is sure
enough, Mr. Vincent; and we nigh gave three cheers, me and the lads in
the shop."

To this Vincent listened with a darkening brow and an impatience which
he did not attempt to conceal. He took the paper with again that quick
sense of the intolerable which prompted him to tear the innocent
broadsheet in pieces and tread it under foot. The 'Gazette' contained,
with a heading in large characters, the following paragraph:--

"THE DOVER TRAGEDY.

"Our reader will be glad to hear that the unfortunate young lady whose
name has been so unhappily mixed up in this mysterious affair, is likely
to be fully exonerated from the charge rashly brought against her. In
the deposition of the wounded man, which was taken late on Saturday
night, by Mr. Everett, the stipendiary magistrate of Dover, he
distinctly declares that Miss---- was not the party who fired the
pistol, nor in any way connected with it--that she had accompanied his
daughter merely as companion on a hasty journey, and that, in short,
instead of the romantic connection supposed to subsist between the
parties, with all the passions of love and revenge naturally involved,
the ties between them were of the simplest and most temporary character.
We are grieved to add, that the fright and horror of her awful position
had overpowered Miss---- some time before this deposition was made, and
brought on a brain-fever, which, of course, made the unfortunate young
lady, who is understood to possess great personal attractions, quite
unable to explain the suspicious circumstances surrounding her. We have
now only to congratulate her respectable family and friends on her
exoneration from a very shocking charge, and hope her innocence will
soon be confirmed by full legal acquittal. Our readers will find Colonel
Mildmay's deposition on another page. It will be perceived that he
obstinately refuses to indicate who was the real perpetrator of the
deed. Suspicion has been directed to his groom, who accompanied him, in
whom, however, the wounded man seems to repose perfect confidence. He is
still in a precarious state, but little doubt is entertained of his
ultimate recovery."

"There, Mr. Vincent, that's gratifying, that is," said Tozer, as Vincent
laid down the paper; "and I come over directly I see it, to let you
know. And I come to say besides," continued the butterman with some
diffidence, "as I think if you and me was to go off to Mr. Brown the
solicitor, and give him his orders as he was to put in bail for
Miss---- or anything else as might be necessary--not meaning to use no
disagreeable words, as there ain't no occasion now," said the good
deacon; "but only to make it plain, as you and me is responsible for
her, if so be as she was ever to be called for again. It would be the
thing to do, that would, sir, if you take my advice. It ain't altogether
my own notion, but was put into my head by one as knows. The gentleman
as come here from Dover inquiring into the business was the one as
suggested it to me. He turned out uncommon obliging, and wasn't to say
no trouble in the house; and when word came as the Colonel wasn't dead,
he went away as civil as could be. I'll go with you cheerful to Mr.
Brown, if you'll take my advice, afore Mrs. Vincent gets moving about
again, or the young lady knows what's a-going on; that's what I'd do,
sir, if it was me."

Vincent grasped the exultant butterman's hand in an overflow of
gratitude and compunction. "I shall never forget your kindness," he
said, with a little tremor in his voice. "You have been a true friend.
Thank you from the bottom of my heart. I will go at once, and accept
this other great kindness from you. I shall never forget what I owe to
you as long as I live."

"I never was the man to forsake my pastor in trouble--not to say a young
man like you as is a credit to the connection, and the best preacher I
may say as I ever heard in Salem," said Tozer, with effusion, returning
the grasp; "but we ain't a-going a step till you've had your breakfast.
Your good mother, Mrs. Vincent, as is a real lady, sir, and would never
advise you different from what I would myself, being for your own
interests, would have little opinion of me if I took you out on a Monday
mornin' after your labours without so much as a bit o' breakfast to
sustain you. I'll sit by you while you're a-eating of your bacon.
There's a deal to consider of concerning Salem as I couldn't well bring
before you as long as you were in such trouble. Them were uncommon
sermons, sir, yesterday, I don't know as I ever heard anything as was
just to be compared with the mornin' discourse, and most of the flock
was of my opinion; but what is the good of standing up for the pastor--I
ask you candid, Mr. Vincent--when he'll not take no pains to keep things
square? I'm speaking plain, for you can't mistake me as it's anything
but your own interests I am a-thinking of. We was all marching in,
deacons and committee and all, to say as we was grateful to you for your
instructions, and wishing you well out of your trouble--and I was in
great hopes as matters might have been made up--when behold, what we
finds was the vestry empty and the pastor gone! Now, I ain't a-finding
fault. Them news would explain anything; but I don't deny as Pigeon and
the rest was put out; and if you'll be guided by one as wishes you well,
Mr. Vincent, when you've done our business as is most important of all,
you'll go and make some visits, sir, and make yourself agreeable, if
you'll excuse me. It ain't with no selfish thoughts as I speak," said
Tozer, energetically. "It's not like asking of you to come a-visiting to
me, nor setting myself forward as the minister's great friend--though
we was remarking as the pastor was unknown in our house this fortnight
and more--but it's for peace and union, Mr. Vincent, and the good of the
flock, sir, and to keep--as your good mother well knows ain't easy in a
congregation--all things straight."

When this little peroration was delivered, Vincent was seated at table,
making what he could of the breakfast, in which both his mother and
Tozer had interested themselves. It was with a little effort that the
young man accepted this advice as the character and intentions of his
adviser deserved. He swallowed what was unpalatable in the counsel, and
received the suggestion "in as sweet a frame of mind as I could wish to
see," as Tozer afterwards described.

"I will go and make myself agreeable," said the minister, with a smile.
"Thank heaven! it is not so impossible to-day as it might have been
yesterday; I left the chapel so hurriedly, because----"

"I understand, sir," said Tozer, benevolently interposing as Vincent
paused, finding explanation impossible. "Pigeon and the rest was put
out, as I say, more nor I could see was reasonable--not as Pigeon is a
man that knows his own mind. It's the women as want the most managing.
Now, Mr. Vincent, I'm ready, sir, if you are, and we won't lose no
time."

Before going out, however, Vincent went to his sister's room. She was
lying in an utter quietness which went to his heart;--silent, no longer
uttering the wild fancies of a disordered brain, recovering, as the
doctor thought; but stretched upon her white couch, marble white,
without any inclination apparently to lift the heavy lids of her eyes,
or to notice anything that passed before her--a very sad sight to see.
By her sat her mother, in a very different condition, anxious, looking
into Arthur's eyes, whispering counsels in his ears. "Oh, my dear boy,
be very careful," said Mrs. Vincent; "your dear papa always said that a
minister's flock was his first duty; and now that Susan is getting
better, O Arthur! you must not let people talk about your sister;--and
have patience, O have patience, dear!" This was said in wistful
whispers, with looks which only half confided in Arthur's prudence; and
the widow sank into her chair when he left her, folding her hands in a
little agony of self-restraint and compulsory quietness. She felt equal
for it herself, if she had been at liberty to go out upon the flock once
more in Arthur's cause; but who could tell how he might commit himself,
he who was a young man, and took his own way, and did not know, as Tozer
said, how to keep all things straight? When Mrs. Vincent thought of her
son in personal conflict with Mrs. Pigeon, she lost faith in Arthur. She
herself might have conquered that difficult adversary, but what weapons
had he to bring forth against the deacon's wife, he who was only a
minister and a man?




CHAPTER XI.


"AND now that's settled, as far as we can settle it now," said Tozer, as
they left the magistrate's office, where John Brown, the famous
Carlingford solicitor, had accompanied them, "you'll go and see some of
the chapel folks, Mr. Vincent? It'll be took kind of you to lose no
time, especially if you'd say a word just as it's all over, and let them
know the news is true."

"I will go with you first," said Vincent, who contemplated the
butterman's shop at that moment through a little halo of gratitude and
kindness. He went into the back parlour with the gratified deacon, where
Mrs. Tozer sat reading over again the same 'Gazette' in which poor
Susan's history was summed up and ended. It seemed like a year to
Vincent since he had dined with his mother at this big table, amid the
distant odours of all the bacon and cheese. Mrs. Tozer put down the
paper, and took off her spectacles as her visitor came in. "It's Mr.
Vincent, Phoebe," she said, with a little exclamation. "Dear, dear, I
never thought as the pastor would be such a strange sight in my
house--not as I was meaning nothing unkind, Tozer, so there's no
occasion to look at me. I'm as glad as ever I can be to see the
minister; and what a blessing as it's all settled, and the poor dear
getting well, too. Phoebe, you needn't be a-hiding behind me, child,
as if the pastor was thinking of how you was dressed. She has on her
morning wrapper, Mr. Vincent, as she was helping her mother in, and we
didn't expect no visitors. Don't be standing there, as if it was any
matter to the minister how you was dressed."

"Oh, ma, as if I ever thought of such a thing!" said Phoebe, extending
a pink uncovered arm out of the loose sleeve of her morning dress to
Vincent, and averting her face; "but to see Mr. Vincent is so like old
times--and everything has seemed so different--and it is so pleasant to
feel as if it were all coming back again. Oh ma! to imagine that I ever
supposed Mr. Vincent could notice my dress, or think of poor me!" added
Phoebe, in a postscript under her breath. The minister heard the
latter words quite as well as the first. After he had shaken the pink,
plump hand, he sat down on the opposite side of the table, and saw
Phoebe, relieved against the light of the window, wiping a tender tear
from her eye. All at once out of the darker and heavier trials which had
abstracted him from common life, the young Nonconformist plunged back
into the characteristic troubles of his position. As usual, he made no
response to Phoebe, found nothing civil to say, but turned with
desperation to Mrs. Tozer, who was luckily about to speak.

"Don't pay no attention to her, Mr. Vincent; she's a deal too feelin'.
She oughtn't to be minded, and then she'll learn better," said Mrs.
Tozer. "I am sure it wasn't no wish of ours as you should ever stop
away. If we had been your own relations we couldn't have been more took
up; and where should a minister seek for sympathy if it isn't in his own
flock? There ain't nobody so safe to put your trust in, Mr. Vincent, as
Salem folks. There's a many fine friends a young man may have when he's
in a prosperous way, but it ain't to be supposed they would stand by him
in trouble; and it's then as you find the good of your real friends,"
continued Mrs. Tozer, looking with some significance at her husband.
Tozer, for his own part, rubbed his hands and stationed himself with his
back to the fire, as is the custom of Englishmen of all degrees. The
husband and wife contemplated Vincent with complacence. With the kindest
feelings in the world, they could not altogether restrain a little
triumph. It was impossible now that the minister could mistake who were
his true friends.

But just then, strangely enough, a vision of a tender smile, a glance up
in his face, the touch of a soft hand, came to Vincent's mind. His fine
friends! he had but one, and she had stood by him in his trouble. From
Tozer's complacence the minister's mind went off with a bound of relief
to that sweet, fruitless sympathy which was dearer than help. From her
soft perfumy presence to Mrs. Tozer's parlour, with that pervading
consciousness in it of the shop hard by and its store of provisions,
what a wonderful difference! It was not so easy to be grateful as he had
at first thought.

"Mr. Tozer has been my real friend indeed, and a most honest and
thorough one," said Vincent. "But I don't think I have any other in
Salem so sure and steady," added the minister, after a little pause,
half gratefully, half in bitterness. This sentiment was not, however,
resented by the assembled family. Phoebe leaned over her mother's
chair, and whispered, "Oh, ma, dear! didn't I always say he was full of
feeling?" somewhat to the discomfiture of the person commented on; while
Tozer himself beamed upon the minister from before the blazing fire.

"I said as we'd pull you through," said Tozer, "and I said as I'd stand
by you; and both I'll do, sir, you take my word, if you'll but stick to
your duty; and as for standing bail in a hundred pound or two,"
continued the butterman, magnanimously, "for a poor young creature as
couldn't be nothing but innocent, I don't mind that, nor a deal more
than that, to keep all things straight. It's nothing but my duty. When a
man is a responsible man, and well-known in a place, it's his business
to make use of his credit, Mr. Vincent, sir, and his character, for the
good of his friends."

"It may be your duty, but you know there ain't a many as would have done
it," said his straight-forward wife, "as Mr. Vincent sees himself, and
no need for nobody a-telling of him. There ain't a many as would have
stood up for the pastor, right and wrong, and finished off with the
likes of this, and the minister don't need us to say so. Dear, dear, Mr.
Vincent, you ain't a-going away already, and us hasn't so much as seen
you for I can't tell how long? I made sure you'd stop and take a bit of
dinner at least, not making no ceremony," said Mrs. Tozer, "for there's
always enough for a friend, and you can't take us wrong."

Vincent had risen hurriedly to his feet, under the strong stimulant of
the butterman's self-applause. Conscious as he was of all that Tozer had
really done, the minister found it hard to listen and echo, with due
humility and gratitude, the perfect satisfaction of the pair over their
own generosity. He had no thanks to say when thus forestalled. "Oh, ma,
how can you make so much of it?" cried Phoebe. "The minister will
think us so selfish; and, oh, please Mr. Vincent, when you go home, will
you speak to your mother, and ask her to let me come and help with her
nursing? I should do whatever she told me, and try to be a comfort to
her--oh, I should indeed!" said Phoebe, clasping those pink hands.
"Nobody could be more devoted than I should be." She cast down her eyes,
and stood the image of maidenly devotedness between Vincent and the
window. She struck him dumb, as she always did. He never was equal to
the emergency where Phoebe was concerned. He took up his hat in his
hands, and tried to explain lamely how he must go away--how he had
visits to make--duties to do--and would have stuck fast, and lost Mrs.
Tozer's favour finally and for ever, had not the butterman interposed.

"It's me as is to blame," said the worthy deacon. "If it hadn't have
been as the pastor wouldn't pass the door without coming in, I'd not
have had him here to-day; and if you women would think, you'd see.
We're stanch--and Mr. Vincent ain't no call to trouble himself about us;
but Pigeon and them, you see, as went off in a huff yesterday--that's
what the minister has got to do. You shan't be kep' no longer, sir, in
my house. Duty afore pleasure, that's my maxim. Good mornin', and I hope
as you won't meet with no unpleasantness; but if you should, Mr.
Vincent, don't be disheartened, sir--we'll pull you through."

With this encouraging sentiment, Vincent was released from Mrs. Tozer's
parlour. He drew a long breath when he got out to the fresh air in the
street, and faced the idea of the Pigeons and other recusants whom he
was now bound to visit. While he thought of them, all so many varieties
of Mrs. Tozer's parlour, without the kindness which met him there, the
heart of the young Nonconformist failed him. Nothing but gratitude to
Tozer could have sent him forth at all on this mission of conciliation;
but now on the threshold of it, smarting from even Tozer's
well-intentioned patronage, a yearning for a little personal comfort
seized upon Vincent's mind. It was his duty to go away towards Grove
Street, where the poulterer's residence was; but his longing eyes
strayed towards Grange Lane, where consolation dwelt. And, besides, was
it not his duty to watch over the real criminal, for whose mysterious
wickedness poor Susan had suffered? It was not difficult to foresee how
that argument would conclude. He wavered for a few minutes opposite
Masters's shop, gave a furtive glance back towards the butterman's, and
then, starting forward with sudden resolution, took his hasty way to
Lady Western's door; only for a moment; only to see that all was safe,
and his prisoner still in custody. Vincent sighed over the thought with
an involuntary quickening of his heart. To be detained in such custody,
the young man thought, would be sweeter than heaven; and the wild hope
which came and went like a meteor about his path, sprang up with sudden
intensity, and took the breath from his lips, and the colour from his
cheek, as he entered at that green garden door.

Lady Western was by herself in the drawing-room--that room divided in
half by the closed doors which Vincent remembered so well. She rose up
out of the low chair in which she reposed, like some lovely swan amid
billows of dark silken drapery, and held out her beautiful hand to
him--both her beautiful hands--with an effusion of kindness and
sympathy. The poor young Nonconformist took them into his own, and
forgot the very existence of Salem. The sweetness of the moment took all
the sting out of his fate. He looked at her without saying anything,
with his heart in his eyes. Consolation! It was all he had come for. He
could have gone away thereafter and met all the Pigeons in existence;
but more happiness still was in store for him--she pointed to a chair on
the other side of her work-table. There was nobody else near to break
the charm. The silken rustle of her dress, and that faint perfume which
she always had about her, pervaded the rosy atmosphere. Out of
purgatory, out of bitter life beset with trouble, the young man had
leaped for one moment into paradise; and who could wonder that he
resigned himself to the spell?

"I am so glad you have come," said Lady Western. "I am sure you must
have hated me, and everything that recalled my name; but it was
impossible for any one to be more grieved than I was, Mr. Vincent. Now,
will you tell me about Rachel? She sits by herself in her own room. When
I go in she gives me a look of fright which I cannot understand. Fright!
Can you imagine Rachel frightened, Mr. Vincent--and of me!"

"Ah, yes. I would not venture to come into the presence of the angels if
I had guilt on my hands," said Vincent, not very well knowing what he
said.

"Mr. Vincent! what can you mean? You alarm me very much," said the young
Dowager; "but perhaps it is about her little girl. I don't think she
knows where her daughter is. Indeed," said Lady Western, with a cloud on
her beautiful face, "you must not think I ever approved of my brother's
conduct; but when he was so anxious to have his child, I think she might
have given in to him a little--don't you think so? The child might have
done him good perhaps. She is very lovely, I hear. Did you see her? Oh,
Mr. Vincent, tell me about it. I cannot understand how you are connected
with it at all. She trusted in you so much, and now she is afraid of
you. Tell me how it is. Hush! she is ringing her bell. She has seen you
come into the house."

"But I don't want to see Mrs.--Mrs. Mildmay," said Vincent, rising up.
"I don't know why I came at all, if it were not to see the sun shining.
It is dark down below where I am," said the young man, with an
involuntary outburst of the passion which at that moment suddenly
appeared to him in all its unreasonableness. "Forgive me. It was only a
longing I had to see the light."

Lady Western looked up with her sweet eyes in the minister's face. She
was not ignorant of the condition of mind he was in, but she was sorry
for him to the bottom of her heart. To cheer him a little could not harm
any one. "Come back soon," she said, again holding out her hand with a
smile. "I am so sorry for your troubles; and if we can do anything to
comfort you, come back soon again, Mr. Vincent." When the poor
Nonconformist came to himself after these words, he was standing outside
the garden door, out of paradise, his heart throbbing, and his pulse
beating in a kind of sweet delirium. In that very moment of delight he
recognised, with a thrill of exaltation and anguish, the madness of his
dream. No matter. What if his heart broke after? Now, at least, he could
take the consolation. But if it was hard to face Mrs. Pigeon before, it
may well be supposed that it was not easy now, with all this world of
passionate fancies throbbing in his brain, to turn away from his
elevation, and encounter Salem and its irritated deacons. Vincent went
slowly up Grange Lane, trying to make up his mind to his inevitable
duty. When he was nearly opposite the house of Dr. Marjoribanks, he
paused to look back. The garden door was again open, and somebody else
was going into the enchanted house. Somebody else;--a tall slight
figure, in a loose light-coloured dress, which he recognised
instinctively with an agony of jealous rage. A minute before he had
allowed to himself, in an exquisite despair, that to hope was madness;
but the sight of his rival awoke other thoughts in the mind of the
minister. With quick eyes he identified the companion of his midnight
journey--he in whose name all Susan's wretchedness had been wrought--he
whom Lady Western could trust "with life--to death." Vincent went back
at the sight of him, and found the door now close shut, through which
his steps had passed. Close shut--enclosing the other--shutting him out
in the cold external gloom. He forgot all he had to do for himself and
his friends--he forgot his duty, his family, everything in the world but
hopeless love and passionate jealousy, as he turned again to Lady
Western's door.




CHAPTER XII.


THUS while Mrs. Vincent sat in Susan's sick-room, with her mind full of
troubled thoughts, painfully following her son into an imaginary and
unequal conflict with the wife of the rebellious deacon; and while the
Salem congregation in general occupied itself with conjectures how this
internal division could be healed, and what the pastor would do, the
pastor himself was doing the very last thing he ought to have done in
the circumstances--lingering down Grange Lane in the broad daylight with
intent to pass Lady Western's door--that door from which he had himself
emerged a very few minutes before. Why did he turn back and loiter again
along that unprofitable way? He did not venture to ask himself the
question; he only did it in an utterly unreasonable access of jealousy
and rage. If he had been Lady Western's accepted lover instead of the
hopeless worshipper afar off of that bright unattainable creature, he
could still have had no possible right to forbid the entrance of Mr.
Fordham at that garden gate. He went back with a mad, unreasoning
impulse, only excusable in consideration of the excited state of mind
into which so many past events had concurred to throw him. But the door
opened again as he passed it. Instinctively Vincent stood still,
without knowing why. It was not Mr. Fordham who came out. It was a
stealthy figure, which made a tremulous pause at sight of him, and,
uttering a cry of dismay, fixed eyes which still gleamed, but had lost
all their steadiness, upon his face. Vincent felt that he would not have
recognised her anywhere but at this door. Her thin lips, which had once
closed so firmly, and expressed with such distinctness the flying shades
of amusement and ridicule, hung apart loosely, with a perpetual quiver
of hidden emotion. Her face, always dark and colourless, yet bearing
such an unmistakable tone of vigour and strength, was haggard and
ghastly; her once assured and steady step furtive and trembling. She
gave him an appalled look, and uttered a little cry. She shivered as she
looked at him, making desperate vain efforts to recover her composure
and conceal the agitation into which his sudden appearance had thrown
her. But nature at last had triumphed over this woman who had defied her
so long. She had not strength left to accomplish the cheat. "You!" she
cried, with a shrill tone of terror and confusion in her voice, "I did
not look for you!" It was all her quivering lips would say.

The sight of her had roused Vincent. "You were going to escape," he
said. "Do you forget your word? Must I tell her everything, or must I
place you in surer custody? You have broken your word."

"My word! I did not give you my word," she cried, eagerly. "No. I--I
never said--: and," after a pause, "if I had said it, how do you imagine
I was going to escape? Escape! from what? That is the worst--one cannot
escape," said the miserable woman, speaking as if by an uncontrollable
impulse, "never more; especially if one keeps quiet in one place and has
nothing to do," she continued after a pause, recovering herself by
strange gleams now and then for a moment; "that is why I came out, to
escape, as you say, for half an hour, Mr. Vincent. Besides, I don't have
news enough--not nearly enough. How do you think I can keep still when
nobody sends me any news? How long is it since I saw you last? And I
have heard nothing since then--not a syllable! and you expect me to sit
still, because I have given my word? Besides," after another breathless
pause, and another gleam of self-recovery, "the laws of honour don't
extend to women. We are weak, and we are allowed to lie."

"You are speaking wildly," said Vincent, with some compassion and some
horror, putting his hand on her arm to guide her back to the house. Mrs.
Hilyard gave a slight convulsive start, drew away from his touch, and
gazed upon him with an agony of fright and terror in her eyes.

"We agreed that I was to stay with Alice," she said. "You forget I am
staying with Alice: she--she keeps me safe, you know. Ah! people change
so; I am sometimes--half afraid--of Alice, Mr. Vincent. My child is like
her--my child--she did not know me!" cried the wretched woman, with a
sob that came out of the depths of her heart; "after all that happened,
she did not know me! To be sure, that was quite natural," she went on
again, once more recovering her balance for an instant, "she could not
know me! and I am not beautiful, like Lady Western, to please a child's
eye. Beauty is good--very good. I was once pretty myself; any man would
have forgiven me as you did when Alice came with her lovely face; but I
daresay your mother would not have minded had it been she. Ah, that
reminds me," said Mrs. Hilyard, gradually acquiring a little more
steadiness, "that was why I came out: to go to your mother--to ask if
perhaps she had heard anything--from my child."

"This is madness," said Vincent; "you know my mother could not possibly
hear about your child; you want to escape-- I can see it in your eyes."

"If you will tell me what kind of things people can escape from, I will
answer you," said his strange companion, still becoming more composed.
"Hush! I said what was true. The governess, you know, had your address.
Is it very long since yesterday when I got that news from Dover? Never
mind. I daresay I am asking wild questions that cannot have any answer.
Do you remember being here with me once before? Do you remember looking
through the grating and seeing----? Ah, there is Mr. Fordham now with
Alice! Poor young man!" said Mrs. Hilyard, turning once more to look at
him, still vigilant and anxious, but with a softened glance. "Poor
minister! I told you not to fall in love with her lovely face. I told
you she was kind, too kind--she does not mean any harm. I warned you.
Who could have thought then that we should have so much to do with each
other?" she resumed, shrinking from him, and trying to conceal how she
shrank with another convulsive shiver; "but you were going to visit
your people or something. I must not keep you, Mr. Vincent; you must go
away."

"Not till you have returned to the house; and given me your word of
honour," said Vincent, "not to escape, or to attempt to escape; or else
I must tell her everything, or give you up into stronger hands. I will
not leave you here."

"My word! but women are not bound by their honour; our honour means--not
our word," cried Mrs. Hilyard, wildly; "my parole, he means; soldiers,
and heroes, and men of honour give their parole; you don't exact it from
women. Words are not kept to us, Mr. Vincent; do you expect us to keep
them? Yes, yes; I know I am talking wildly. Is it strange, do you think?
But what if I give you my word, and nobody sends me any further
news--nothing about my child? Women are only wild animals when their
children are taken from them. I will forget it, and go away for
news--news! That is what I want. Escape!" she repeated, with a miserable
cry; "who can escape? I do not understand what it means."

"But you must not leave this house," said Vincent, firmly. "You
understand what I mean. You must not leave Lady Western. Go with her
where she pleases; but unless you promise on your honour to remain here,
and with her, I shall be obliged----"

"Hush!" she said, trembling--"hush! My honour!--and you still trust in
it? I will promise," she continued, turning and looking anxiously round
into the dull winter daylight, as if calculating what chance she had of
rushing away and eluding him. Then her eyes returned to the face of the
young man, who stood firm and watchful beside her--agitated, yet so
much stronger, calmer, even more resolute than she; then shrinking back,
and keeping her eyes, with a kind of fascinated gaze, upon his face, she
repeated the words slowly, "I promise--upon my honour. I will not go
away--escape, as you call it. If I should go mad, that will not matter.
Yes, ring the bell for me. You are the stronger now. I will obey you and
go back. You have taken a woman's parole, Mr. Vincent," she went on,
with a strange spasmodic shadow of that old movement of her mouth; "it
will be curious to note if she can keep it. Good-bye--good-bye." She
spoke with a trembling desperation of calmness, mastering herself with
all her power. She did not remove her eyes from his face till the door
had been opened. "I promise, on my honour," she repeated, with again a
gleam of terror, as Vincent stood watching. Then the door closed,
shutting in that tragic, wretched figure. She was gone back to her
prison, with her misery, from which she could not escape. In that same
garden, Vincent, with the sharp eyes of love and despair, even while
watching her, had caught afar off a vision of two figures together,
walking slowly, one leaning on the other, with the lingering steps of
happiness. The sight went to his heart with a dull pang of certainty,
which crushed down in a moment the useless effervescence of his former
mood. His prisoner and he parted, going in and out, one scarcely less
miserable at that moment than the other. In full sight of them both
lingered for the same moment these two in the tenderest blessedness of
life. Vincent turned sharp round, and went away the whole length of the
long road past St. Roque's, past the farthest village suburb of
Carlingford, stifling his heart that it should say nothing. He had
forgotten all about those duties which brought him there. Salem had
vanished from his horizon. He saw nothing in heaven or earth but that
miserable woman going back to her prison, interwoven with the vision of
these two in their garden of paradise. The sight possessed him heart and
spirit; he could not even feel that he felt it, his heart lying stifled
in his bosom. It was, and there was no more to say.




CHAPTER XIII.


MRS. VINCENT made many pilgrimages out of the sick-room that day; her
mind was disturbed and restless; she could not keep still by Susan's
side. She went and strayed through her son's rooms, looked at his books,
gave a furtive glance at his linen; then went back and sat down for a
little, until a renewed access of anxiety sent her wandering forth once
more. Then she heard him come in, and went out to see him. But he was
gloomy and uncommunicative, evidently indisposed to satisfy her in any
way, absorbed in his own thoughts. Mrs. Vincent came and sat by him
while he dined, thinking, in her simplicity, that it would be a pleasure
to Arthur. But Arthur, with the unsocial habits of a man accustomed to
live alone, had already set up a book before him while he ate, leaving
his mother to wonder by herself behind what was the world of unknown
thought that rapt her son, and into which her wistful wonder could not
penetrate. But the widow was wise in her generation: she would not worry
him with questions which it was very apparent beforehand that he did not
mean to answer. She admitted to herself with a pang of mingled pain,
curiosity, and resignation, that Arthur was no longer a boy having no
secrets from his mother. Once more the little woman looked at the
unreasonable male creature shut up within itself, and decided, with a
feminine mixture of pity and awe, that it must be allowed to take its
own time and way of disclosing itself, and that to torture it into
premature utterance would be foolish, not to say impracticable. She left
him, accordingly, to himself, and went away again, returning, however,
ere long, in her vague restlessness, as she had been doing all day. The
early winter evening had closed in, and the lamp was lighted--the same
lamp which had smoked and annoyed Mrs. Vincent's nice perceptions the
first evening she was in Carlingford. Vincent had thrown himself on a
sofa with a book, not to read, but as a disguise under which he could
indulge his own thoughts, when his mother came quietly back into the
room. Mrs. Vincent thought it looked dark and less cheerful than it
ought. She poked the fire softly not to disturb Arthur, and made it
blaze. Then she turned to the lamp, which flared huskily upon the table.
"It smokes more than ever," said Mrs. Vincent, half apologetically, in
case Arthur should observe her proceedings as she took off the globe.
He, as was natural, put down his book and gazed at her with a certain
impatient wonder, half contemptuous of that strange female development
which amid all troubles could carry through, from one crisis of life to
another, that miraculous trifling, and concern itself about the smoking
of a lamp. As she screwed it up and down and adjusted the wick, with the
smoky light flaring upon her anxious face, and magnifying the shadow of
her little figure against the wall behind, her son looked on with a
feeling very similar to that which had moved Mrs. Vincent when she
watched him eating his dinner with his book set up before him. These
were points upon which the mother and son could not understand each
other. But the sight disturbed his thoughts and touched his temper; he
got up from the sofa and threw down his unread book.

"You women are incomprehensible," said the young man, with an irritation
he could not subdue--"what does it matter about the lamp? but if the
world were going to pieces you must still be intent upon such
trifles--leave that to the people of the house."

"But, my dear, the people of the house don't understand it," said Mrs.
Vincent. "Oh Arthur, it is often the trifles that are the most
important. I have had Mrs. Tozer calling upon me to-day, and Mrs.
Tufton. I don't wonder, dear, if you find them a little tiresome; but
that is what every pastor has to expect. I daresay you have been worried
to-day paying so many visits. Hush, there is some one coming up-stairs.
It is Mr. Tozer, Arthur. I can hear his voice."

Upon which the minister, conscious of not being prepared for Tozer's
questions, gave vent to an impatient ejaculation. "Never a moment's
respite! And now I shall have to give an account of myself," said the
unfortunate Nonconformist. Mrs. Vincent, who had just then finished her
operations with the lamp, looked up reproachfully over the light at her
son.

"Oh Arthur, consider how kind he has been! Your dear father would never
have used such an expression--but you have my quick temper," said the
widow, with a little sigh. She shook hands very cordially with the good
butterman when he made his appearance. "I was just going to make tea for
my son," said Mrs. Vincent. "I have scarcely been able to sit with him
at all since Susan took ill. Arthur, ring the bell--it is so kind of you
to come; you will take a cup of tea with us while my son and you talk
matters over--that is, if you don't object to my presence?" said the
minister's mother with a smile. "Your dear papa always liked me to be
with him, Arthur; and until he has a wife, Mr. Tozer, I daresay his
mother will not be much in the way when it is so kind a friend as you he
has to talk over his business with. Bring tea directly, please. I fear
you have forgotten what I said to you about the lamp, which burns quite
nicely when you take a little pains. Arthur, will you open the window to
clear the atmosphere of that smoke? and perhaps Mr. Tozer will take a
seat nearer the fire."

"I am obliged to you, ma'am," said the butterman, who had a cloud on his
face. "Not no nearer, thank you all the same. If I hadn't thought you'd
have done tea, I shouldn't have come troubling Mr. Vincent, not so
soon;" and Tozer turned a doubtful glance towards the minister, who
stood longer at the window than he need have done. The widow's
experienced eye saw that some irritation had risen between her son and
his friend and patron. Tozer was suspicious, and ready to take
offence-- Arthur, alas! in an excited and restless mood, only too ready
to give it. His mother could read in his shoulders, as he stood at the
window with his back to her, that impulse to throw off the yoke and
resent the inquisition to which he was subject, which, all conscious as
he was of not having carried out Tozer's injunctions, seized upon the
unfortunate Nonconformist. With a little tremulous rush, Mrs. Vincent
put herself in the breach.

"I am sure so warm a friend as Mr. Tozer can never trouble any of my
family at any time," said the widow, with a little effusion. "I know too
well how rare a thing real kindness is--and I am very glad you have come
just now while I can be here," she added, with a sensation of
thankfulness perhaps not so complimentary to Tozer as it looked on the
surface. "Arthur, dear, I think that will do now. You may put up the
window and come back to your chair. You don't smell the lamp, Mr. Tozer?
and here is the little maid with the tea."

Mrs. Vincent moved about the tray almost in a bustle when the girl had
placed it on the table. She re-arranged all the cups and moved
everything on the table, while her son took up a gloomy position behind
her on the hearthrug, and Tozer preserved an aspect of ominous civility
on the other side of the table. She was glad that the little maid had to
return two or three times with various forgotten adjuncts, though even
then Mrs. Vincent's instincts of good management prompted her to point
out to the handmaiden the disadvantages of her thoughtlessness. "If you
had but taken time to think what would be wanted, you would have saved
yourself a great deal of trouble," said the minister's mother, with a
tremble of expectation thrilling her frame, looking wistfully round to
see whether anything more was wanted, or if, perhaps, another minute
might be gained before the storm broke. She gave Arthur a look of
entreaty as she called him forward to take his place at table. She knew
that real kindness was not very often to be met with in this
cross-grained world; and if people are conscious of having been kind, it
is only natural they should expect gratitude! Such was the sentiment in
her eyes as she turned round and fixed them upon her son. "Tea is ready,
Arthur," said the widow, in a tone of secret supplication. And Arthur
understood his mother, and was less and less inclined to conciliate as
he came forward out of the darkness, where he might look sulky if he
pleased, and sat down full in the light of the lamp, which smoked no
longer. They were not a comfortable party. Mrs. Vincent felt it so
necessary that she should talk and keep them separated, that she lost
her usual self-command, and subjects failed her in her utmost need.

"Let me give you another cup of tea," she said, as the butterman paused
in the supernumerary meal which that excellent man was making; "I am so
glad you happened to come this evening when I am taking a little
leisure. I hope the congregation will not think me indifferent, Mr.
Tozer. I am sure you and Mrs. Tozer will kindly explain to them how much
I have been occupied. When Susan is well, I hope to make acquaintance
with all my son's people. Arthur, my dear boy, you are over-tired, you
don't eat anything--and you made a very poor dinner. I wish you would
advise him to take a little rest, Mr. Tozer. He minds his mother in most
things, but not in this. It is vain for me to say anything to him about
giving up work; but perhaps a little advice from you would have more
effect. I spoke to Dr. Rider on the subject, and he says a little rest
is all my son requires; but rest is exactly what he will never take. It
was just the same with his dear father--and you are not strong enough,
Arthur, to bear so much."

"I daresay as you're right, ma'am," said Tozer; "if he was to take a
little more exercise and walking about--most of us Salem folks wouldn't
mind a little less on Sundays, to have more of the minister at other
times. I hope as there wasn't no unpleasantness, Mr. Vincent, between
you and Pigeon when you see him to-day?"

"I did not see him;--I mean I am sorry I was not able to call on Pigeon
to-day," said Vincent, hastily; "I was unexpectedly detained," he added,
growing rather red, and looking Tozer in the face. "Indeed, I am not
sure that I ought to call on Pigeon," continued the minister, after a
pause; "I have done nothing to offend him. If he chooses to take an
affront which was never intended, I can't help it. Why should I go and
court every man who is sulky or ill-tempered in the congregation? Look
here, Tozer--you are a sensible man--you have been very kind, as my
mother says. I set out to-day intending to go and see this man for your
sake; but you know very well this is not what I came to Carlingford
for. If I had known the sort of thing that was required of me!" cried
Vincent, rising up and resuming his place on the hearthrug--"to go with
my hat in my hand, and beg this one and the other to forgive me, and
receive me into favour:--why, what have I ever done to Pigeon? if he has
anything to find fault with, he had much better come to me, and have it
out."

"Mr. Vincent, sir," said Tozer solemnly, pushing away his empty teacup,
and leaning forward over the table on his folded arms, "them ain't the
sentiments for a pastor in our connection. That's a style of thing as
may do among fine folks, or in the church where there's no freedom; but
them as chooses their own pastor, and pays their own pastor, and don't
spare no pains to make him comfortable, has a right to expect different.
Them ain't the sentiments, sir, for Salem folks. I don't say if they're
wrong or right-- I don't make myself a judge of no man; but I've seen a
deal of our connection and human nature in general, and this I know,
that a minister as has to please his flock, has got to please his flock
whatever happens, and neither me nor no other man can make it different;
and that Mrs. Vincent, as has seen life, can tell you as well as I can.
Pigeon ain't neither here nor there. It's the flock as has to be
considered--and it ain't preaching alone as will do that; and that your
good mother, sir, as knows the world, will tell you as well as me."

"But Arthur is well aware of it," said the alarmed mother, interposing
hastily, conscious that to be thus appealed to was the greatest danger
which could threaten her. "His dear father always told him so; yet,
after all, Mr. Vincent used to say," added the anxious diplomatist,
"that nothing was to be depended on in the end but the pulpit. I have
heard him talking of it with the leading people in the connection, Mr.
Tozer. They all used to say that, though visiting was very good, and a
pastor's duty, it was the pulpit, after all, that was to be most trusted
to; and I have always seen in my experience--I don't know if the same
has occurred to you--that both gifts are very rarely to be met with. Of
course, we should all strive after perfection," continued the minister's
mother, with a tremulous smile--"but it is so seldom met with that any
one has both gifts! Arthur, my dear boy, I wish you would eat something;
and Mr. Tozer, let me give you another cup of tea."

"No more for me, ma'am, thankye," said Tozer, laying his hand over his
cup. "I don't deny as there's truth in what you say. I don't deny as a
family here and there in a flock may be aggravating like them Pigeons,
I'm not the man to be hard on a minister, if that ain't his turn. A
pastor may have a weakness, and not feel himself as equal to one part of
his work as to another; but to go for to say as visiting and keeping the
flock pleased, ain't his duty--it's that, ma'am, as goes to my heart."

Tozer's pathos touched a lighter chord in the bosom of the minister. He
came back to his seat with a passing sense of amusement. "If Pigeon has
anything to find fault with, let him come and have it out," said
Vincent, bringing, as his mother instantly perceived, a less clouded
countenance into the light of the lamp. "You, who are a much better
judge than Pigeon, were not displeased on Sunday," added the minister,
not without a certain complacency. Looking back upon the performances of
that day, the young Nonconformist himself was not displeased. He knew
now--though he was unconscious at the time--that he had made a great
appearance in the pulpit of Salem, and that once more the eyes of
Carlingford, unused to oratory, and still more unused to great and
passionate emotion, were turned upon him.

"Well, sir, if it come to be a question of that," said the mollified
deacon; "but no--it ain't that--I can't, whatever my feelings is, be
forgetful of my dooty!" cried Tozer, in sudden excitement. "It ain't
that, Mr. Vincent; it's for your good I'm a-speaking up and letting you
know my mind. It ain't the pulpit, sir. I'll not say as I ever had a
word to say against your sermons: but when the minister goes out of my
house, a-saying as he's going to visit the flock, and when he's to be
seen the next moment, Mrs. Vincent, not going to the flock, but
a-spending his precious time in Grange Lane with them as don't know
nothing, and don't care nothing for Salem, nor understand the ways of
folks like us----"

Here Tozer was interrupted suddenly by the minister, who once more rose
from his chair with an angry exclamation. What he might have said in the
hasty impulse of the moment nobody could tell; but Mrs. Vincent, hastily
stumbling up on her part from her chair, burst in with a tremulous
voice--

"Arthur, my dear boy! did you hear Susan call me?--hark! I fancied I
heard her voice. Oh, Arthur dear, go and see, I am too weak to run
myself. Say I am coming directly--hark! do you think it is Susan? Oh,
Arthur, go and see!"

Startled by her earnestness, though declaring he heard nothing, the
young man hastened away. Mrs. Vincent seized her opportunity without
loss of time.

"Mr. Tozer," said the widow, "I am just going to my sick child. Arthur
and you will be able to talk of your business more freely when I am
gone, and I hope you will be guided to give him good advice; what I am
afraid of is, that he will throw it all up," continued Mrs. Vincent,
leaning her hand upon the table, and bending forward confidential and
solemn to the startled butterman, "as so many talented young men in our
connection do nowadays. Young men are so difficult to deal with; they
will not put up with things that we know must be put up with," said the
minister's mother, shaking her head with a sigh. "That is how we are
losing all our young preachers;--an accomplished young man has so many
ways of getting on now. Oh, Mr. Tozer, I rely upon you to give my son
good advice--if he is aggravated, it is my terror that he will throw it
all up! Good-night. You have been our kind friend, and I have such trust
in you!" Saying which the widow shook hands with him earnestly and went
away, leaving the worthy deacon much shaken, and with a weight of
responsibility upon him. Vincent met her at the door, assuring her that
Susan had not called; but with a heroism which nobody suspected--trembling
with anxiety, yet conscious of having struck a master-stroke--his mother
glided away to the stillness of the sick-room, where she sat questioning
her own wisdom all the evening after, and wondering whether, after all,
at such a crisis, she had done right to come away.

When the minister and the deacon were left alone together, instead of
returning with zest to their interrupted discussion, neither of them
said anything for some minutes. Once more Vincent took up his position
on the hearthrug, and Tozer gazed ruefully at the empty cup which he
still covered with his hand, full of troubled thoughts. The
responsibility was almost too much for Tozer. He could scarcely realise
to himself what terrors lay involved in that threatened danger, or what
might happen if the minister threw it all up! He held his breath at the
awful thought. The widow's Parthian arrow had gone straight to the
butterman's heart.

"I hope, sir, as you won't think there's anything but an anxious feelin'
in the flock to do you justice as our pastor," said Tozer, with a
certain solemnity, "or that we ain't sensible of our blessin's. I've
said both to yourself and others, as you was a young man of great
promise, and as good a preacher as I ever see in our connection, Mr.
Vincent, and I'll stand by what I've said; but you ain't above taking a
friend's advice--not speaking with no authority," added the good
butterman, in a conciliatory tone; "it's all along of the women,
sir--it's them as is at the bottom of all the mischief in a flock. It
ain't Pigeon, bless you, as is to blame. And even my missis, though
she's not to say unreasonable as women go--none of them can abide to
hear of you a-going after Lady Western--that's it, Mr. Vincent. She's a
lovely creature," cried Tozer, with enthusiasm; "there ain't one in
Carlingford to compare with her, as I can see, and I wouldn't be the one
to blame a young man as was carried away. But there couldn't no good
come of it, and Salem folks is touchy and jealous," continued the worthy
deacon; "that was all as I meant to say."

Thus the conference ended amicably after a little more talk, in which
Pigeon and the other malcontents were made a sacrifice of and given up
by the anxious butterman, upon whom Mrs. Vincent's parting words had
made so deep an impression. Tozer went home thereafter to overawe his
angry wife, whom Vincent's visit to Lady Western had utterly
exasperated, with the dread responsibility now laid upon them. "What if
he was to throw it all up!" said Tozer. That alarming possibility struck
silence and dismay to the very heart of the household. Perhaps it was
the dawn of a new era of affairs in Salem. The deacon's very sleep was
disturbed by recollections of the promising young men who, now he came
to think of it, had been lost to the connection, as Mrs. Vincent
suggested, and had thrown it all up. The fate of the chapel, and all the
new sittings let under the ministry of the young Nonconformist, seemed
to hang on Tozer's hands. He thought of the weekly crowd, and his heart
stirred. Not many deacons in the connection could boast of being crowded
out of their own pews Sunday after Sunday by the influx of unexpected
hearers. The enlightenment of Carlingford, as well as the filling of the
chapel, was at stake. Clearly, in the history of Salem, a new era had
begun.




CHAPTER XIV.


THAT week passed on without much incident. To Vincent and his mother, in
whose history days had, for some time past, been counting like years, it
might have seemed a very grateful pause, but for the thunderous
atmosphere of doubt and uncertainty which clouded over them on every
side. Susan's recovery did not progress; and Dr. Rider began to look as
serious over her utter languor and apathy, which nothing seemed able to
disturb, as he had done at her delirium. The Salem people stood aloof,
as Mrs. Vincent perceived, with keen feminine observation. She could not
persuade herself, as she had tried to persuade Mrs. Tozer, that the
landlady answered inquiries at the door by way of leaving the sick-room
quiet. The fact was, that except Lady Western's fine footman, the sight
of whom at the minister's door was far from desirable, nobody came to
make inquiries except Mrs. Tufton and Phoebe Tozer, the latter of whom
found no encouragement in her visits. Politic on all other points, the
widow could not deny herself, when circumstances put it in her power to
extinguish Phoebe. Mrs. Vincent would not have harmed a fly, but it
gave her a certain pleasure to wound the rash female bosom which had, as
she supposed, formed plans of securing her son. As for Tozer himself,
his visits had almost ceased. He was scarcely to be seen even in the
shop, into which sometimes the minister himself gazed disconsolately
when he strayed out in the twilight to walk his cares away. The good
butterman was otherwise employed. He was wrestling with Pigeon in many a
close encounter, holding little committees in the back parlour. On his
single arm and strength he felt it now to depend whether or not the
pastor could tide it over, and be pulled through.

As for Vincent himself, he had retired from the conflict. He paid no
visits; with a certain half-conscious falling back upon the one thing he
could do best, he devoted himself to his sermons. At least he shut
himself up to write morning after morning, and remained all day dull and
undisturbed, brooding over his work. The congregation somehow got to
hear of his abstraction. And to the offended mind of Salem there was
something imposing in the idea of the minister, misunderstood and
unappreciated, thus retiring from the field, and devoting himself to
"study." Even Mrs. Pigeon owned to herself a certain respect for the foe
who did not humble himself, but withdrew with dignity into the
intrenchments of his own position. It was fine; but it was not the thing
for Salem. Mrs. Brown had a tea-party on the Thursday, to which the
pastor was not even invited, but where there were great and manifold
discussions about him, and where the Tozers found themselves an angry
minority, suspected on all sides. "A pastor as makes himself agreeable
here and there, but don't take no thought for the good of the flock in
general, ain't a man to get on in our connection," said Mrs. Pigeon,
with a toss of her head at Phoebe, who blushed over all her pink arms
and shoulders with mingled gratification and discomposure. Mrs. Tozer
herself received this insinuation without any violent disclaimer. "For
my part, I can't say as the minister hasn't made himself very agreeable
as far as we are concerned," said that judicious woman. "It's well known
as friends can't come amiss to Tozer and me. Dinner or supper, we never
can be took wrong, not being fine folks but comfortable," said the
butterman's wife, directing her eyes visibly to Mrs. Pigeon, who was not
understood to be liberal in her house-keeping. Poor Phoebe was not so
discriminating. When she retired into a corner with her companions,
Phoebe's injured feelings disclosed themselves. "I am sure he never
said anything to me that he might not have said to any one," she
confessed to Maria Pigeon; "it is very hard to have people look so at me
when perhaps he means nothing at all," said Phoebe, half dejected,
half important. Mrs. Pigeon heard the unguarded confession, and made use
of it promptly, not careful for her consistency.

"I said when you had all set your hearts on a young man, that it was a
foolish thing to do," said poor Vincent's skilful opponent; "I said he'd
be sure to come a-dangling about our houses, and a-trifling with the
affections of our girls. It'll be well if it doesn't come too true; not
as I want to pretend to be wiser nor other folks--but I said so, as
you'll remember, Mrs. Brown, the very first day Mr. Vincent preached in
Salem. I said, 'He's not bad-looking, and he's young and has genteel
ways, and the girls don't know no better. You mark my words, if he don't
make some mischief in Carlingford afore all's done,'--and I only hope as
it won't come too true."

"Them as is used to giddy girls gets timid, as is natural," said Mrs.
Tozer; "it's different where there is only one, and she a quiet one. I
can't say as I ever thought a young man was more taking for being a
minister; but there can't be no doubt as it must be harder upon you,
ma'am, as has four daughters, than me as has only one--and she a quiet
one," added the deacon's wife, with a glance of maternal pride at
Phoebe, who was just then enfolding the spare form of Maria Pigeon in
an artless embrace, and who looked in her pink wreath and white muslin
dress, "quite the lady," at least in her mother's eyes.

"The quiet ones is the deep ones," said Tozer, interfering, as a wise
man ought, in the female duel, as it began to get intense. "Phoebe's
my girl, and I don't deny being fond of her, as is natural; but she
ain't so innocent as not to know how things is working, and what meaning
is in some folks' minds. But that's neither here nor there, and it's
time as we was going away."

"Not before we've had prayers," said Mrs. Brown. "I was surprised the
first time I see Mr. Vincent in your house, Mr. Tozer, as we all parted
like heathens without a blessing, specially being all chapel folks, and
of one way of thinking. Our ways is different in this house; and though
we're in a comfortless kind of condition, and no better than if we
hadn't no minister, still as there's you and Mr. Pigeon here----"

The tea-party thus concluded with a still more distinct sense of the
pastor's shortcomings. There was nobody to "give prayers" but Pigeon and
Tozer. For all social purposes, the flock in Salem might as well have
had no minister. The next little committee held in the back parlour at
the butter-shop was still more unsatisfactory. While it was in progress,
Mr. Vincent himself appeared, and had to be taken solemnly up-stairs to
the drawing-room, where there was no fire, and where the hum of the
voices below was very audible, as Mrs. Tozer and Phoebe, getting blue
with cold, sat vainly trying to occupy the attention of the pastor.

"Pa has some business people with him in the parlour," explained
Phoebe, who was very tender and sympathetic, as might be expected; but
it did not require a very brilliant intelligence to divine that the
business under discussion was the minister, even if Mrs. Tozer's
solemnity, and the anxious care with which he was conveyed past the
closed door of the parlour, had not already filled the mind of the
pastor with suspicion.

"Go down and let your pa know as Mr. Vincent's here," said Mrs. Tozer,
after this uncomfortable seance had lasted half an hour; "and he's not
to keep them men no longer than he can help; and presently we'll have a
bit of supper--that's what I enjoy, that is, Mr. Vincent; no ceremony
like there must be at a party, but just to take us as we are; and we
can't be took amiss, Tozer and me. There's always a bit of something
comfortable for supper; and no friend as could be made so welcome as the
minister," added the good woman, growing more and more civil as she came
to her wits' end; for had not Pigeon and Brown been asked to share that
something comfortable? For the first time it was a relief to the
butterman's household when the pastor declined the impromptu invitation,
and went resolutely away. His ears, sharpened by suspicion, recognised
the familiar voices in the parlour, where the door was ajar when he went
out again. Vincent could not have imagined that to feel himself
unwelcome at Tozer's would have had any effect whatever upon his
preoccupied mind, or that to pass almost within hearing of one of the
discussions which must inevitably be going on about him among the
managers of Salem, could quicken his pulse or disturb his composure. But
it was so notwithstanding. He had come out at the entreaty of his
mother, half unwillingly, anticipating, with the liveliest realisation
of all its attendant circumstances, an evening spent at that big table
in the back parlour, and something comfortable to supper. He came back
again tingling with curiosity, indignation, and suppressed defiance. The
something comfortable had not this time been prepared for him. He was
being discussed, not entertained, in the parlour; and Mrs. Tozer and
Phoebe, in the chill fine drawing-room up-stairs, where the gas was
blazing in a vain attempt to make up for the want of the fire--shivering
with cold and civility--had been as much disconcerted by his appearance
as if they too were plotting against him. Mr. Vincent returned to his
sermon not without some additional fire. He had spent a great deal of
time over his sermon that week; it was rather learned and very
elaborate, and a little--dull. The poor minister felt very conscious of
the fact, but could not help it. He was tempted to put it in the fire,
and begin again, when he returned that Friday evening, smarting with
those little stinging arrows of slight and injury; but it was too late:
and this was the beginning of the "coorse" which Tozer had laid so much
store by. Vincent concluded the elaborate production by a few sharp
sentences, which he was perfectly well aware did not redeem it, and
explained to his mother, with a little ill-temper, as she thought, that
he had changed his mind about visiting the Tozers that night. Mrs.
Vincent did Arthur injustice as she returned to Susan's room, where
again matters looked very sadly; and so the troubled week came to a
close.




CHAPTER XV.


SUNDAY! It came again, the inevitable morning. There are pathetic
stories current in the world about most of the other professions that
claim the ear of the public; how lawyers prepare great speeches, which
are to open for them the gates of the future, in the midst of the
killing anxieties of life and poverty--how mimes and players of all
descriptions keep the world in laughter while their hearts are breaking.
But few people think of the sufferings of the priest, whom, let trouble
or anxiety come as they please, necessity will have in the inexorable
pulpit Sunday after Sunday. So Vincent thought as he put on his Geneva
gown in his little vestry, with the raw February air coming in at the
open window, and his sermon, which was dull, lying on the table beside
him. It was dull--he knew it in his heart; but after all the strain of
passion he had been held at, what was to preserve him any more than
another from the unavoidable lassitude and blank that followed? Still it
was not agreeable to know that Salem was crowded to the door, and that
this sermon, upon which the minister looked ruefully, was laboured and
feeble, without any divine spark to enlighten it, or power to touch the
hearts of other men. The consciousness that it was dull would, the
preacher knew, make it duller still--its heaviness would affect himself
as well as his audience. Still that was not to be helped now, there it
lay, ready for utterance; and here in his Geneva gown, with the sound in
his ears of all the stream of entering worshippers who were then
arranging themselves in the pews of Salem, stood the minister prepared
to speak. There was, as Vincent divined, a great crowd--so great a crowd
that various groups stood during the whole service, which, by dint of
being more laboured and feeble than usual, was longer too. With a
certain dulness of feeling, half despairing, the minister accomplished
the preliminary devotions, and was just opening his Bible to begin the
work of the day when his startled eye caught a most unlooked-for
accession to the flock. Immediately before him, in the same pew with
Mrs. Tozer and Phoebe, what was that beautiful vision that struck him
dumb for the moment? Tozer himself had brought her in during the
prayers, through the groups that occupied the passage, to his own seat,
where she sat expanding her rustling plumage, and looking round with all
her natural sweetness, and a kind of delightful unconscious patronage
and curiosity, upon the crowd of unknown people who were nobody in
Carlingford. The sight of her struck the young Nonconformist dumb. He
took some moments to recover himself, ere, with a pang in his heart, he
began his dull sermon. It mattered nothing to Lady Western what kind of
a sermon he preached. She was not clever, and probably would never know
the difference; but it went to the young man's heart, an additional pang
of humiliation, to think that it was not his best he had to set before
that unexpected hearer. What had brought the beauty here? Vincent's
dazzled eyes did not make out for some time the dark spare figure beside
her, all sunned over with the rays of her splendour. Mrs. Tozer and
Phoebe on one side, proud yet half affronted, contemplating with awe
and keen observation the various particulars of Lady Western's dress,
were not more unlike her, reposing in her soft beauty within the hard
wooden enclosure of the pew, beaming upon everybody in sweet ease and
composure--than was the agitated restless face, with gleaming uncertain
eyes that flashed everywhere, which appeared at her other side when
Vincent came to be able to see. He preached his sermon with a certain
self-disgust growing more and more intense every time he ventured to
glance at that strange line of faces. The only attentive hearer in
Tozer's pew was Lady Western, who looked up at the young minister
steadily with her sweet eyes, and listened with all the gracious
propriety that belonged to her. The Tozers, for their part, drawn up in
their end of the seat, gave a very divided attention, being chiefly
occupied with Lady Western; and as for Mrs. Hilyard, the sight of her
restlessness and nervous agitation would have been pitiful had anybody
there been sufficiently interested to observe it. Mr. Vincent's sermon
certainly did not secure that wandering mind. All her composure had
deserted this strange woman. Now and then she almost rose up by way
apparently of relieving the restless fever that possessed her; her
nervous hands wandered among the books of the Tozer pew with an
incessant motion. Her eyes gleamed in all directions with a wistful
anxiety and suspicion. All this went on while Vincent preached his
sermon; he had no eyes for the other people in the place. Now and then
the young man became rhetorical, and threw in here and there a wild
flourish to break the deadness of his discourse, with no success as he
saw. He read tedium in all the lines of faces before him as he came to a
close with a dull despair--in all the faces except that sweet face never
disturbed out of its lovely calm of attention, which would have listened
to the Dissenting minister quite as calmly had he preached like Paul.
With a sensation that this was one of the critical moments of his fate,
and that he had failed in it, Vincent dropped into his seat in
exhaustion and self-disgust, while his hearers got up to sing their
hymn. It was at this moment that Tozer walked up through the aisle,
steadily, yet with his heart beating louder than usual, and ascended the
pulpit-stairs to give forth that intimation which had been agreed upon
in the back parlour on Friday. The minister was disturbed in his
uncomfortable repose by the entrance of the deacon into the pulpit,
where the worthy butterman seated himself by Vincent's side. The
unconscious congregation sang its hymn, while the Nonconformist, rousing
up, looked with surprised eyes upon his unexpected companion; yet there
were bosoms in the flock which owned a thrill of emotion as Tozer's
substantial person partially disappeared from view behind the crimson
cushion. Phoebe left off singing, and subsided into tears and her
seat. Mrs. Pigeon lifted up her voice and expanded her person;
meanwhile Tozer whispered ominously, with a certain agitation, in his
pastor's ear--

"It's three words of an intimation as I'd like to give--nothing of no
importance; a meeting of the flock as some of us would like to call, if
it's quite agreeable--nothing as you need mind, Mr. Vincent. We wouldn't
go for to occupy your time, sir, attending of it. There wasn't no
opportunity to tell you before. I'll give it out, if it's agreeable,"
said Tozer, with hesitation--"or if you'd rather----"

"Give it to me," said the minister quickly. He took the paper out of the
butterman's hand, who drew back uncomfortable and embarrassed, wishing
himself anywhere in the world but in the pulpit, from which that
revolutionary document menaced the startled pastor with summary
deposition. It was a sufficiently simple notice of a meeting to be held
on the following Monday evening, in the schoolroom, which was the scene
of all the tea and other meetings of Salem. This, however, was no
tea-meeting. Vincent drew his breath hard, and changed colour, as he
bent down under the shadow of the pulpit-cushion and the big Bible, and
read this dangerous document. Meanwhile the flock sang their hymn, to
which Tozer, much discomposed, added a few broken notes of tremulous
bass as he sat by the minister's side. When Mr. Vincent again raised his
head, and sat erect with the notice in his hand, the troubled deacon
made vain attempts to catch his eye, and ask what was to be done. The
Nonconformist made no reply to these telegraphic communications. When
the sinking was ended he rose, still with the paper in his hand, and
faced the congregation, where he no longer saw one face with a vague
background of innumerable other faces, but had suddenly woke up to
behold his battle-ground and field of warfare, in which everything dear
to him was suddenly assailed. Unawares the assembled people, who had
received no special sensation from the sermon, woke up also at the sight
of Vincent's face. He read the notice to them with a voice that tingled
through the place; then he paused. "This meeting is one of which I have
not been informed," said Vincent. "It is one which I am not asked to
attend. I invite you to it, all who are here present; and I invite you
thereafter," continued the minister, with an unconscious elevation of
his head, "to meet me on the following evening to hear what I have to
say to you. Probably the business will be much the same on both
occasions, but it will be approached from different sides of the
question. I invite you to meet on Monday, according to this notice; and
I invite you on Tuesday, at the same place and hour, to meet me."

Vincent did not hear the audible hum and buzz of surprise and excitement
which ran through his startled flock. He did not pay much attention to
what Tozer said to him when all was over. He lingered in his vestry,
taking off his gown, until he could hear Lady Western's carriage drive
off after an interval of lingering. The young Dowager had gone out
slowly, thinking to see him, and comfort him with a compliment about his
sermon, concerning the quality of which she was not critical. She was
sorry in her kind heart to perceive his troubled looks, and to discover
that somehow, she could not quite understand how, something annoying and
unexpected had occurred to him. And then this uneasy companion, to whom
he had bound her, and whose strange agitation and wonderful change of
aspect Lady Western could in no way account for-- But the carriage rolled
away at last, not without reluctance, while the minister still remained
in his vestry. Then he hurried home, speaking to no one. Mrs. Vincent
did not understand her son all day, nor even next morning, when he might
have been supposed to have time to calm down. He was very silent, but no
longer dreamy or languid, or lost in the vague discontent and dejection
with which she was familiar. On the contrary, the minister had woke up
out of that abstraction. He was wonderfully alert, open-eyed, full of
occupation. When he sat down to his writing-table it was not to muse,
with his pen in his languid fingers, now and then putting down a
sentence, but to write straight forward with evident fire and emphasis.
He was very tender to herself, but he did not tell her anything. Some
new cloud had doubtless appeared on the firmament where there was little
need for any further clouds. The widow rose on the Monday morning with a
presentiment of calamity on her mind--rose from the bed in Susan's room
which she occupied for two or three hours in the night, sometimes
snatching a momentary sleep, which Susan's smallest movement
interrupted. Her heart was rent in two between her children. She went
from Susan's bedside, where her daughter lay in dumb apathy, not to be
roused by anything that could be said or done, to minister wistfully at
Arthur's breakfast, which, with her heart in her throat, the widow made
a pitiful pretence of sharing. She could not ask him questions. She was
silent, too, in her great love and sorrow. Seeing some new trouble
approaching--wistfully gazing into the blank skies before her, to
discover, if that were possible, without annoying Arthur, or
compromising him, what it was; but rather than compromise or annoy him,
contenting herself not to know--the greatest stretch of endurance to
which as yet she had constrained her spirit.

Arthur did not go out all that Monday. Even in the house a certain
excitement was visible to Mrs. Vincent's keen observation. The landlady
herself made her appearance in tears to clear away the remains of the
minister's dinner. "I hope, sir, as you don't think what's past and gone
has made no difference on me," said that tearful woman in Mrs. Vincent's
hearing; "it ain't me as would ever give my support to such doings."
When the widow asked, "What doings?" Arthur only smiled and made some
half articulate remark about gossip, which his mother of course treated
at its true value. As the dark wintry afternoon closed in, Mrs.
Vincent's anxiety increased under the influence of the landlady's Sunday
dress, in which she was visible progressing about the passages, and
warning her husband to mind he wasn't late. At last Mrs. Tufton called,
and the minister's mother came to a true understanding of the state of
affairs. Mrs. Tufton was unsettled and nervous, filled with a not
unexhilarating excitement, and all the heat of partisanship. "Don't you
take on," said the good little woman; "Mr. Tufton is going to the
meeting to tell them his sentiments about his young brother. My dear,
they will never go against what Mr. Tufton says: and if I should mount
upon the platform and make a speech myself, there shan't be anything
done that could vex you; for we always said he was a precious young man,
and a credit to the connection; and it would be a disgrace to us all to
let the Pigeons, or such people, have it all their own way." Mrs.
Vincent managed to ascertain all the particulars from the old minister's
wife. When she was gone, the widow sat down a little with a very
desolate heart to think it all over. Arthur, with a new light in his
eye, and determination in his face, was writing in the sitting-room; but
Arthur's mother could not sit still as he did, and imagine the scene in
the Salem schoolroom, and how everybody discussed and sat upon her boy,
and decided all the momentous future of his young life in this private
inquisition. She went back, however, beside him, and poured out a cup of
tea for him, and managed to swallow one for herself, talking about Susan
and indifferent household matters, while the evening wore on and the
hour of the meeting approached. A little before that hour Mrs. Vincent
left Arthur, with an injunction not to come into the sick-room that
evening until she sent for him, as she thought Susan would sleep. As she
left the room the landlady went downstairs, gorgeous in her best bonnet
and shawl, with all the personal satisfaction which a member of a flock
naturally feels when called to a bed of justice to decide the future
destiny of its head. The minister's fate was in the hands of his people;
and it was with a pleasurable sensation that, from every house
throughout Grove Street and the adjacent regions, the good people were
going forth to decide it. As for the minister's mother, she went softly
back to Susan's room, where the nurse, who was Mrs. Vincent's assistant,
had taken her place. "She looks just the same," said the poor mother.
"Just the same," echoed the attendant. "I don't think myself as there'll
be no change until----" Mrs. Vincent turned away silently in her
anguish, which she dared not indulge. She wrapped herself in a black
shawl, and took out the thick veil of crape which she had worn in her
first mourning. Nobody could recognise her under that screen. But it was
with a pang that she tied that sign of woe over her pale face. The touch
of the crape made her shiver. Perhaps she was but forestalling the
mourning which, in her age and weakness, she might have to renew again.
With such thoughts she went softly through the wintry lighted streets
towards Salem. As she approached the door, groups of people going the
same way brushed past her through Grove Street. Lively people, talking
with animation, pleased with this new excitement, declaring, sometimes
so loudly that she could hear them as they passed, what side they were
on, and that they, for their part, were going to vote for the minister
to give him another trial. The little figure in those black robes, with
anxious looks shrouded under the crape veil, went on among the rest to
the Salem schoolroom. She took her seat close to the door, and saw Tozer
and Pigeon, and the rest of the deacons, getting upon the platform,
where on occasions more festive the chairman and the leading people had
tea. The widow looked through her veil at the butterman and the
poulterer with one keen pang of resentment, of which she repented
instantly. She did not despise them as another might have done. They
were the constituted authorities of the place, and her son's fate, his
reputation, his young life, all that he had or could hope for in the
world, was in their hands. The decision of the highest authorities in
the land was not so important to Arthur as that of the poulterer and the
butterman. There they stood, ready to open their session, their
inquisition, their solemn tribunal. The widow drew her veil close, and
clasped her hands together to sustain herself. It was Pigeon who was
about to speak.




CHAPTER XVI.


MR. PIGEON was a heavy orator; he was a tall man, badly put together,
with a hollow crease across his waistcoat, which looked very much as if
he might be folded in two, and so laid away out of mischief. His arms
moved foolishly about in the agonies of oratory, as if they did not
belong to him; but he did not look absurd through Mrs. Vincent's crape
veil, as she sat gazing at the platform on which he stood, and taking in
with eager ears every syllable that came from his lips. Mr. Pigeon said
it was Mr. Vincent as they had come there to discuss that night. The
managers had made up their minds as it was a dooty to lay things before
the flock. Mr. Vincent was but a young man, and most in that
congregation was ready to make allowances; and as for misfortunes as
might have happened to him, he wasn't a-going to lay that to the
pastor's charge, nor take no mean advantages. He was for judging a man
on his merits, he was. If they was to take Mr. Vincent on his merits
without no prejudice, they would find as he hadn't carried out the
expectations as was formed of him. Not as there was anything to be said
against his preaching; his preaching was well enough, though it wasn't
to call rousing up, which was what most folks wanted. There wasn't no
desire on the part of the managers to object to his preaching: he had
ought to have preached well, that was the truth, for every one as had
been connected with Salem in Mr. Tufton's time knew as there was a deal
of difference between the new pastor and the old pastor, as far as the
work of a congregation went. As for Pigeon's own feelings, he would have
held his peace cheerful, if his dooty had permitted him, or if he had
seen as it was for the good of the connection. But things was come to
that pass in Salem as a man hadn't ought to mind his own feelings, but
had to do his dooty, if he was to be took to the stake for it. And them
were his circumstances, as many a one as he had spoken to in private
could say, if they was to speak up.

To all this Mrs. Vincent listened with the profoundest attention behind
her veil. The schoolroom was very full of people--almost as full as on
the last memorable tea-party, but the square lines of the gas-burners,
coming down with two flaring lights each from the low roof, were veiled
with no festoons this time, and threw an unmitigated glare upon the
people, all in their dark winter-dresses, without any attempt at special
embellishment. Mrs. Pigeon was in the foreground, on a side-bench near
the platform, very visible to the minister's mother, nodding her head
and giving triumphant glances around now and then to point her husband's
confused sentences. Mrs. Pigeon had her daughters spread out on one side
of her, all in their best bonnets, and at the corner of the same seat
sat little Mrs. Tufton, who shook her charitable head when the
poulterer's wife nodded hers, and put her handkerchief to her eyes now
and then, as she gazed up at the platform, not without a certain womanly
misgiving as to how her husband was going to conduct himself. The Tozers
had taken up their position opposite. Mrs. Tozer and her daughter had
all the appearance of being in great spirits, especially Phoebe, who
seemed scarcely able to contain her amusement as Mr. Pigeon went on. All
this Mrs. Vincent saw as clearly as in a picture through the dark folds
of her veil. She sat back as far as she could into the shade, and
pressed her hands close together, and was noways amused, but listened
with as profound an ache of anxiety in her heart as if Pigeon had been
the Lord Chancellor. As for the audience in general, it showed some
signs of weariness as the poulterer stumbled on through his confused
speech; and not a restless gesture, not a suppressed yawn in the place,
but was apparent to the minister's mother. The heart in her troubled
bosom beat steadier as she gazed; certainly no violent sentiment
actuated the good people of Salem as they sat staring with calm eyes at
the speaker. Mrs. Vincent knew how a congregation looked when it was
thoroughly excited and up in arms against its head. She drew a long
breath of relief, and suffered the tight clasp of her hands to relax a
little. There was surely no popular passion there.

And then Mr. Tufton got up, swaying heavily with his large uncertain old
figure over the table. The old minister sawed the air with his white fat
hand after he had said "My beloved brethren" twice over; and little
Mrs. Tufton, sitting below in her impatience and anxiety lest he should
not acquit himself well, dropt her handkerchief and disappeared after
it, while Mrs. Vincent erected herself under the shadow of her veil. Mr.
Tufton did his young brother no good. He was so sympathetic over the
misfortunes that had befallen Vincent's family, that bitter tears came
to the widow's eyes, and her hands once more tightened in a silent
strain of self-support. While the old minister impressed upon his
audience the duty of bearing with his dear young brother, and being
indulgent to the faults of his youth, it was all the poor mother could
do to keep silent, to stifle down the indignant sob in her heart, and
keep steady in her seat. Perhaps it was some breath of anguish escaping
from her unawares that drew towards her the restless gleaming eyes of
another strange spectator there. That restless ghost of a woman!--all
shrunken, gleaming, ghastly--her eyes looking all about in an obliquity
of furtive glances, fearing yet daring everything. When she found Mrs.
Vincent out, she fixed her suspicious desperate gaze upon the crape veil
which hid the widow's face. The deacons of Salem were to Mrs. Hilyard
but so many wretched masquers playing a rude game among the dreadful
wastes of life, of which these poor fools were ignorant. Sometimes she
watched them with a reflection of her old amusement--oftener, pursued by
her own tyrannical fancy and the wild restlessness which had brought her
here, forgot altogether where she was. But Mrs. Vincent's sigh, which
breathed unutterable things--the steady fixed composure of that little
figure while the old minister maundered on with his condolences, his
regrets, his self-glorification over the interest he had taken in his
dear young brother, and the advice he had given him--could not miss the
universal scrutiny of this strange woman's eyes. She divined, with a
sudden awakening of the keen intelligence which was half crazed by this
time, yet vivid as ever, the state of mind in which the widow was. With
a half-audible cry the Back Grove Street needlewoman gazed at the
minister's mother; in poignant trouble, anxiety, indignant
distress--clasping her tender hands together yet again to control the
impatience, the resentment, the aching mortification and injury with
which she heard all this maudlin pity overflowing the name of her
boy--yet, ah! what a world apart from the guilty and desperate spirit
which sat there gazing like Dives at Lazarus. Mrs. Hilyard slid out of
her seat with a rapid stealthy movement, and placed herself unseen by
the widow's side. The miserable woman put forth her furtive hand and
took hold of the black gown--the old black silk gown, so well worn and
long preserved. Mrs. Vincent started a little, looked at her, gave her a
slight half-spasmodic nod of recognition, and returned to her own
absorbing interest. The interruption made her raise her head a little
higher under the veil, that not even this stranger might imagine
Arthur's mother to be affected by what was going on. For everything
else, Mrs. Hilyard had disappeared out of the widow's memory. She was
thinking only of her son.

As for the other minister's wife, poor Mrs. Tufton's handkerchief
dropped a great many times during her husband's speech. Oh, if these
blundering men, who mismanage matters so, could but be made to hold
their peace! Tears of vexation and distress came into the eyes of the
good little woman. Mr. Tufton meant to do exactly what was right; she
knew he did; but to sit still and hear him making such a muddle of it
all! Such penalties have to be borne by dutiful wives. She had to smile
feebly, when he concluded, to somebody who turned round to congratulate
her upon the minister's beautiful speech. The beautiful speech had done
poor Vincent a great deal more harm than Pigeon's oration. Salem folks,
being appealed to on this side, found out that they had, after all, made
great allowances for their minister, and that he had not on his part
shown a due sense of their indulgence. Somebody else immediately after
went on in the same strain: a little commotion began to rise in the
quiet meeting. "Mr. Tufton's 'it it," said a malcontent near Mrs.
Vincent; "we've been a deal too generous, that's what we've been; and
he's turned on us." "He was always too high for my fancy," said another.
"It ain't the thing for a pastor to be high-minded; and them lectures
and things was never nothing but vanity; and so I always said." Mrs.
Vincent smiled a wan smile to herself under her veil. She refused to let
the long breath escape from her breast in the form of a sigh. She sat
fast, upright, holding her hands clasped. Things were going against
Arthur. Unseen among all his foes, with an answer, and more than an
answer, to everything they said, burning in dumb restrained eloquence
in her breast, his mother held up his banner. One at least was there who
knew Arthur, and lifted up a dumb protest on his behalf to earth and
heaven. She felt with an uneasy half-consciousness that some haunting
shadow was by her side, and was even vaguely aware of the hold upon her
dress, but had no leisure in her mind for anything but the progress of
this contest, and the gradual overthrow, accomplishing before her eyes,
of Arthur's cause.

It was at this moment that Tozer rose up to make that famous speech
which has immortalised him in the connection, and for which the Homerton
students, in their enthusiasm, voted a piece of plate to the worthy
butterman. The face of the Salem firmament was cloudy when Tozer rose;
suggestions of discontent were surging among the audience. Heads of
families were stretching over the benches to confide to each other how
long it was since they had seen the minister; how he never had visited
as he ought; and how desirable "a change" might prove. Spiteful glances
of triumph sought poor Phoebe and her mother upon their bench, where
the two began to fail in their courage, and laughed no longer. A crisis
was approaching. Mrs. Tufton picked up her handkerchief, and sat erect,
with a frightened face; she, too, knew the symptoms of the coming storm.

Such were the circumstances under which Tozer rose in the pastor's
defence.

"Ladies and gentlemen," said Tozer,--"and Mr. Chairman, as I ought to
have said first, if this meeting had been constituted like most other
meetings have been in Salem; but, my friends, we haven't met not in
what I would call an honest and straight-forward way, and consequently
we ain't in order, not as a free assembly should be, as has met to know
its own mind, and not to be dictated to by nobody. There are them as are
ready to dictate in every body of men. I don't name no names; I don't
make no suggestions; what I'm a-stating of is a general truth as is well
known to every one as has studied philosophy. I don't come here
pretending as I'm a learned man, nor one as knows better nor my
neighbours. I'm a plain man, as likes everything fair and aboveboard,
and is content when I'm well off. What I've got to say to you, ladies
and gentlemen, ain't no grumbling nor reflecting upon them as is absent
and can't defend themselves. I've got two things to say--first, as I
think you haven't been called together not in an open way; and, second,
that I think us Salem folks, as ought to know better, is a-quarrelling
with our bread-and-butter, and don't know when we're well off!

"Yes, ladies and gentlemen! them's my sentiments! we don't know when
we're well off! and if we don't mind, we'll find out how matters really
is when we've been and disgusted the pastor, and drove him to throw it
all up. Such a thing ain't uncommon; many and many's the one in our
connection as has come out for the ministry, meaning nothing but to
stick to it, and has been drove by them as is to be found in every
flock--them as is always ready to dictate--to throw it all up. My
friends, the pastor as is the subject of this meeting"--here Tozer sank
his voice and looked round with a certain solemnity--"Mr. Vincent,
ladies and gentlemen, as has doubled the seat-holders in Salem in six
months' work, and, I make bold to say, brought one-half of you as is
here to be regular at chapel, and take an interest in the
connection-- Mr. Vincent, I say, as you're all collected here to knock
down in the dark, if so be as you are willing to be dictated to--the
same, ladies and gentlemen, as we're a-discussing of to-night--told us
all, it ain't so very long ago, in the crowdedest meeting as I ever see,
in the biggest public hall in Carlingford--as we weren't keeping up to
the standard of the old Nonconformists, nor showing, as we ought, what a
voluntary church could do. It ain't pleasant to hear of, for us as
thinks a deal of ourselves; but that is what the pastor said, and there
was not a man as could contradict it. Now, I ask you, ladies and
gentlemen, what is the reason? It's all along of this as we're doing
to-night. We've got a precious young man, as Mr. Tufton tells you, and a
clever young man, as nobody tries for to deny; and there ain't a single
blessed reason on this earth why he shouldn't go on as he's been
a-doing, till, Salem bein' crowded out to the doors (as it's been two
Sundays back), we'd have had to build a new chapel, and took a place in
our connection as we've never yet took in Carlingford!"

Mr. Tozer paused to wipe his heated forehead, and ease his excited bosom
with a long breath; his audience paused with him, taking breath with the
orator in a slight universal rustle, which is the most genuine
applause. The worthy butterman resumed in a lowered and emphatic tone.

"But it ain't to be," said Tozer, looking round him with a tragic frown,
and shaking his head slowly. "Them as is always a-finding fault, and
always a-setting up to dictate, has set their faces again' all that.
It's the way of some folks in our connection, ladies and gentlemen; a
minister ain't to be allowed to go on building up a chapel, and making
hisself useful in the world. He ain't to be left alone to do his dooty
as his best friends approve. He's to be took down out of his pulpit, and
took to pieces behind his back, and made a talk and a scandal of to the
whole connection! It's not his preaching as he's judged by, nor his
dooty to the sick and dyin', nor any of them things as he was called to
be pastor for; but it's if he's seen going to one house more nor
another, or if he calls often enough on this one or t'other, and goes to
all the tea-drinkings. My opinion is," said Tozer, suddenly breaking off
into jocularity, "as a young man as may-be isn't a marrying man, and
anyhow can't marry more nor one, ain't in the safest place at Salem
tea-drinkings; but that's neither here nor there. If the ladies haven't
no pity, us men can't do nothing in that matter; but what I say is
this," continued the butterman, once more becoming solemn; "to go for to
judge the pastor of a flock, not by the dooty he does to his flock, but
by the times he calls at one house or another, and the way he makes
hisself agreeable at one place or another, ain't a thing to be done by
them as prides themselves on being Christians and Dissenters. It's not
like Christians--and if it's like Dissenters the more's the pity. It's
mean, that's what it is," cried Tozer, with fine scorn; "it's like a
parcel of old women, if the ladies won't mind me saying so. It's beneath
us as has liberty of conscience to fight for, and has to set an example
before the Church folks as don't know no better. But it's what is done
in our connection," added the good deacon with pathos, shaking his
forefinger mournfully at the crowd. "When there's a young man as is
clever and talented, and fills a chapel, and gives the connection a
chance of standing up in the world as it ought, here's some one as jumps
up and says, 'The pastor don't come to see me,' says he--'the pastor
don't do his duty--he ain't the man for Salem.' And them as is always in
every flock ready to do a mischief, takes it up; and there's talk of a
change, and meetings is called, and--here we are! Yes, ladies and
gentlemen, here we are! We've called a meeting, all in the dark, and
give him no chance of defending himself; and them as is at the head of
this movement is calling upon us to dismiss Mr. Vincent. But let me tell
you," continued Tozer, lowering his voice with a dramatic intuition, and
shaking his forefinger still more emphatically in the face of the
startled audience, "that this ain't no question of dismissing Mr.
Vincent; it's a matter of disgusting Mr. Vincent, that's what it
is--it's a matter of turning another promising young man away from the
connection, and driving him to throw it all up. You mark what I say.
It's what we're doing most places, us Dissenters; them as is talented
and promising and can get a better living working for the world than
working for the chapel, and won't give in to be worried about calling
here and calling there--we're a-driving of them out of the connection,
that's what we're doing! I could reckon up as many as six or seven as
has been drove off already, and I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, what's
the good of subscribing and keeping up of colleges and so forth, if
that's how you're a-going to serve every clever young man as trusts
hisself to be your pastor? I'm a man as don't feel no shame to say that
the minister, being took up with his family affairs and his studies, has
been for weeks as he hasn't crossed my door; but am I that poor-spirited
as I would drive away a young man as is one of the best preachers in the
connection, because he don't come, not every day, to see me? No, my
friends! them as would ever suspect such a thing of me don't know who
they're a-dealing with; and I tell you, ladies and gentlemen, as this is
a question as must come home to every one of your bosoms. Them as is so
set upon their own way that they can't hear reason--or them as is led
away by folks as like to dictate--may give their voice again' the
minister, if so be as they think fit; but as for me, and them as stands
by me, I ain't a-going to give in to no such tyranny! It shall never be
said in our connection as a clever young man was drove away from
Carlingford, and I had part in it. There's the credit o' the
denomination to keep up among the Church folks--and there's the chapel
to fill, as never had half the sittings let before--and there's Mr.
Vincent, as is the cleverest young man I ever see in our pulpit, to be
kep' in the connection; and there ain't no man living as shall dictate
to me or them as stands by me! Them as is content to lose the best
preaching within a hundred miles, because the minister don't call on two
or three families in Salem, not as often as they would like to see him,"
said Tozer, with trenchant sarcasm, "can put down their names again' Mr.
Vincent; but for me, and them as stands by me, we ain't a-going to give
in to no such dictation: we ain't a-going to set up ourselves against
the spread of the Gospel, and the credit o' the connection, and
toleration and freedom of conscience, as we're bound to fight for! If
the pastor don't make hisself agreeable, I can put up with that-- I can;
but I ain't a-going to see a clever young man drove away from Salem, and
the sittings vacant, and the chapel falling to ruin, and the Church
folks a-laughing and a-jeering at us, not for all the deacons in the
connection, nor any man in Carlingford. And this I say for myself and
for all as stands by me!"

The last sentence was lost in thunders of applause. The "Salem folks"
stamped with their feet, knocked the floor with their umbrellas, clapped
their hands in a furore of enthusiasm and sympathy. Their pride was
appealed to; nobody could bear the imputation of being numbered among
the two or three to whom the minister had not paid sufficient attention.
All the adherents of the Pigeon party deserted that luck-less family
sitting prominent upon their bench, with old Mrs. Tufton at the corner
joining as heartily as her over-shoes would permit in the general
commotion. There they sat, a pale line of faces, separated, by their
looks of dismay and irresponsive silence, from the applauding crowd,
cruelly identified as "them as is always ready to dictate." The occasion
was indeed a grand one, had the leader of the opposition been equal to
it; but Mrs. Pigeon only sat and stared at the new turn of affairs with
a hysterical smile of spite and disappointment fixed on her face. Before
the cheers died away, a young man--one of the Young Men's Christian
Association connected with Salem--jumped up on a bench in the midst of
the assembly, and clinched the speech of Tozer. He told the admiring
meeting that he had been brought up in the connection, but had strayed
away into carelessness and neglect--and when he went anywhere at all on
Sundays, went to church like one of the common multitude, till Mr.
Vincent's lectures on Church and State opened his eyes, and brought him
to better knowledge. Then came another, and another. Mrs. Vincent,
sitting on the back seat with her veil over her face, did not hear what
they said. The heroic little soul had broken down, and was lost in
silent tears, and utterances in her heart of thanksgiving, deeper than
words. No comic aspect of the scene appeared to her; she was not moved
by its vulgarity or oddity. It was deliverance and safety to the
minister's mother. Her son's honour and his living were alike safe, and
his people had stood by Arthur. She sat for some time longer, lost in
that haze of comfort and relief, afraid to move lest perhaps something
untoward might still occur to change this happy state of affairs--keen
to detect any evil symptom, if such should occur, but unable to follow
with any exactness the course of those addresses which still continued
to be made in her hearing. She was not quite sure, indeed, whether
anybody had spoken after Tozer, when, with a step much less firm than on
her entrance, she went forth, wiping the tears that blinded her from
under her veil, into the darkness and quiet of the street outside. But
she knew that "resolutions" of support and sympathy had been carried by
acclamation, and that somebody was deputed from the flock to assure the
minister of its approval, and to offer him the new lease of popularity
thus won for him in Salem. Mrs. Vincent waited to hear no more. She got
up softly and went forth on noiseless, weary feet, which faltered, now
that her anxiety was over, with fatigue and agitation. Thankful to the
bottom of her heart, yet at the same time doubly worn out with that
deliverance, confused with the lights, the noises, and the excitement of
the scene, and beginning already to take up her other burden, and to
wonder by times, waking up with sharp touches of renewed anguish, how
she might find Susan, and whether "any change" had appeared in her other
child. It was thus that the great Salem congregational meeting, so
renowned in the connection, ended for the minister's mother. She left
them still making speeches when she emerged into Grove Street. The
political effect of Tozer's address, or the influence which his new
doctrine might have on the denomination, did not occur to Mrs. Vincent.
She was thinking only of Arthur. Not even the darker human misery by her
side had power to break through her preoccupation. How the gentle
little woman had shaken off that anxious hand which grasped her old
black dress, she never knew herself, nor could any one tell; somehow she
had done it: alone, as she entered, she went away again--secret, but not
clandestine, under that veil of her widowhood. She put it up from her
face when she got into the street, and wiped her tears off with a
trembling, joyful hand. She could not see her way clearly for those
tears of joy. When they were dried, and the crape shadow put back from
her face, Mrs. Vincent looked up Grove Street, where her road lay in the
darkness, broken by those flickering lamps. It was a windy night, and
Dr. Rider's drag went up past her rapidly, carrying the doctor home from
some late visit, and recalling her thoughts to her own patient whom she
had left so long. She quickened her tremulous steps as Dr. Rider
disappeared in the darkness; but almost before she had got beyond the
last echoes of the Salem meeting, that shadow of darker woe and misery
than any the poor mother wist of, was again by Mrs. Vincent's side.




CHAPTER XVII.


"YOU are not able to walk so fast," said Mrs. Hilyard, coming up to the
widow as she crossed over to the darker side of Grove Street, just where
the house of the Miss Hemmings turned its lighted staircase-window to
the street; "and it will not harm you to let me speak to you. Once you
offered me your hand, and would have gone with me. It is a long long
time ago--ages since--but I remember it. I do not come after you for
nothing. Let me speak. You said you were a--a minister's wife, and knew
human nature," she continued, with a certain pause of reverence, and at
the same time a gleam of amusement, varying for a moment the blank and
breathless voice in which she had spoken. "I want your advice."

Mrs. Vincent, who had paused with an uncomfortable sensation of being
pursued, recovered herself a little during this address. The minister's
mother had no heart to linger and talk to any one at that moment, after
all the excitement of the evening, with her fatigued frame and occupied
mind; but still she was the minister's mother, as ready and prepared as
Arthur himself ought to have been, to hear anything that any of the
flock might have to say to her, and to give all the benefit of her
experience to anybody connected with Salem, who might be in trouble. "I
beg your pardon," said Mrs. Vincent; "my daughter is ill--that is why I
was making so much haste; but I am sure, if I can be of any use to any
member of-- I mean to any of my son's friends"--she concluded rather
abruptly. She did not remember much about this woman, who was strangely
unlike the other people in Salem. When was that time in which they had
met before? The widow's mind had been so swept by the whirlwind of
events and emotions, that she remembered only dimly how and where it was
she had formerly seen her strange companion.

"Your daughter is ill?" said Mrs. Hilyard; "that is how trouble happens
to you. You are a good woman; you don't interfere in God's business; and
this is how your trouble comes. You can nurse her and be about her bed;
and when she wakes up, it is to see you and be grateful to you. But my
child," she said, touching the widow's arm suddenly with her hand, and
suppressing painfully a shrill tone of anguish in her voice which would
break through, "does not know me. She opens her blue eyes--they are not
even my eyes--they are Alice's eyes, who has no right to my child--and
looks at me as if I were a stranger; and for all this time, since I
parted with her, I have not heard--I do not know where she is. Hush,
hush, hush!" she went on, speaking to herself, "to think that this is
me, and that I should break down so at last. A woman has not soul enough
to subdue her nerves for ever. But this is not what I wanted to say to
you. I gave Miss Smith your son's address----"

Having said this, she paused, and looked anxiously at the widow, who
looked at her also in the windy gleams of lamplight with more and more
perplexity. "Who is Miss Smith?" asked poor Mrs. Vincent. "Who are--you?
Indeed, I am very sorry to seem rude; but my mind has been so much
occupied. Arthur, of course, would know if he were here, but Susan's
illness has taken up all my thoughts; and--I beg your pardon--she may
want me even now," she continued, quickening her steps. Even the
courtesy due to one of the flock had a limit; and the minister's mother
knew it was necessary not to yield too completely to all the demands
that her son's people might make upon her. Was this even one of her
son's people? Such persons were unusual in the connection. Mrs. Vincent,
all fatigued, excited, and anxious as she was, felt at her wits' end.

"Yes, your son would know if he were here; he has taken my parole and
trusted me," said the strange woman; "but a woman's parole should not be
taken. I try to keep it; but unless they come, or I have news---- Who am
I? I am a woman that was once young and had friends. They married me to
a man, who was not a man, but a fine organisation capable of pleasures
and cruelties. Don't speak. You are very good; you are a minister's
wife. You don't know what it is, when one is young and happy, to find
out all at once that life means only so much torture and misery, and so
many lies, either done by you or borne by you--what does it matter
which? My baby came into the world with a haze on her sweet soul because
of that discovery. If it had been but her body!" said Mrs. Vincent's
strange companion, with bitterness. "A dwarfed creature, or deformed,
or---- But she was beautiful--she is beautiful, as pretty as Alice; and
if she lives, she will be rich. Hush, hush! you don't know what my fears
were," continued Mrs. Hilyard, with a strange humility, once more
putting her hand on the widow's arm. "If he could have got possession of
her, how could I tell what he might have done?--killed her--but that
would have been dangerous; poisoned what little mind she had left--made
her like her mother. I stole her away. Long ago, when I thought she
might have been safe with you, I meant to have told you. I stole her out
of his power. For a little while she was with me, and he traced us--then
I sent the child away. I have not seen her but in glimpses, lest he
should find her. It has cost me all I had, and I have lived and worked
with my hands," said the needlewoman of Back Grove Street, lifting her
thin fingers to the light and looking at them, pathetic vouchers to the
truth of her story. "When he drove me desperate," she went on, labouring
in vain to conceal the panting, long-drawn breath which impeded her
utterance, "you know? I don't talk of that. The child put her arms round
that old woman after her mother had saved her. She had not a word, not a
word for me, who had done---- But it was all for her sake. This is what
I have had to suffer. She looked in my face and waved me away from her
and said, 'Susan, Susan!' Susan meant your daughter--a new friend, a
creature whom she had not seen a week before--and no word, no look, no
recognition for me!"

"Oh, I am very sorry, very sorry!" said Mrs. Vincent, in her turn taking
the poor thin hand with an instinct of consolation. Susan's name, thus
introduced, went to the mother's heart. She could have wept over the
other mother thus complaining, moaning out her troubles in her
compassionate ear.

"I left them in a safe place. I came home to fall into your son's hands.
He might have been sure, had it come to that, that no one should have
suffered for me" said Mrs. Hilyard, with again a tone of bitterness.
"What was my life worth, could any man suppose? And since then I have
not heard a word--not a word--whether the child is still where I left
her, or whether some of his people have found her--or whether she is
ill--or whether-- I know nothing, nothing! Have a little pity upon me,
you innocent woman! I never asked pity, never sought sympathy before;
but a woman can never tell what she may be brought to. I am brought down
to the lowest depths. I cannot stand upright any longer," she cried,
with a wailing sigh. "I want somebody--somebody at least to give me a
little comfort. Comfort! I remember," she said, with one of those sudden
changes of tone which bewildered Mrs. Vincent, "your son once spoke to
me of getting comfort from those innocent young sermons of his. He knows
a little better now; he does not sail over the surface now as he used to
do in triumph. Life has gone hard with him, as with me and all of us.
Tell him, if I get no news I will break my parole. I cannot help
myself--a woman's honour is not her word. I told him so. Say to your
son----"

"My son? what have you to do with my son?" said Mrs. Vincent, with a
sudden pang. The poor mother was but a woman too. She did not understand
what this connection was. A worn creature, not much younger than
herself, what possible tie could bind her to Arthur? The widow, like
other women, could believe in any "infatuation" of men; but could not
understand any other bond subsisting between these two. The thought went
to her heart. Young men had been known before now to be mysteriously
attracted by women old, unbeautiful, unlike themselves. Could this be
Arthur's fate? Perhaps it was a danger more dismal than that which he
had just escaped in Salem. Mrs. Vincent grew sick at heart. She
repeated, with an asperity of which her soft voice might have been
thought incapable, "What have you to do with my son?"

Mrs. Hilyard made no answer--perhaps she did not hear the question. Her
eyes, always restlessly turning from one object to another, had found
out, in the lighted street to which they had now come, a belated postman
delivering his last letters. She followed him with devouring looks; he
went to Vincent's door as they approached, delivered something, and
passed on into the darkness with a careless whistle. While Mrs. Vincent
watched her companion with doubtful and suspicious looks through the
veil which, once more among the lights of Grange Street, the minister's
mother had drawn over her face, the unconscious object of her suspicion
grasped her arm, and turned to her with beseeching eyes. "It may be news
of my child?" she said, with a supplication beyond words. She drew the
widow on with the desperation of her anxiety. The little maid had still
the letter in her hand when she opened the door. It was not even for Mr.
Vincent. It was for the mistress of the house, who had not yet returned
from the meeting at Salem. Mrs. Vincent paused upon the threshold,
compassionate but determined. She looked at the unhappy woman who stood
upon the steps in the light of the lamp, gazing eagerly in at the door,
and resolved that she should penetrate no farther; but even in the
height of her determination the widow's heart smote her when she looked
at that face, so haggard and worn with passion and anxiety, with its
furtive gleaming eyes, and all the dark lines of endurance which were so
apparent now, when the tide of emotion had grown too strong to be
concealed. "Have you--no--friends in Carlingford?" said the widow, with
hesitation and involuntary pity. She could not ask her to enter where,
perhaps, her presence might be baleful to Arthur; but the little woman's
tender heart ached, even in the midst of her severity, for the suffering
in that face.

"Nowhere!" said Mrs. Hilyard; then, with a gleam out of her eyes which
took the place of a smile, "Do not be sorry for me; I want no
friends--nobody could share my burden with me. I am going back--home--to
Alice. Tell Mr. Vincent; I think something must happen to-night," she
added, with a slight shiver; "it grows intolerable, beyond bearing.
Perhaps by the telegraph--or perhaps---- And Miss Smith has this
address. I told you my story," she went on, drawing closer, and taking
the widow's hand, "that you might have pity on me, and understand--no,
not understand; how could she?--but if you were like me, do you think
you could sit still in one place, with so much upon your heart? You
never could be like me--but if you had lost your child----"

"I did," said Mrs. Vincent, drawing a painful breath at the
recollection, and drawn unwittingly by the sight of the terrible anxiety
before her into a reciprocation of confidence--"my child who had been in
my arms all her life-- God gave her back again; and now, while I am
speaking, He may be taking her away," said the mother, with a sudden
return of all her anxiety. "I cannot do you any good, and Susan may want
me: good-night--good-night."

"It was not God who gave her back to you," said Mrs. Hilyard, grasping
the widow's hand closer--"it was I--remember it was I. When you think
hardly of me, recollect--I did it. She might have been--but I freed
her--remember; and if you hear anything, if it were but a whisper, of my
child, think of it, and have pity on me. You will?--you understand what
I say?"

The widow drew away her hand with a pang of fear. She retreated
hurriedly, yet with what dignity she could, calling the little maid to
shut the door.

When that strange face, all gleaming, haggard, and anxious, was shut out
into the night, Mrs. Vincent went up-stairs very hastily, scarcely able
to give her alarmed withdrawal the aspect of an orderly retreat. Was
this woman mad to whom she had been speaking so calmly? In her agitation
she forgot all the precautions with which she had intended to soften to
her son the fact of her attendance at that meeting of which he had not
even informed her. Pursued by the recollection of that face, she
hastened to Arthur, still in her bonnet and veil. He was seated at the
table writing as when she left him; but all the minister's self-control
could not conceal a certain expectancy and excitement in the eyes which
he raised with a flash of eager curiosity to see who it was that thus
invaded his solitude. "Mother! where have you been?" he asked, with
irritation, when he perceived her. His impatience and anxiety, and the
great effort he had made to subdue both, betrayed him into a momentary
outburst of annoyance and vexation. "Where have you been?" he repeated,
throwing down his pen. "Surely not to this meeting, to compromise me, as
if I had not trouble enough already!" This rude accost put her immediate
subject out of Mrs. Vincent's mind: she went up to her son with
deprecating looks, and put her hand fondly on his head. The tears came
into her eyes, not because his words offended or grieved her, but for
joy of the good news she had to tell; for the minister's mother was
experienced in the ways of man, and knew how many things a woman does
for love which she gets no thanks for doing. Her boy's anger did not
make her angry, but it drove other matters, less important, out of her
head.

"Oh, Arthur, no one saw me," she said; "I had my veil down all the time.
How could I help going when I knew of it? I did not tell you--I did not
mean you to know; but it was impossible to stay away," cried the widow,
perceiving her son's impatience while she explained herself, and growing
confused in consequence, "when I heard what was going on. Oh, Arthur
dear, don't look so disturbed; they know better than you imagine--they
appreciate you, though they have not the way of showing it. I have seen
things happen so differently, that I know the value of such friends as
you have in the flock. Oh, my dear boy, don't look so strange! It has
been a great triumph, Arthur. There is a deputation coming to offer you
their support and sympathy. All this dreadful business has not harmed
you. Thank God for that! I think I shall be able to bear anything now."

The minister got up hastily from his chair, and took refuge on the
hearthrug. He changed colour; grew red and grew pale; and by way of
escaping from the complication of feelings that moved him, once more
broke out into impatient exclamations. "Why did you go? Why did not you
tell me you were going?" he said. "Why did you leave Susan, who wanted
you? Mother, you will never understand that a man's affairs must not be
meddled with!" cried the Nonconformist, with an instinctive effort to
conceal the agitation into which this unexpected news threw him. Then he
began to pace about the room, exclaiming against the impatience of
women, who can never wait for a result. The young man was too proud to
acknowledge the state of feverish suspense in which he had been, or the
wonderful tumult suddenly produced in his mind. He seized upon this
ready safety-valve of irritation, which was half real and half
fictitious. It gave him time to collect his troubled thoughts.

"Arthur dear, hush! no one saw me at the meeting. I had my veil down,
and spoke to nobody," said the widow: "and oh! don't you think it was
only natural that your mother should be there? No one in the world is so
much interested in what concerns you. I spoke to no one--except," said
Mrs. Vincent, with a little effort, "that strange woman, Arthur, whom
you have had so much to do with. Who is she? Oh, my dear boy, I hope you
have not formed any connections that you will repent? She said something
about a promise, and having given her word. I don't know why you should
have her word, or what she has to do with you. She came here to the door
with me to-night."

"Mrs. Hilyard!" cried the minister, suddenly roused. "Mrs.----; no
matter what her name is. Where is she? Do you mean that she came here?
They keep no watch over her. To-night of all nights in the world! If you
had but stayed at home, I should not have known of her wanderings at
least," he said, with vexation. "Now I shall have to go and look after
her--she must be sent back again--she must not be allowed to escape."

"Is she mad?" said Mrs. Vincent, alarmed, yet relieved. "Don't go away,
Arthur; she is not here. She said I was to tell you that she had gone
back--to Alice. Who is Alice?--who is this woman? What have you to do
with her? Oh! my dear boy, you are a minister, and the world is so ready
to make remarks. She said you had her word. Oh, Arthur, I hope it does
not mean anything you will live to repent?" cried the anxious mother,
fixing her jealous eyes on her son's face. "She is not like you. I
cannot tell what you can have to do with such a woman--you who
might----" Mrs. Vincent's fright and anxiety exhausted both her language
and her breath.

"It does not matter much after all," said the Nonconformist, who had
been busy with his own thoughts, and had only half heard his mother's
adjurations. "Like me?--what has that to do with the matter? But I
daresay she will go back, as she said; and now that he is out of danger,
and has not accused her, things must take their chance. Mad? It would
not be wonderful if she were mad. I can sympathise with people when they
are driven out of their wits. Who is this next? Another messenger from
the meeting, or perhaps your deputation? I think I shall go mad after a
while if I get no rest."

But as the minister stood in ill-concealed excitement by the fire, not
without expectation that it might be somebody with an official report
from Salem, Mr. Vincent's landlady, still in her bonnet and shawl, just
returned from the meeting, came in to tell the widow of the approach of
the doctor. "He's a-coming directly, ma'am; he's gone in for a minute
to Smith's, next door, where they've got the hooping-cough. And oh, Mr.
Vincent, sir," cried the woman, who had made this a pretence to express
her sentiments on the more important subject, "if there hasn't a-been a
sweet meeting! I'd have giv' a half-year's rent, ma'am, the pastor had
been there. All as unanimous and as friendly!--all but them Pigeons, as
are the poison of the place; and sweet Miss Phoebe Tozer a-crying of
her pretty eyes out; but there ain't no occasion for crying now," said
the triumphant landlady, who had a real stake in the matter. At this
touch the minister regained his composure. He went back to his seat at
the table, and took up the pen he had thrown down. A bishop could not
have looked more grandly indifferent than did the Nonconformist as he
turned his back upon his anxious partisan. "Tell the doctor to let me
know how Susan is, mother, for I am busy to-night," said the young man.
"I cannot leave my work just now even for Dr. Rider." He began again to
write in the excitement of his mind, and produced a sentence which was
not one of the least successful of his sentences, while the two women
with a certain awe stood silent behind his chair.

"I will not disturb you any longer, my dear boy. Good-night," said Mrs.
Vincent. She went away, followed by the discomfited landlady, who was
overwhelmed, and did not know what to make of it. The widow could not
but improve such an opportunity. "The minister must not be disturbed in
his studies," she said, with importance and in a whisper as she closed
the door. "When he is engaged with a subject, it does not answer to go
in upon him and disturb his attention. Neither meetings nor anything
else, however important, should interrupt a pastor when he is engaged in
composition," said the little woman, grandly. But while the mistress of
the house departed to her own quarter much overawed, the minister's
mother went to the sick-room with no such composure as she assumed.
Something she did not understand was in Arthur's mind. The Salem meeting
did not appear to her so conclusive as it had done an hour ago. He was
young and high-spirited and proud, and had not that dutiful subjection
to the opinions of the flock which became a minister of Salem. What if
that visionary horror with which she had frightened Tozer might turn out
a real danger? Though she had made such skilful use of it, the
possibility she had herself invented had not really alarmed her; but the
thought thrilled through her now with a fear which had some remorse in
it. She had invoked the ghost, not much believing in any such
supernatural climax; but if the apparition really made itself visible,
the widow recognised at once her entire want of any power to lay it. She
took off her shawl and bonnet with little comfort in her mind on that
subject to support her under the returning pangs of anxiety about Susan,
which overwhelmed her again as she opened the door of the sick-room. The
two troubles united in her heart and aggravated each other, as with a
sick throb of expectation she went in to Susan's bedside. Perhaps there
might be "a change"--for better or for worse, something might have
happened. The doctor might find something more conclusive to-night in
that languid pallid face. The noiseless room struck her with a chill of
misery as she went to her usual place, carrying the active life of pain
and a troubled heart into that melancholy atmosphere from which life
seemed to have fled. With a faltering voice she spoke to Susan, who
showed no signs of hearing her except by a feeble half-lifting of her
heavy eyelids and restless motion of her frame. No change! Never any
change! or, at least, as the nurse imagined, until---- The widow's heart
heaved with a silent sob of anguish--anguish sharp and acute as it is
when our misery breaks suddenly upon us out of a veil of other thoughts,
and we feel it intolerable. This sudden pang convulsed Mrs. Vincent's
much-tried heart as she wiped the bitter tears out of her eyes and
looked at her child, thus gliding, in a hopeless apathy and
unconsciousness, out of the arms that strained themselves in vain to
hold her. After so much as she had borne in her troubled life, God knows
it was hard. She did not rebel, but her heart lifted up a bitter cry to
the Father in heaven.

It was just then, while her anxious ear caught the step of the doctor on
the stair, that Mrs. Vincent was aware also of a carriage driving
rapidly up to the door. Preoccupied as she was, the sound startled her.
A passing wonder who it could be, and the vague expectation which
influences the mind at the great crises of life, when one feels that
anything may happen, moved her dimly as she rose to receive the doctor.
Dr. Rider came in with his noiseless step and anxious face; they shook
hands with each other mechanically, she gazing at him to see what his
opinion was before it could be formed--he looking with solicitous
serious eyes on the sick-bed. The light was dim, and Dr. Rider held it
up to see his patient. There she lay, moving now and then with the
restlessness of weakness, the pale large eyelids half closed, the pale
lips dropping apart,--a solemn speechless creature, abstracted already
out of this world and all its influences. The light that streamed over
her for the moment made no difference to Susan. There was nothing here
powerful enough to rouse the soul which horror and passion had driven
into one terrible corner of memory, obliterating all the rest of her
life. Dr. Rider looked at her with eyes in which the impatience of
powerless strength overcame even his professional reserve. He wrung the
widow's hand, which she laid on his arm in a trembling appeal to him to
tell her the worst. "The worst is that she is dying before our eyes, and
that she might be saved," he said, leading the poor mother to the other
end of the room. "All her heart and soul are concentrated upon that time
when she was away from you; unless we can rouse her by something that
will recall that time, she will never know you more. Think! is there
nothing that would wake her up even to remember the misery she endured?
Where is your servant who was with her?--but she has seen her lately,
and nothing has come of that. If you have the courage and strength,"
said the doctor, once more grasping Mrs. Vincent's hand tight, "to talk
of that man under the name she knew him by--to talk of him so as perhaps
she might hear; to discuss the matter; anything that will recall her
mind. Hush! what is that noise down-stairs?"

Even while listening to the doctor's dreadful suggestion, Mrs. Vincent
had been aware of the opening of the door down-stairs, and of a sound of
voices. She was trembling so that she could scarcely stand, principally,
no doubt, on account of this strange demand which he made upon her
strength, but with a nervous expectation besides which she could not
explain even to herself. But when, out of that confused commotion below,
there rose faint but audible the sound of a voice calling "Susan!
Susan!" the two anxious people started apart, and turned a wondering
momentary gaze upon each other, involuntarily asking what was that? what
did it mean? Then the doctor rushed to the door, where the widow
followed him as well as her trembling limbs would permit. She saw him
dash down-stairs, and herself stood grasping the railing, waiting for
what was about to happen, with her heart so beating and fluttering in
her breast that she could scarcely breathe for it. She could make
nothing of the rapid interrogation that went on downstairs. She heard
the voice of the doctor in hasty questions, and the slow, agitated,
somewhat confused utterance of a strange voice, which appeared to answer
him; and once or twice through these sounds came the strange cry,
"Susan! Susan!" which went to the widow's heart. Who could this be that
called upon Susan with so pathetic a repetition? It seemed a very long
interval to Mrs. Vincent before the doctor reappeared, and yet so short
was the time, that the door by which the new-comers, whoever they were,
had entered, was still open, admitting some strange familiar sounds from
the street into the bewildering maze of wonder and expectation. Mrs.
Vincent held fast by the rails to support herself, when she saw the
doctor returning up the stair, leading by the hand a girl whom he
grasped fast, and carried along with him by a kind of gentle but strong
compulsion. It was she who was calling Susan, gazing round her with
large dilated blue eyes, looking everywhere for something she had not
yet found. A beautiful girl--more beautiful than anything mortal to the
widow's surprised and wondering eyes. Who was she? The face was very
young, sadly simple, framed by long curling locks of fair hair, and the
broad circle of a large flapping Leghorn hat and blue veil. A bewildered
half-recognition came to Mrs. Vincent's mind as this blue veil waved in
her face in the wind from the open door; but excitement and anxiety had
deprived her of speech: she could ask no questions. "Here is the
physician," said Dr. Rider, with a kindred excitement in his voice. He
went into the room before her, leading the girl, behind whom there
followed slowly a confused and disturbed woman, whose face Mrs. Vincent
felt she had seen before. The mother, half jealous in her wonder,
pressed in after the doctor to guard her Susan even from experiments of
healing. "Doctor, doctor, who is it?" she said. But Dr. Rider held up
his hand imperatively to silence her. The room was imperfectly lighted
with candles burning dimly, and a faint glow of firelight. "Susan!"
cried the eager child's voice, with a weary echo of longing and
disappointment. "Susan!--take me to Susan; she is not here." Then Dr.
Rider led her round to the bedside, closely followed by the widow, and,
lifting a candle, threw its light fully upon the stranger. "Is it
Susan?" said the girl. "Will she not speak to me?--is she dead? Susan,
oh Susan, Susan!" It was an outcry of childish impatience and despair,
rising louder than any voice had risen in that room for many a day. Then
she burst forth into tears and sobs. "Susan!--she will not speak to me,
she will not look at me!" cried the stranger, drawing her arm out of the
doctor's hold, and clasping her hands together. There was a slight
movement in the bed; not the restless tossing with which her nurse was
familiar, but a trembling shiver came over that dying frame. The sound
had reached to the dull ears of the patient. She lifted her heavy
eyelids, and looked round with half-awakened eyes. "Call her again,
again!" said the doctor, in an intense whisper, which seemed to thrill
through the room. The girl, who was engaged with a much more engrossing
interest of her own, took no notice of the doctor. She knew nothing
about Susan's danger--she was bent on gaming succour for herself.
"Susan! tell her to look at me--at me! Susan! I care for nobody but
you!" said the lovely helpless creature, with strange half-articulate
cries, pressing closer to the bed. "You are to take care of me." Mrs.
Vincent pressed forward with pangs of anxiety, of terror, of hope, and
of a mother's tender jealousy through all, as these strange entreaties
filled the room. She too cried aloud, as she perceived the awakening in
that pallid face, the faint movement as if to raise herself up, which
indicated a conscious effort on the part of Susan. The clouds were
breaking on that obscured and hopeless firmament. The light, which
trembled in the doctor's hand, caught a gleam of understanding and life
in Susan's eyes, as her mother flew to raise her up, obeying the
suggestion of that unhoped-for movement. "Susan! you said you would take
care of me!" cried the young stranger, throwing herself upon the bedside
and grasping at the weak arm which once had protected her. The touch of
her hands awoke the slumbering soul. Slowly the light grew in Susan's
eyes. She who had not moved for days except in the restless tossings of
languor, lifted those white feeble arms to put them round the appealing
child. Then Susan struggled up, faint, yet inspired, unconscious of her
mother's help that enabled her to do so, and confronted the strange
people in her room, whom she had seen for weeks past, but did not know,
with living eyes. "Nobody shall touch her--we will protect each other,"
said the voice that had grown strange even to her mother's ears. Mrs.
Vincent could hardly be restrained from breaking in with a thousand
caresses and outcries of joy and thankfulness. But Dr. Rider quieted the
poor mother with a touch of his hand. "Let them alone," he said, with
that authority which no one in a sick-room can resist. Mrs. Vincent kept
back with unspeakable pangs in her heart, and watched the waking up of
that paralysed life which, alike in its loss and its recovery, had been
swept apart from her into another world. Without any help from her
mother, without even recognising her mother or distinguishing her from
the strangers round, Susan's soul awoke. She raised herself more and
more among those pillows where a little while ago she lay so
passively--she opened her eyes fully and looked round upon the man by
her bedside, and the other indistinct figures in the room, with a look
of resistance and conscious strength. "We will protect each other," said
Susan, slowly, "nobody shall harm her--we will keep each other safe."
Then, after another interval, other instincts awoke in the reviving
soul. She cast a wistful look from one to another, always drawing her
faint white arm round the girl who clung to her and found security in
her clasp. "Hush, hush! there are women here," she said in a whisper,
and with a tone of strange confusion, light breaking through the
darkness. Then there followed a long pause. Dr. Rider stood by the
bedside holding up his candle, attracting the wandering wistful glances
of his patient, who ceased to look at him with defiance as her eyes
again and again returned to the face, of which, often as it had bent
over her, she had no knowledge. All over the unknown room wandered those
strange looks, interrogating everything with a wistfulness beyond words.
What was this strange unfamiliar world into which, after her trance of
suffering, Susan had awakened? She did not know where she was, nor who
the people were who surrounded her. But the recollection of deadly peril
was not more distinct upon her confused mind than was the sentiment of
safety, of love, and watchfulness which somehow abode in this strange
dim room, in the little undecipherable circle of faces which surrounded
her bed. "Hush!" said Susan again, holding the stranger close. "Here are
women--women! nobody will harm us;" then, with a sudden flush over all
her face and cry of joy as the doctor suddenly threw the light full upon
Mrs. Vincent, who was bending over her, her mind struggled into
possession of itself,--"Here is my mother! she has come to take us
home!"

Mrs. Vincent remembered nothing more; she did not faint, for her child
wanted her--she sat all the night through on the bed, with Susan leaning
against her shoulder, clinging to her, holding her fast--starting again
and again to make sure that all was safe, and that it was, indeed, her
mother's arms that held her. Her soul was recalled out of that trance of
death. They laid the beautiful child upon the sofa in her young
guardian's sight, to keep up that happy influence; and when the night
was about half spent, the widow, throbbing all over her wearied frame
with exhaustion, pain, and joy, perceived that her Susan had fallen deep
and sweet asleep, clasping close, as if never again to lose hold of
them, her mother's tender hands.




CHAPTER XVIII.


THE after-events of the evening naturally lessened, in the minister's
family at least, the all-absorbing interest of the meeting at Salem.
Even Mr. Vincent's landlady, in her wondering narrative of the scene in
the sick-room--which, all Mrs. Vincent's usual decorums being thrust
aside by that unexpected occurrence, she had witnessed--forgot the other
public event which was of equally great importance. The house was in a
state of agitation as great as on Susan's return; and when the exulting
doctor, whose experiment had been so rarely successful, turned all
supernumerary persons out of the sick-room, it fell to Vincent's part to
take charge of the perplexed governess, Miss Smith, who stood outside,
anxious to offer explanations, a fatigued and harassed, but perfectly
virtuous and exemplary woman. Vincent, who had not realised his sister's
extreme peril, and who was rather disconcerted by this fresh invasion of
his house, opened the door of his sitting-room for her with more
annoyance than hospitality. His own affairs were urgent in his mind. He
could not keep his thoughts from dwelling upon Salem and what had
occurred there, though no one else thought of it. Had he known the
danger in which his sister lay, his heart might have rejected every
secondary matter. But the minister did not know that Susan had been
sinking into the last apathy when this sudden arrival saved her. He gave
Miss Smith the easy-chair by the fire, and listened with an appearance
of attention, but with little real understanding, to her lengthy and
perplexed story. She was all in a flutter, the good governess said:
everything was so mysterious and out of the way, she did not know what
to think. Little Alice's mamma, Miss Russell that was, Mrs. Mildmay she
meant, had brought the child back to her after that dreadful business at
Dover. What was the rights of that business, could Mr. Vincent tell her?
Colonel Mildmay was getting better, she knew, and it was not a murder;
and she was heartbroken when she heard the trouble poor dear Miss
Vincent had got into about it. Well, Alice's mamma brought back the
child, and they started with her at once to France. They went up beyond
Lyons to the hills, an out-of-the-way little place, but Mrs. Mildmay was
always so nervous. "And then she left us, Mr. Vincent," said the
afflicted governess, as the minister, in grievous impatience, kept
pacing up and down the room thus occupied and taken possession of--"left
us without a soul to speak to or a church within reach; and if there is
one thing I have more horror of than another for its effect upon the
youthful mind, it is Popery, which is so seductive to the imagination.
Alice did not take to her mamma, Mr. Vincent. It was natural enough, but
it was hard upon Mrs. Mildmay: she never had a good way with children;
and from the moment we started till now, it has been impossible to get
your sister out of the child's mind. She took a fancy to her the moment
she saw her. Girls of that age, if you will not think it strange of me
to say so, very often fall in love with a girl older than
themselves--quite fall in love, though it is a strange thing to say.
Alice would not rest--she gave me no peace. I wrote to say so, but I
think Mrs. Mildmay could not have got my letter. The child would have
run away by herself if I had not brought her. Besides," said Miss Smith,
apologetically, "the doctors have assured me that, if she ever became
much interested in any one, or attached to anybody in particular, she
was not to be crossed. It was the best chance for her mind, the doctors
said. What could I do? What do you think I could do, Mr. Vincent? I
brought her home, for I could not help myself--otherwise she would have
run away. She has a very strong will, though she looks so gentle. I hope
you will help me to explain the circumstances to Mrs. Mildmay, and how
it was I came back without her authority. Don't you think they ought to
call in the friends on both sides and come to some arrangement, Mr.
Vincent?" said the excellent woman, anxiously. "I know she trusts you
very much, and it was she herself who gave me your address."

To this speech Vincent listened with an impatience and restlessness
which he found it impossible to conceal. He paced about the darker end
of his room, on the other side of that table, where the lamp shone
vacantly upon his open desk and scattered papers, answering now and then
with a mono-syllable of reluctant courtesy, irritated and disturbed
beyond expression by the perfectly serious and proper figure seated by
the fire. Somebody might come from that assembly which had met to
discuss him, and he could not be alone to receive them. In the annoyance
of the moment the minister almost chafed at his sister and her concerns.
His life was invaded by these women, with their mysteries and agonies.
He listened to the steps outside, thinking every moment to hear the
steady tramp of the deputation from Salem, or at least Tozer, whom it
would have been balm to his mind, in the height of the good man's
triumph, to cut short and annihilate. But how do that, or anything else,
with this woman seated by his fire explaining her unintelligible
affairs? Such was Vincent's state of mind while his mother, in an agony
of joy, was hearing from Susan's lips, for the first time, broken
explanations of those few days of her life which outbalanced in terrible
importance all its preceding years. The minister did not know that his
sister's very existence, as well as her reason, hung upon that
unhoped-for opening of her mouth and her heart.

Matters were not much mended when Dr. Rider came in, beaming and
radiant, full of congratulations. Susan was saved. It was the most
curious psychological puzzle, the doctor said; all her life had got
concentrated into the few days between her departure from Lonsdale and
her arrival at Carlingford. Neither her old existence, nor the objects
that surrounded her at the moment, had any significance for Susan; only
something that belonged to that wonderful interval in which she had
been driven desperate, could win back consciousness to her mind. It was
the most singular case he had ever met with; but he knew this was the
only way of treating it, and so it had proved. He recognised the girl
with the blue veil the moment he saw her--he knew it could be no other.
Who was she? where had she sprung from at that critical moment? where
had she been? what was to be done with her? Dr. Rider poured forth his
questions like a stream. He was full of professional triumph, not to say
natural satisfaction. He could not understand how his patient's brother,
at that wonderful crisis, could have a mind preoccupied or engaged with
other things. The doctor turned with lively sympathy and curiosity from
the anxious Nonconformist to Miss Smith, who was but too willing to
begin all her explanations over again. Dr. Rider, accustomed to hear
many personal narratives, collected this story a great deal more clearly
than Vincent, who was so much more interested in it, had, with all his
opportunities, been able to do. How long the poor minister might have
suffered under this conversation, it is impossible to tell. But Mrs.
Vincent, in all the agitation of her daughter's deliverance, could not
forget the griefs of others. She sent a little message to her son,
begging that he would send word of this arrival to "the poor lady." "To
let her know--but she must not come here to-night," was the widow's
message, who was just then having the room darkened, and everything
arranged for the night, if perhaps her child might sleep. This message
delivered the minister; it recalled Miss Smith to her duty. She it was
who must go and explain everything to her patroness. Dr. Rider, whose
much-excited wonder was still further stimulated by hearing that the
child's mother was at Lady Western's, that she was Mrs. Mildmay, and
that the Nonconformist was in her confidence, cheerfully undertook to
carry the governess in his drag to Grange Lane, not without hopes of
further information; and it was now getting late. Miss Smith made
Vincent a tremulous curtsy, and held out her hand to him to say
good-night. "The doctor will perhaps explain to Mrs. Mildmay why I have
left little Alice," said the troubled woman. "I never left her before
since she was intrusted to me--never but when her papa stole her away;
and you are a minister, Mr. Vincent, and oh, I hope I am doing quite
right, and as Alice's mamma will approve! But if she disapproves I must
come back and----"

"They must not be disturbed to-night," said Dr. Rider, promptly; "I will
see Mrs. Mildmay." He was not reluctant to see Mrs. Mildmay. The doctor,
though he was not a gossip, was not inaccessible to the pleasure of
knowing more than anybody else of the complications of this strange
business, which still afforded matter of talk to Carlingford. He hurried
her away while still the good governess was all in a flutter, and for
the first time the minister was left alone. It was with a troubled mind
that the young man resumed his seat at his desk. He began to get utterly
weary of this business, and all about it. If he could only have swept
away in a whirlwind, with his mother and sister, where the name of
Mildmay had never been heard of, and where he could for ever get rid of
that haunting woman with her gleaming eyes, who had pursued even his
gentle mother to the door! but this new complication seemed to involve
him deeper than ever in those strange bonds. It was with a certain
disgust that the minister thought it all over as he sat leaning his head
on his hands. His way was dark before him, yet it must speedily be
decided. Everything was at a crisis in his excited mind and troubled
life--even that strange lovely child's face, which had roused Susan from
her apathy, had its share in the excitement of her brother's thoughts;
for it was but another version, with differences, of the face of that
other Alice, who all unwittingly had procured for Vincent the sweetest
and the hardest hours he had spent in Carlingford. Were they all to pass
like a dream--her smiles, her sweet looks, her kind words, even that
magical touch upon his arm, which had once charmed him out of all his
troubles? A groan came out of the young man's heart, not loud, but deep,
as that thought moved him. The very despair of this love-dream had been
more exquisite than any pleasure of his life. Was it all to pass away
and be no longer? Life and thought, the actual and the visionary, had
both come to a climax, and seemed to stand still, waiting the decision
which must be come to that night.

From these musings the entrance of Tozer roused the minister. The
excellent butterman came in all flushed and glowing from his success. To
him, the meeting, which already the Nonconformist had half lost sight of
under the superstructure of subsequent events, had newly concluded, and
was the one occurrence of the time. The cheers which had hailed him
master of the field were still ringing in Tozer's ears. "I don't deny as
I am intoxicated-like," said the excellent deacon; "them cheers was
enough to carry any man off his legs, sir, if you'll believe me. We've
scattered the enemy, that's what we've been and done, Mr. Vincent. There
ain't one of them as will dare show face in Salem. We was unanimous,
sir--unanimous, that's what we was! I never see such a triumph in our
connection. Hurrah! If it warn't Miss as is ill, I could give it you all
over again, cheers and all."

"I am glad you were pleased," said Vincent, with an effort; "but I will
not ask you for such a report of the proceedings."

"Pleased! I'll tell you one thing as I was sorry for, sir," said Tozer,
somewhat subdued in his exultation by the pastor's calmness--"I did it
for the best; but seeing as things have turned out so well, I am as
sorry as I can be--and that is, that you wasn't there. It was from
expecting some unpleasantness as I asked you not to come; but things
turning out as they did, it would have done your heart good to see 'em,
Mr. Vincent. Salem folks has a deal of sense when you put things before
them effective. And then you'd only have had to say three words to them
on the spur of the moment, and all was settled and done with, and
everything put straight; which would have let them settle down steady,
sir, at once, and not kept no excitement, as it were, hanging about."

"Yes," said the minister, who was moving about his papers, and did not
look up. The butterman began to be alarmed; he grew more and more
enthusiastic the less response he met with.

"It's a meeting as will tell in the connection," said Tozer, with
unconscious foresight; "a candid mind in a congregation ain't so general
as you and me would like to see, Mr. Vincent, and it takes a bit of a
trial like this, sir, and opposition, to bring out the real attachment
as is between a pastor and a flock."

"Yes," said Vincent again. The deacon did not know what to make of the
minister. Had he been piqued and angry, Tozer thought he might have
known how to manage him, but this coldness was an alarming and
mysterious symptom which he was unequal to. In his embarrassment and
anxiety the good butterman stumbled upon the very subject from which,
had he known the true state of affairs, he would have kept aloof.

"And the meeting as was to be to-morrow night?" said Tozer; "there ain't
no need for explanation now--a word or two out of the pulpit is all as
is wanted, just to say as it's all over, and you're grateful for their
attachment, and so forth; you know a deal better, sir, how to do it nor
me. And about the meeting as was called for to-morrow night?--me and the
misses were thinking, though it's sudden, as it might be turned into a
tea-meeting, if you was agreeable, just to make things pleasant; or if
that ain't according to your fancy, as I'm aware you're not one as likes
tea-meetings, we might send round, Mr. Vincent to all the seat-holders
to say as it's given up; I'd do one or the other, if you'd be advised by
me."

"Thank you--but I can't do either one or the other," said the
Nonconformist. "I would not have asked the people to meet me if I had
not had something to say to them--and this night's business, you
understand," said Vincent, with a little pride, "has made no difference
in me."

"No, sir, no--to be sure not," said the perplexed butterman, much
bewildered; "but two meetings on two nights consecutive is running the
flock hard, it is. I'd give up to-morrow, Mr. Vincent, if I was you."

To this insinuating address the minister made no answer--he only shook
his head. Poor Tozer, out of his exultation, fell again into the depths.
The blow was so unlooked-for that it overwhelmed him.

"You'll not go and make no reflections, sir?" said the troubled deacon;
"bygones is bygones. You'll not bring it up against them, as they didn't
show that sympathy they might have done? You'll not make no reference to
nobody in particular, Mr. Vincent? When a flock is conscious as they've
done their duty and stood by their pastor, it ain't a safe thing, sir,
not to turn upon them, and rake up things as is past. If you'll take my
advice, sir, as wishes you well, and hasn't no motive but your good, I'd
not hold that meeting, Mr. Vincent; or, if you're bent upon it, say the
word, and we'll set to work and give 'em a tea-meeting, and make all
things comfortable. But if you was prudent, sir, and would go by my
advice, one or the other of them two is what I would do."

"Thank you, Tozer, all the same," said Vincent, who, notwithstanding his
preoccupation, saw the good butterman's anxiety, and appreciated it. "I
know very well that all that is pleasant to-night is owing to you. Don't
suppose I don't understand how you've fought for me; but now the
business is mine, and I can take no more advice. Think no more of it;
you have done all that you could do."

"I have done my humble endeavour, sir, as is my dooty, to keep things
straight," said the deacon, doubtfully; "and if you'd tell me what was
in your mind, Mr. Vincent----?"

But the young Nonconformist gathered up his papers, closed his desk, and
held out his hand to the kind-hearted butterman. "My sister has come
back almost from the grave to-night," said Vincent; "and we are all, for
anything I can see, at the turning-point of our lives. You have done all
you can do, and I thank you heartily; but now the business is in my
hands."

This was all the satisfaction Tozer got from the minister. He went home
much discouraged, not knowing what to make of it, but did not confide
his fears even to his wife, hoping that reflection would change the
pastor's mind, and resolved to make another effort to-morrow. And so the
night fell over the troubled house. In the sick-room a joyful agitation
had taken the place of the dark and hopeless calm. Susan, roused to
life, lay leaning against her mother, looking at the child asleep on the
sofa by her, unconscious of the long and terrible interval between the
danger which that child had shared, and the delicious security to which
her mind had all at once awakened. To Susan's consciousness, it appeared
as if her mother had suddenly risen out of the mists, and delivered the
two helpless creatures who had suffered together. She could not press
close enough to this guardian of her life. She held her arms round her,
and laid her cheek against the widow's with the dependence of a child
upon her mother's bosom. Mrs. Vincent sat upon the bed supporting her,
herself supported in her weariness by love and joy, two divine
attendants who go but seldom together. The two talked in
whispers,--Susan because of her feebleness, the mother in the instinct
of caressing tenderness. The poor girl told her story in broken
syllables--broken by the widow's kisses and murmurs of sympathy, of
wonder and love. Healing breathed upon the stricken mind and feeble
frame as the two clung together in the silent night, always with an
unspoken reference to the beautiful forlorn creature on the sofa--that
visible symbol of all the terrors and troubles past. "I told her my
mother would come to save us," said poor Susan. When she dropt to sleep
at last, the mother leant her aching frame upon some pillows, afraid to
move, and slept too, supreme protector, in her tender weakness, of these
two young lives. As she woke from time to time to see her child sleeping
by her side, thoughts of her son's deliverance stole across Mrs.
Vincent's mind to sweeten her repose. The watch-light burned dimly in
the room, and threw a gigantic shadow of her little figure, half erect
on the side of the bed, still in her black gown and the close white cap,
which could not be less than dainty in its neatness, even in that vigil,
upon the further wall. The widow slept only in snatches, waking often
and keeping awake, as people do when they grow old; her thoughts, ever
alive and active, varying between her projects for the future, to save
Susan from all painful knowledge of her own story, and the thankful
recollection of Arthur's rescue from his troubles. From echoes of
Tozer's speech, and of the cheers of the flock, her imagination wandered
off into calculations of how she could find another place of habitation
as pleasant, perhaps, as Lonsdale, and even to the details of her
removal from thence, what portions of her furniture she would sell, and
which take with her. "For now that Arthur has got out of his troubles,
we must not stay to get him into fresh difficulties with his flock," she
said to herself, with a momentary ache in her thankful heart; and so
dropped asleep for another half-hour, to wake again presently, and enter
anew into the whole question. Such was the way in which Mrs. Vincent
passed that agitated but joyful night.

In the adjoining room Arthur sat up late over his papers. He was not
writing, or doing any work; for hours together he sat leaning his head
on his hands, gazing intently at the lamp, which his mother had
adjusted, until his eyes were dazzled, and the gloom of the room around
became spotted with discs of shade. Was he to permit the natural
gratification into which Tozer's success had reluctantly moved him, to
alter his resolve? Was he to drop into his old harness and try again? or
was he to carry out his purpose in the face of all entreaties and
inducements? The natural inclination to adopt the easiest course--and
the equally natural, impetuous, youthful impulse to take the leap to
which he had made up his mind, and dash forth in the face of his
difficulties--gave him abundant occupation for his thoughts as they
contended against each other. He sat arguing the question within himself
long after his fire had sunk into ashes. When the penetrating cold of
the night drove him at last to bed, the question was still dubious. Even
in his sleep the uneasy perplexity pursued him;--a matter momentous
enough, though nobody but Tozer--who was as restless as the minister,
and disturbed his wife by groans and murmurs, of which, when indignantly
woke up to render an account, he could give no explanation--knew or
suspected anything. Whether to take up his anchors altogether and launch
out upon that sea of life, of which, much as he had discussed it in his
sermons, the young Nonconformist knew next to nothing? The widow would
not have mused so quietly with her wakeful eyes in the dim room next to
him, had she known what discussions were going on in Arthur's mind. As
for the congregation of Salem, they slept soundly, with an exhilarating
sensation of generosity and goodness,--all except the Pigeons, who were
plotting schism, and had already in their eye a vacant Temperance Hall,
where a new preaching station might be organised under the auspices of
somebody who would rival Vincent. The triumphant majority, however,
laughed at the poulterer, and anticipated, with a pleasurable
expectation, the meeting of next night, and the relief and delight of
the pastor, who would find he had no explanations to make, but only his
thanks to render to his generous flock. The good people concluded that
they would all stop to shake hands with him after the business was over.
"For it's as good as receiving of him again, and giving him the right
hand of fellowship," said Mrs. Brown at the Dairy, who was entirely won
over to the minister's side. Only Tozer, groaning in his midnight
visions, and disturbing the virtuous repose of his wedded partner,
suspected the new cloud that hung over Salem. For before morning the
minister's mind was finally made up.




CHAPTER XIX.


THE next day dawned amid the agitations natural to such a crisis of
affairs. Almost before it was daylight, before Susan had woke, or the
young stranger stirred upon her sofa, Miss Smith, troubled and
exemplary, had returned to see after her charge. Miss Smith was in a
state of much anxiety and discomfort till she had explained to Mrs.
Vincent all the strange circumstances in which she found herself; and
the widow, who had ventured to rise from Susan's side, and had been
noiselessly busy putting the room in order, that her child might see
nothing that was not cheerful and orderly when she woke, was not without
curiosity to hear, and gladly took this opportunity, before even Arthur
was stirring, to understand, if she could, the story which was so
connected with that of her children. She ventured to go into the next
room with Miss Smith, where she could hear every movement in the
sick-chamber. The widow found it hard to understand all the tale. That
Mrs. Hilyard was Mildmay's wife, and that it was their child who had
sought protection of all the world from Susan Vincent, whom the crimes
of her father and mother had driven to the very verge of the grave, was
so hard and difficult to comprehend, that all the governess's anxious
details of how little Alice first came into her hands, of her mother's
motives for concealing her from Colonel Mildmay, even of the ill-fated
flight to Lonsdale, which, instead of keeping her safe, had carried the
child into her father's very presence--and all the subsequent events
which Miss Smith had already confided to the minister, fell but dully
upon the ears of Susan's mother. "Her daughter--and his daughter--and
she comes to take refuge with my child," said the widow, with a swelling
heart. Mrs. Vincent did not know what secret it was that lay heavy on
the soul of the desperate woman who had followed her last night from
Grove Street, but somehow, with a female instinct, felt, though she did
not understand, that Mrs. Hilyard or Mrs. Mildmay, whatever her name
might be, was as guilty in respect to Susan as was her guilty
husband--the man who had stolen like a serpent into the Lonsdale cottage
and won the poor girl's simple heart. Full of curiosity as she was, the
widow's thoughts wandered off from Miss Smith's narrative; her heart
swelled within her with an innocent triumph; the good had overcome the
evil. This child, over whom its father and mother had fought with so
deadly a struggle, had flown for protection to Susan, whom that father
and mother had done their utmost to ruin and destroy. They had not
succeeded, thank God! Through the desert and the lions the widow's Una
had come victorious, stretching her tender virgin shield over this poor
child of passion and sorrow. While Miss Smith maundered through the
entire history, starting from the time when Miss Russell married Colonel
Mildmay, the widow's mind was entirely occupied with this wonderful
victory of innocence over wickedness. She forgot the passionate despair
of the mother whose child did not recognise her. She began immediately
to contrive, with unguarded generosity, how Susan and she, when they
left Carlingford, should carry the stranger along with them, and nurse
her clouded mind into full development. Mrs. Vincent's trials had not
yet taught her any practical lessons of worldly wisdom. Her heart was
still as open as when, unthinking of evil, she admitted the false Mr.
Fordham into her cottage, and made a beginning of all the misery which
seemed now, to her sanguine heart, to be passing away. She went back to
Susan's room full of this plan--full of tender thoughts towards the girl
who had chosen Susan for her protector, and of pride and joy still more
tender in her own child, who had overcome evil. It was, perhaps, the
sweetest solace which could have been offered, after all her troubles,
to the minister's mother. It was at once a vindication of the hard
"dealings" of Providence, and of that strength of innocence and purity,
in which the little woman believed with all her heart.

The minister himself was much less agreeably moved when he found the
governess in possession of his sitting-room. Anything more utterly
vexatious could hardly have occurred to Vincent than to find this
troubled good woman, herself much embarrassed and disturbed by her own
position, seated at his breakfast-table on this eventful morning. Miss
Smith was as primly uncomfortable as it was natural for an elderly
single woman, still conscious of the fact that she was unmarried, to be,
in an absolute tete-a-tete with a young man. She, poor lady, was as near
blushing as her grey and composed non-complexion would permit. She moved
uneasily in her seat, and made tremulous explanations, as Vincent, who
was too young and inexperienced to be absolutely uncourteous, took his
place opposite to her. "I am sure I feel quite an intruder," said poor
Miss Smith; "but your mother, Mr. Vincent, and little Alice--and indeed
I did not know I was to be left here alone. It must seem so odd to you
to find a lady--dear, dear me! I feel I am quite in the way," said the
embarrassed governess; "but Mrs. Mildmay will be here presently. I know
she will be here directly. I am sure she would have come with me had she
known. But she sat up half the night hearing what I had to tell her, and
dropped asleep just in the morning. She is wonderfully changed, Mr.
Vincent--very, very much changed. She is so nervous--a thing I never
could have looked for. I suppose, after all, married ladies, however
much they may object to their husbands, can't help feeling a little when
anything happens," continued Miss Smith, primly; "and there is something
so dreadful in such an accident. How do you think it can have happened?
Could it be his groom, or who could it be? but I understand he is
getting better now?"

"Yes, I believe so," said Vincent.

"I am so glad," said Miss Smith, "not that if it had been the will of
Providence.--I would make the tea for you, Mr. Vincent, if you would not
think it odd, and I am sure Mrs. Mildmay will be here directly. They
were in a great commotion at Grange Lane. Just now, you know, there is
an excitement. Though she is not a young girl, to be sure it is always
natural. But for that I am sure they would all have come this morning;
but perhaps Mr. Fordham----"

"Not any tea, thank you. If you have breakfasted, I will have the things
removed. I have only one sitting-room, you perceive," said the minister,
rather bitterly. He could not be positively uncivil--his heart was too
young and fresh to be rude to any woman; but he rang the bell with a
little unnecessary sharpness when Miss Smith protested that she had
breakfasted long before. Her words excited him with a touch beyond
telling. He could not, would not ask what was the cause of the commotion
in Grange Lane; but he walked to the window to collect himself while the
little maid cleared the table, and, throwing it open, looked out with
the heart beating loud in his breast. Were these the bells of St.
Roque's chiming into the ruddy sunny air with a confused jangle of joy?
It was a saint's day, no doubt--a festival which the perpetual curate
took delight in proclaiming his observance of; or--if it might happen to
be anything else, what was that to the minister of Salem, who had so
many other things on his mind? As he looked out a cab drove rapidly up
to the door--a cab from which he saw emerge Mrs. Hilyard and another
figure, which he recognised with a start of resentment. What possible
right had this man to intrude upon him in this moment of fate? The
minister left the window hastily, and stationed himself with a gloomy
countenance on the hearthrug. He might be impatient of the women; but
Fordham, inexcusable as his intrusion was, had to be met face to face.
With a flash of sudden recollection, he recalled all his previous
intercourse with the stranger whose name was so bitterly inter-woven
with the history of the last six months. What had he ever done to wake
so sharp a pang of dislike and injury in Vincent's mind? It was not for
Susan's sake that her brother's heart closed and his countenance clouded
against the man whose name had wrought her so much sorrow. Vincent had
arrived at such a climax of personal existence that Susan had but a dim
and secondary place in his thoughts. He was absorbed in his own troubles
and plans and miseries. On the eve of striking out for himself into that
bitter and unknown life in which his inexperienced imagination rejected
the thought of any solace yet remaining, what malicious influence
brought this man here?

They came in together into the room, "Mrs. Mildmay and Mr. Fordham"--not
Mrs. Hilyard: that was over; and, preoccupied as the minister was, he
could not but perceive the sudden change which had come over the Back
Grove Street needlewoman. Perhaps her despair had lasted as long as was
possible for such an impatient spirit. She came in with the firm, steady
step which he had observed long ago, before she had begun to tremble at
his eye. Another new stage had commenced in her strange life. She went
up to him without any hesitation, clear and decisive as of old.

"I am going away," she said, holding out her hand to him, "and so I
presume are you, Mr. Vincent. I have come to explain everything and see
your mother. Let me see your mother. Mr. Fordham has come with me to
explain to you. They think in Grange Lane that it is only a man who can
speak to a man," she went on, with the old movement of her thin lips;
"and that now I have come to life again, I must not manage my own
affairs. I am going back to society and the world, Mr. Vincent. I do not
know where you are going, but here is somebody come to answer for me. Do
they accept bail in a court of honour? or will you still hold a woman to
her parole? for it must be settled now."

"Why must it be settled now?" said Vincent. He had dropped her hand and
turned away from her with a certain repugnance. She had lost her power
over him. At that moment the idea of being cruel, tyrannical to
somebody--using his power harshly, balancing the pain in his own heart
by inflicting pain on another--was not unagreeable to the minister's
excited mind. He could have steeled himself just then to bring down upon
her all the horrible penalties of the law. "Why must it be settled?" he
repeated; "why must you leave Carlingford? I will not permit it." He
spoke to her, but he looked at Fordham. The stranger was wrapped in a
large overcoat which concealed all his dress. What was his dress, or
his aspect, or the restrained brightness in his eyes to the minister of
Salem? But Vincent watched him narrowly with a jealous inspection. In
Fordham's whole appearance there was the air of a man to whom something
was about to happen, which aggravated to the fever-point the dislike and
opposition in Vincent's heart.

"I will be answerable for Mrs. Mildmay," said Fordham, with an evident
response on his side to that opposition and dislike. Then he paused,
evidently perceiving the necessity of conciliation. "Mr. Vincent," he
continued, with some earnestness, "we all understand and regret deeply
the inconvenience-- I mean the suffering--that is to say, the injury and
misery which these late occurrences must have caused you. I know how
well--that is, how generously, how nobly--you have behaved----"

Here Mr. Fordham came to a pause in some confusion. To express calm
acknowledgments to a man for his conduct in a matter which has been to
him one of unmitigated disaster and calamity, requires an amount of
composure which few people possess when at the height of personal
happiness. The minister drew back, and, with a slight bow, and a
restraint which was very natural and not unbecoming in his
circumstances, looked on at the confusion of the speaker without any
attempt to relieve it. He had offered seats to his visitors, but he
himself stood on the hearthrug, dark and silent, giving no assistance in
the explanation. He had not invited the explanation--it must be managed
now as the others might, without any help from him.

"I have seen Colonel Mildmay," continued Mr. Fordham, after a confused
pause. "If it can be any atonement to you to know how much he regrets
all that has happened, so far as your family is concerned--how fully he
exonerates Miss Vincent, who was all along deceived, and who would not
have remained a moment with him had she not been forcibly detained.
Mildmay declares she met with nothing but respect at his hands,"
continued the embarrassed advocate, lowering his voice; "he says----"

"Enough has been said on the subject," said Vincent, restraining himself
with a violent effort.

"Yes--I beg your pardon, it is quite true--enough has been said," cried
Fordham, with an appearance of relief. Here, at least, was one part of
his difficult mediation over. "Mildmay will not," he resumed, after a
pause, "tell me or any one else who it was that gave him his wound--that
is a secret, he says, between him and his God--and another. Whoever that
other may be," continued Fordham, with a quick look towards Mrs.
Mildmay, "he is conscious of having wronged--him--and will take no steps
against--him. This culprit, it appears, must be permitted to escape--you
think so?--worse evils might be involved if we were to
demand--his--punishment. Mr. Vincent, I beg you to take this into
consideration. It could be no advantage to you; the innocent shall not
suffer--but--the criminal--must be permitted to escape."

"I do not see the necessity," said Vincent between his teeth.

"No, no," said Mrs. Mildmay, suddenly. "Escape! who believes in escape?
Mr. Vincent knows better. Hush, you are a happy man just now--you are
not qualified to judge; but we know better. Escape!--he means from
prisons, and such like," she continued, turning to Vincent with a
half-disdainful wave of her hand towards her companion. "But you know,
and so do I, that there is no escape--not in this world. I know nothing
about the next," said the strange woman, curbing once more the flush of
excitement which had overpowered her as she spoke--"nothing; neither do
you, though you are a priest. But there is enough of retribution here.
The criminal--Mr. Vincent--you know--will not escape."

She spoke these last words panting, with pauses between, for breath. She
was afraid of him again; his blankness, his passive opposition, drove
her out of her composure. She put her hands together under her shawl
with a certain dumb entreaty, and fixed upon him her eager eyes. They
were a strange group altogether. Miss Smith, who had still lingered at
the door, notwithstanding Mrs. Mildmay's imperative gesture of
dismissal--out of hearing, but not out of sight--suffered some little
sound to escape her at this critical moment; and when her patroness
turned round upon her with those dreadful eyes, fled with precipitation,
taking refuge in Mrs. Vincent's room. The table, still covered with its
white cloth, stood between that dismayed spectator before she
disappeared finally, and the little company who were engaged in this
silent conflict. Beside it sat Mrs. Mildmay, with a renewed panic of
fear rising in her face. Fordham, considerably disturbed, and not
knowing what to say, stood near her buttoning and unbuttoning his
overcoat with impatient fingers, anxious to help her, but still more
anxious to be gone. The minister stood facing them all, with compressed
lips, and eyes which looked at nobody. He was wrapt in a silent dumb
resistance to all entreaties and arguments, watching Fordham's gestures,
Fordham's looks, with a jealous but secret suspicion. His heart was
cruel in its bitterness. He for whom Providence had no joys in store, to
whom the light was fading which made life sweet, was for this moment
superior to the happy man who stood embarrassed and impatient before
him; and generous as his real nature was, it was not in him, in this
moment of darkness, to let the opportunity go.

"The innocent have suffered already," said Vincent, "all but madness,
all but death. Why should the criminal escape?--go back into society,
the society of good people, perhaps strike some one else more
effectually? Why should I betray justice, and let the criminal escape?
My sister's honour and safety are mine, and shall be guarded, whoever
suffers. I will not permit her to go."

"But I offer to be answerable for her appearance," said Fordham,
hastily. "I undertake to produce her if need be. You know me. I am a--a
relation of the family. I am a man sufficiently known to satisfy any
magistrate. You have no legal right to detain her. What would you have
more? Is not my guarantee enough for you?"

"No," said Vincent, slowly. The two men stood defiant opposite to each
other, contending for this woman, whom neither of them looked at, for
whom neither of them cared. She, in the mean time, sat still in an agony
of suspense and concealed anguish, with her eyes fixed on Vincent's
face. She knew very well it was not of her that either of the two was
thinking; yet it was her fate, perhaps her very life, which hung
trembling in the balance. A smothered sighing sob came from her breast.
She was silenced for the first time in her life. She had escaped her
crime; but all its material consequences, shame and punishment, still
hung over her head. After God himself had freed her from the guilt of
blood--after the injured man himself had forgiven her--when all was
clear for her escape into another life--was this an indignant angel,
with flaming sword and averted face, that barred the way of the
fugitive? Beyond him, virtue and goodness, and all the fruits of
repentance, shone before the eyes which had up to this time seen but
little attraction in them--all so sweet, so easy, so certain, if but she
were free. Her worn heart sighed to get forth into that way of peace.
She could have fallen on her knees before the stern judge who kept her
back, and held over her head the cloud of her own ill-doings, but dared
not, in her paroxysm of fear and half-despair. A groaning, sighing sob,
interrupted and broken, came from her exhausted breast. Just as she had
recovered herself--as she had escaped--as remorse and misery had driven
her to yearn after a better life, to be cast down again into this abyss
of guilt and punishment! She trembled violently as she clasped her poor
hands under her shawl. Composure and self-restraint were impossible in
this terrible suspense.

Her cry went to Fordham's heart; and, besides, he was in desperate
haste, and could afford to sink his pride, and make an appeal for once.
He made a step forward, and put out his hand with an entreating gesture.
"Do you hear her?" he cried, suddenly. "You have had much to bear
yourself; have pity on her. Let her off--leave her to God. She has been
ill, and will die if you have no mercy. You who are a minister----"

In his energy his overcoat fell back for a moment; underneath he was in
full dress, which showed strangely in that grey spring morning. Vincent
turned round upon him with a smile. The young man's face was utterly
pale, white to the lips. The bells were jangling joy in his ears. He was
not master of himself. "We detain you, Mr. Fordham; you have other
affairs in hand," he said. "I am a minister only--a Dissenting
minister--unworthy to have such an intercessor pleading with me; but
you, at least," cried poor Vincent, with an attempt at sarcasm, "do not
want my pity; there is nothing between us that requires explanation. I
will arrange with Mrs. Mildmay alone." He turned away and went to the
window when he had spoken. There he stood, with his back to them,
listening to the bells of St. Roque's, as they came and went in
irregular breaks upon the wind. His heart was bursting with wild throbs
of bitterness and despair; it was all he could do to keep the tumult
down, and contain himself in that flush of passion. He turned away from
them, and stood gazing out at that tedious window into the blank world.
What did it matter? Let her escape if she would--let things go as they
might; nothing was of any further importance--certainly on
earth--perhaps even in heaven.

"I will go away--I can do you no good--I should only lose my temper; and
time presses," said Mr. Fordham, with a flush of resentment on his face,
as he turned to the anxious woman behind him. What could he do? He could
not quarrel with this angry man in his own house on such a day. He could
not keep happier matters waiting. He would not risk the losing of his
temper and his time at this moment of all others. He went away with a
sensation of defeat, which for half an hour materially mitigated his
happiness. But he was happy, and the happy are indulgent judges both of
their own conduct and of others. As for the minister, he was roused
again when he saw his rival jump into the cab at the door, and drive off
alone down the street, which was lively with the early stir of day. The
sun had just broken through the morning clouds, and it was into a ruddy
perspective of light that the stranger disappeared as he went off
towards Grange Lane. Strange contrast of fate! While Fordham hastened
down into the sunshine to all the joy that awaited him there, Tozer, a
homely, matter-of-fact figure in the ruddy light, was crossing the
street towards the minister's door. Vincent went away from the window
again, with pangs of an impatience and intolerance of his own lot which
no strength of mind could subdue. All the gleams of impossible joy which
had lighted his path in Carlingford had now gone out, and left him in
darkness; and here came back, in undisturbed possession, all the meaner
circumstances of his individual destiny. Salem alone remained to him out
of the wreck of his dreams; except when he turned back and discovered
her--the one tragic thread in the petty history--this woman whose future
life for good or for evil he held in his avenging hands.

Mrs. Mildmay was still seated by the table. She had regained command of
herself. She looked up to him with gleaming eyes when he approached her.
"Mr. Vincent, I keep my parole-- I am waiting your pleasure," she said,
never removing her eyes from his face. It was at this moment that Mrs.
Vincent, who had from the window of Susan's chamber seen the cab arrive
and go away with some curiosity, came into the room. The widow wanted to
know who her son's visitors were, and what had brought them. She came in
with a little eagerness, but was brought to a sudden standstill by the
appearance of Mrs. Mildmay. Why was this woman here? what had she to do
with the minister? Mrs. Vincent put on her little air of simple dignity.
She said, "I beg your pardon; I did not know my son was engaged," with a
curtsy of disapproving politeness to the unwelcome visitor. With a
troubled look at Arthur, who looked excited and gloomy enough to
justify any uncomfortable imaginations about him, his mother turned
away somewhat reluctantly. She did not feel that it was quite right to
leave him exposed to the wiles of this "designing woman;" but the
widow's own dignity was partly at stake. All along she had disapproved
of this strange friendship, and she could not countenance it now.

"Your mother is going away," said Mrs. Mildmay, with a restrained outcry
of despair: "is no one to be permitted to mediate between us? You are a
man and cruel; you are in trouble, and you think you will avenge
yourself. No, no--I don't mean what I say. Your son is a--a true knight,
Mrs. Vincent; I told you so before. He will never be hard upon a woman:
if I had not known that, why should I have trusted him? I came back, as
he knows, of my own will. Don't go away; I am willing you should
know--the whole," said the excited woman, with a sudden pause, turning
upon Vincent, her face blanching into deadly whiteness--"the whole--I
consent; let her be the judge. Women are more cruel than men; but I
saved her daughter--I am willing that she should hear it all."

She sat down again on the seat from which she had risen. A certain
comfort and relief stole over her face. She was appealing to the general
heart of humanity against this one man who knew her secret. It might be
hard to hear the story of her own sin--but it was harder to be under the
stifling sway of one who knew it, and who had it in his power to
denounce her. She ceased to tremble as she looked at the widow's
troubled face. It was a new tribunal before which she stood; perhaps
here her provocations might be acknowledged--her soul acquitted of the
burden from which it could never escape. As the slow moments passed on,
and the minister did not speak, she grew impatient of the silence. "Tell
her," she said, faintly--it was a new hope which thus awoke in her
heart.

But while Mrs. Mildmay sat waiting, and while the widow drew near, not
without some judicial state in the poise of her little figure, to hear
the explanation which she felt she was entitled to, Tozer's honest
troubled face looked in at the door. It put a climax upon the confusion
of the morning. The good butterman looked on in some surprise at this
strange assemblage, recognising dimly the haze of an excitement of which
he knew nothing. He was acquainted, to some extent, with the needlewoman
of Back Grove Street. He had gone to call on her once at the
solicitation of the anxious Brown, who had charge of her district but
did not feel himself competent to deal with the spiritual necessities of
such a penitent; and Tozer remembered well that her state of mind had
not been satisfactory--"not what was to be looked for in a person as had
the means of grace close at hand, and attended regular at Salem." He
thought she must have come at this unlucky moment to get assistance of
some kind from the minister--"as if he had not troubles enough of his
own," Tozer said to himself; but the deacon was not disposed to let his
pastor be victimised in any such fashion. This, at least, was a matter
in which he felt fully entitled to interfere.

"Good mornin', ma'am," said the worthy butterman; "good mornin', Mr.
Vincent--it's cold, but it's seasonable for the time of year. What I
wanted was a word or two with the pastor, ma'am, if he's disengaged. It
ain't what I approve," continued Tozer, fixing his eyes with some
sternness upon the visitor, "to take up a minister's time in the morning
when he has the work of a flock on his hands. My business, being such as
can't wait, is different; but them as are in want of assistance, one way
or another, which is a thing as belongs to the deacons, have no excuse,
not as I can see, for disturbing the pastor. It ain't a thing as I would
put up with," continued Tozer, with increasing severity; the charities
of the flock ain't in Mr. Vincent's hands; it's a swindling of his time
to come in upon him of a morning if there ain't a good reason; and, as
far as I am concerned, it would be enough to shut my heart up again'
giving help--that's how it would work on me."

Mrs. Mildmay was entirely inattentive to the first few words of this
address, but the pointed application given by the speaker's eyes called
her attention presently. She gazed at him, as he proceeded, with a
gradual lightening of her worn and anxious face. While Mrs. Vincent did
all she could, with anxious looks and little deprecatory gestures, to
stop the butterman, the countenance of her visitor cleared by one of
those strange sudden changes which the minister had noted so often. Her
lips relaxed, her eyes gleamed with a sudden flash of amusement. Then
she glanced around, seeing with quick observation not only the absurdity
of Tozer's mistake, but the infallible effect it had in changing the
aspect of affairs. The minister had turned away, not without a grim,
impatient smile at the corner of his mouth. The minister's mother,
shocked in all her gentle politeness, was eagerly watching her
opportunity to break in and set the perplexed deacon right. The culprit,
who had been on her trial a moment before, drew a long breath of utter
relief. Now she had escaped--the crisis was over. Her quick spirit rose
with a sense of triumph--a sensation of amusement. She entered eagerly
into it, leaning forward with eyes that shone and gleamed upon her
accuser, and a mock solemnity of attention which only her desperate
strain of mind and faculties could have enabled her to assume so
quickly. When the butterman came to a pause, Mrs. Vincent rushed in
breathlessly to the rescue.

"Mr. Tozer--Mr. Tozer! this lady is--a--a friend of ours," cried the
minister's mother, with looks that were much more eloquent of her
distress and horror than any words. She had no time to say more, when
the aggrieved individual herself broke in--

"Mr. Tozer knows I have been one of the flock since ever Mr. Vincent
came," said the strange woman. "I have gone to all the meetings, and
listened faithfully to the pastor every time he has preached; and would
you judge me unworthy of relief because I once came to see him in a
morning? That is hard laws; but the minister will speak for me. The
minister knows me," she went on, turning to Vincent, "and he and his
mother have been very charitable to a poor woman, Mr. Tozer. You will
not exclude me from the Salem charities for this one offence? Remember
that I am a member of the flock."

"Not a church-member as I know," said the sturdy deacon--"not meaning no
offence, if I've made a mistake--one sitting, as far as I remember; but
a--lady--as is a friend of Mrs. Vincent's----"

Here Tozer paused, abashed but suspicious, not disposed to make any
further apology. That moment was enough to drive this lighter interlude
from the vigilant soul which, in all its moods, watched what was going
on with a quick apprehension of the opportunities of the moment. All her
perceptions, quickened as they were by anxiety and fear, were bent on
discovering an outlet for her escape, and she saw her chance now. She
got up wearily, leaning on the table, as indeed she needed to lean, and
looked into Mrs. Vincent's face: "May I see my child?" she said, in a
voice that went to the heart of the widow. The minister's mother could
not resist this appeal. She saw the trembling in her limbs, the anxiety
in her eye. "Arthur, I will see to Mrs. Mildmay. Mr. Tozer has something
to say to you, and we must not occupy your time," said the tender little
woman, in whose gentle presence there was protection and shelter even
for the passionate spirit beside her. Thus the two went away together.
If there had ever been any revengeful intention in Vincent's mind, it
had disappeared by this time. He too breathed deep with relief. The
criminal had escaped, at least out of his hands. He was no longer
compelled to take upon himself the office of an avenger.




CHAPTER XX.


"I HOPE, sir, as I haven't said anything to give offence?--it was far
from my meaning," said Tozer; "not as the--person--is a church-member,
being only a seat-holder for one sittin', as is down in the books. I
wouldn't have come over, not so early, Mr. Vincent, if it wasn't as I
was wishful to try if you'd listen to reason about the meetin' as is
appointed to be to-night. It ain't no interest of mine, not so far as
money goes, nor nothing of that kind. It's you as I'm a-thinking of. I
don't mind standing the expense out of my own pocket, if so be as you'd
give in to make it a tea-meetin'. I don't know as you'd need to do
nothing but take the chair and make yourself agreeable. Me and Brown and
the women would manage the rest. It would be a pleasant surprise, that's
what it would be," said the good butterman; "and Phoebe and some more
would go down directly to make ready: and I don't doubt as there's cakes
and buns enough in Carlingford, Mr. Vincent, sir, if you'd but bend your
mind to it and consent."

"I am going out," said Vincent; "I have--something to do; don't detain
me, Tozer. I must have this morning to myself."

"I'll walk with you, sir, if I ain't in the way," said the deacon,
accompanying the young man's restless steps down-stairs. "They tell me
Miss is a deal better, and all things is going on well. I wouldn't be
meddlesome, Mr. Vincent, not of my own will; but when matters is
settling, sir, if you'd but hear reason! There can't nothing but harm
come of more explanations. I never had no confidence in explanations,
for my part; but pleasant looks and the urns a-smoking, and a bit of
green on the wall, as Phoebe and the rest could put up in no time! and
just a speech as was agreeable to wind up with--a bit of an anecdote, or
poetry about friends as is better friends after they've spoke their
minds and had it out--that's the thing as would settle Salem, Mr.
Vincent. I don't speak, not to bother you, sir, but for your good. There
ain't no difficulty in it; it's easier a deal than being serious and
opening up all things over again; and as for them as would like to
dictate----"

"I am not thinking of Salem," said the minister; "I have many other
things to distract me; for heaven's sake, if you have any pity, leave me
alone to-day."

"But you'll give in to make it a tea-meetin'?" said the anxious
butterman, pausing at his own door.

Tozer did not make out the minister's reply. It is difficult to
distinguish between a nod and a shake of the head, under some
circumstances--and Vincent did not pause to give an articulate answer,
but left his champion to his own devices. It seemed to Vincent to be a
long time since Fordham left his house--and he was possessed with a
fever of impatience to see for himself what was being transacted down
yonder in the sunshine, where the spire of St. Roque's appeared in the
distance through the ruddy morning haze. The bells had ceased, and all
was quiet enough in Grange Lane. Quite quiet--a few ordinary passengers
in the tranquil road, nursemaids and children--and the calm green doors
closing in the concealed houses, as if no passion or agitation could
penetrate them. The door of Lady Western's garden was ajar. The minister
crossed over and looked in with a wistful, despairing hope of seeing
something that would contradict his conclusion. The house was basking in
the spring sunshine--the door open, some of the windows open, eager
servants hovering about, an air of expectation over all. With eyes full
of memories, the minister looked in at the half-open door, which one
time and another had been to him the gate of paradise. Within, where the
red geraniums and verbenas had once brightened all the borders, were
pale crocuses and flowers of early spring--the limes were beginning to
bud, the daisies to grow among the grass. The winter was over in that
sheltered and sunny place; Nature herself stood sweet within the
protecting walls, and gathered all the tenderest sweets of spring to
greet the bride in the new beginning of her life. It was but a glance,
but the spectator, in the bitterness of his heart, did not lose a single
tint or line; and just then the joy-bells burst out once more from St.
Roque's. Poor Vincent drew back from the door as the sudden sound stung
him to the heart. Nothing had any pity for him--all the world, and
every voice and breath therein, sided with the others in their joy. He
went on blindly, without thinking where he was going, with a kind of
dull, stubborn determination in his heart, not to turn back in his
wretchedness even from the sight of the happy procession which he knew
must be advancing to meet him. A pang more or less, what did it matter?
And for the last time he would look on Her who was nothing in the world
to him now--who never could have been anything--yet who had somehow shed
such streams of light upon the poor minister's humble path, as no
reality in all his life had ever shed before. He paused on the edge of
the road as he saw the carriage coming. It was one of those moments when
a man's entire life becomes apparent to him in long perspective of past
and future, he himself and all the world standing still between. The
bells rang on his heart, with echoes from the wheels and the horses'
feet coming up in superb pride and triumph. Heaven and earth were glad
for her in her joy. He, in his great trouble, stood dark in the sunshine
and looked on.

It was only a moment, and no more. He would have seen nothing but the
white mist of the veil which surrounded her, had not she in her
loveliness and kindness perceived him, and bent forward in the carriage
with a little motion of her hand calling the attention of her unseen
bridegroom to that figure on the way. At sight of that movement, the
unhappy young man started with an intolerable pang, and went on heedless
where he was going. He could not control the momentary passion. She had
never harmed him--never meant to dazzle him with her beauty, or trifle
with his love, or break his heart. It was kind as the sunshine, this
sweet bridal face leaning out with that momentary glance of recognition.
She would have given him her kind hand, her sweet smile as of old, had
they met more closely--no remorseful consciousness was in her eyes; but
neither the bells, nor the flowers, nor the sunshine, went with such a
pang to poor Vincent's heart as did that look of kindness. It was all
unreal then--no foundation at all in it? not enough to call a passing
colour to her cheek, or to dim her sweet eyes on her bridal day? He went
down the long road in the insensibility of passion--seeing nothing,
caring for nothing--stung to the heart. No look of triumph, no female
dart of conscious cruelty, could have given the poor minister so bitter
a wound. All her treasured looks and smiles--the touch of her hand--her
words, of which he had scarcely forgotten one--did they mean nothing
after all? nothing but kindness? He had laid his heart at her feet; if
she had trodden on it he could have forgiven her; but she only went on
smiling, and never saw the treasure in her way. And this was the end.
The unfortunate young man could not give way to any outbreak of the
passion that consumed him; he could but go on hotly--on past St.
Roque's, where flowers still lay in the porch, and the open doors
invited strangers, to the silent country, where the fields lay callow
under the touch of spring. Spring! everlasting mockery of human trouble!
Here were the hedgerows stirring, the secret grain beginning to throb
conscious in the old furrows; but life itself standing still--coming to
a sudden end in this heart which filled the young man's entire frame
with pulsations of anguish. All his existence had flowed towards this
day, and took its termination here. His love--heaven help him! he had
but one heart, and had thrown it away; his work--that too was to come to
nothing, and be ended; all his traditions, all his hopes, were they to
be buried in one grave? and what was to become after of the posthumous
and nameless life?




CHAPTER XXI.


WHEN the minister fully came to himself, it was after a long rapid walk
of many miles through the silent fields and hazy country. There the
clouds cleared off from him in the quietness. When he began to see
clearly he turned back towards Carlingford. Nothing now stood between
him and the crisis which henceforward must determine his personal
affairs. He turned in the long country road, which he had been pursuing
eagerly without knowing what he was doing, and gazed back towards the
distant roofs. His heart ached and throbbed with the pangs that were
past. He had a consciousness that it stirred within his breast, still
smarting and thrilling with that violent access of agony--but the climax
was over. The strong pulsations fell into dull beats of indefinite pain.
Now for the other world--the neutral-coloured life. Vincent did not very
well know which road he had taken, for he had not been thinking of where
he was going; but it roused him a little to perceive that his homeward
way brought him through Grove Street, and past Siloam Cottage, where Mr.
Tufton lived.

Mrs. Tufton was at the window, behind the great geranium, when the
minister came in sight. When she saw him she tapped upon the pane and
beckoned him to go in. He obeyed the summons, almost without
impatience, in the languor of his mind. He went in to find them all by
the fire, just as they had been when he came first to Carlingford. The
old minister, in his arm-chair, holding out his flabby white hand to his
dear young brother; the invalid daughter still knitting, with cold blue
eyes, always vigilant and alert, investigating everything. It was a mild
day, and Mrs. Tufton herself had shifted her seat to the window, where
she had been reading aloud as usual the 'Carlingford Gazette.' The
motionless warm air of the little parlour, the prints of the brethren on
the walls, the attitudes of the living inhabitants, were all unchanged
from the time when the young minister of Salem paid his first visit, and
chafed at Mr. Tufton's advice, and heard with a secret shiver the
prophecy of Adelaide, that "they would kill him in six months." He took
the same chair, again making a little commotion among the furniture,
which the size of the room made it difficult to displace. It was with a
bewildering sensation that he sat down in that unchangeable house. Had
time really gone on through all these passions and pains, of which he
was conscious in his heart? or had it stood still, and were they only
dreams? Adelaide Tufton, immovable in her padded chair, with pale blue
eyes that searched through everything, had surely never once altered her
position, but had knitted away the days with a mystic thread like one of
the Fates. Even the geranium did not seem to have gained or shed a
single leaf.

"I have just been reading in the 'Gazette' the report of last night's
meeting," said good Mrs. Tufton. "Oh, Mr. Vincent, I was so glad--your
dear mother herself, if she had been there, could not have been happier
than I was. I hope she has seen the 'Gazette' this morning. You young
men always like the 'Times;' but they never put in anything that is
interesting to me in the 'Times.' Perhaps, if she has not seen it, you
will put the paper in your pocket. Indeed, it made me as happy as if you
had been my own son. I always say that is very much how Mr. Tufton and I
feel for you."

"Yes, it went off very well," said the old minister. "My dear young
brother, it all depends on whether you have friends that know how to
deal with a flock; nothing can teach you that but experience. I am sorry
I dare not go out again to-night--it cost me my night's rest last night,
as Mrs. Tufton will tell you; but that is nothing in consideration of
duty. Never think of ease to yourself, my dear young friend, when you
can serve a brother; it has always been my rule through life----"

"Mr. Vincent understands all that," said Adelaide; "that will do,
papa--we know. Tell me about Lady Western's marriage, Mr. Vincent. I
daresay you were invited, as she was such a friend of yours. It must
have made an awkwardness between you when she turned out to be Colonel
Mildmay's sister; but, to be sure, those things don't matter among
people in high life. It was delightful that she should marry her old
love after all, don't you think? Poor Sir Joseph would have left a
different will if he had known. Parted for ten years and coming
together again! it is like a story in a book----"

"I do not know the circumstances," said poor Vincent. He turned to Mr.
Tufton with a vain hope of escaping. "I shall have to bid you good-bye
shortly," said the minister; "though it was very good of the Salem
people not to dismiss me, I prefer----"

"You mean to go away?" said Adelaide; "that will be a wonderful piece of
news in the connection; but I don't think you will go away: there will
be a deputation, and they will give you a piece of plate, and you will
remain--you will not be able to resist. Papa never was a preacher to
speak of," continued the dauntless invalid, "but they gave him a purse
and a testimonial when he retired; and you are soft-hearted, and they
will get the better of you----"

"Adelaide!" said Mrs. Tufton, "Mr. Vincent will think you out of your
senses: indeed, Mr. Vincent, she does not mind what she says; and she
has had so much ill-health, poor child, that both her papa and I have
given in to her too much; but as for my husband's preaching, it is well
known he could have had many other charges if his duty had not called
him to stay at Salem; invitations used to come----"

"Oh, stuff!" said the irreverent Adelaide--"as if Mr. Vincent did not
know. But I will tell you about Lady Western--that is the romance of the
day. Mr. Fordham was very poor, you know, when they first saw each
other--only a poor barrister--and the friends interfered. Friends always
interfere," said the sick woman, fixing her pale eyes on Vincent's face
as she went on with her knitting; "and they married her to old Sir
Joseph Western; and so, after a while, she became the young dowager. She
must have been very pretty then--she is beautiful now; but I would not
have married a widow, had I been Mr. Fordham, after I came into my
fortune. His elder brother died, you know. I would not have married her,
however lovely she had been. Mr. Vincent, would you?"

"Adelaide!" cried Mrs. Tufton, again in dismay. The poor minister thrust
back his chair from the table, and came roughly against the stand of the
great geranium, which had to be adjusted, and covered his retreat. He
glanced at his conscious tormentor with the contemptuous rage and
aggravation which men sometimes feel towards a weak creature who insults
them with impunity. But she did not show any pleasurable consciousness
of her triumph; she kept knitting on, looking at him with her pale blue
eyes. There was something in that loveless eagerness of curiosity which
appalled Vincent. He got up hastily to his feet, and said he had
something to do and must go away.

"Good-bye, my dear brother," said Mr. Tufton slowly, shaking the young
minister's hand; "you will be judicious to-night? The flock have stood
by you, and been indulgent to your inexperience. They see you never
meant to hurt any of their feelings. It is what I always trained my dear
people to be--considerate to the young preachers. Take my advice, my
beloved young brother, and dear Tozer's advice. We do all we can for
you here, and dear Tozer is a tower of strength. And you have our
prayers; we are but a little assembly--I and my dear partner in life and
our afflicted child--but two or three, you know--and we never forget you
at the throne of grace."

With this parting blessing Vincent hastened away. Poor little Mrs.
Tufton had added some little effusion of motherly kindness which he did
not listen to. He came away with a strange impression on his mind of
that knitting woman, pale and curious, in her padded chair. Adelaide
Tufton was not old--not a great many years older than himself. To him,
with the life beating so strong in his veins, the sight of that life in
death was strange, almost awful. The despair, the anguish, the vivid
uncertainty and reality of his own existence, appeared to him in
wonderful relief against that motionless background. If he came back
here ten years hence, he might still find as now the old man by the
fire, the pale woman knitting in her chair, as they had been for these
six months which had brought to the young minister a greater crowd of
events than all his previous years. When he thought of that helpless
woman, with her lively thoughts and curious eyes, always busy and
speculating about the life from which she was utterly shut out, a
strange sensation of thankfulness stole over the young man; though he
was miserable he was alive. Between him and the lovely figure on which
his heart had dwelt too long, rose up now this other figure which was
not lovely. He grew stronger as he went home along the streets in the
changed light of the afternoon. Siloam Cottage interposed between him
and that ineffable moment at the bridal doors; presently Salem too would
interpose, and all the difficulties and troubles of his career. He had
taken up life again, after that pause when the sun and the moon stood
still and the battle raged. Now it was all over, and the world's course
had begun anew.

Mrs. Vincent was looking out for him when he reached his own door. He
could see her disappear from the window above, where she had been
standing watching. She came to meet him as he went up to the
sitting-room. There was nobody now in that room, where the widow had
been making everything smile for her son. The table was spread; the fire
bright; the lamp ready to be lighted on the table. Mrs. Vincent had been
alarmed by Arthur's long absence, but she did not say so. She only made
haste to tell him that Susan was so much better, and that the doctor was
in such high spirits about her. "After we come back from the meeting you
are to go in and sit with your sister for an hour, my dear boy," said
his mother. "Till that was over, we knew your mind would be occupied,
and Susan would like to see you. Oh, Arthur! it will make you happy only
to look at her. She remembers everything now; she has asked me even all
about the flock, and cried with joy to hear how things had gone off last
night--not for joy only," said the truthful widow, "with indignation,
too, that you ever should have been doubted--for Susan thinks there is
nobody like her brother; but, my dear, we ought to be very thankful
that things have happened so well. Everybody must learn to put up with a
little injustice in this world, particularly the pastor of a flock. If
you will go and get ready for dinner, Arthur," said Mrs. Vincent, "I
will light the lamp. I have taken it into my own hands, dear; it is
better to put it right at first than to be always arranging it after it
has been put wrong. Dinner is quite ready, and make haste, my dear boy.
I have got a little fish for you, and you know it will spoil if you keep
it waiting; and I have so much to tell you before we go out to the
meeting to-night."

Vincent made no answer to the wistful inquiring look which his mother
turned to his face as she mentioned this meeting. He went away with an
impatient exclamation about that lamp, which seemed to him to occupy
half her thoughts. Mrs. Vincent was full of many cares and much news
which she had to give her son; she was also deeply anxious and curious
to know what he was going to do that night; but still she spared a
little time for the lamp, to set the screw right, and light to a
delicate evenness the well-trimmed wick. When she had placed it on the
table, it gave her a certain satisfaction to see how clearly it burned,
and how bright it made the table. "If I only knew what Arthur was going
to do," she said to herself, with a little sigh, as she rang the bell
for the dinner, and warned the little maid to be very careful with the
fish; "for if it is not put very nicely on the table Mr. Vincent will
not have any of it," said the minister's mother, with that feminine
mingling of small cares and great which was so incomprehensible to her
son. When he came back and seated himself listlessly at the table, he
never thought of observing the light, or taking note of the brightness
of the room. To think of this business of dinner at all, interjected
into such a day, was almost too much for Arthur; and he was half
disgusted with himself when he found that, after all, he could eat, and
that not only for his mother's sake. Mrs. Vincent talked only of Susan
while the little maid was going and coming into the room; but when they
were alone she drew her chair a little nearer and entered upon other
things.

"Arthur, I had a great deal of conversation with Mrs. Mildmay; she told
me--everything," said the widow, growing pale. "Oh, my dear! when God
leaves us alone to our own devices, what dreadful things a sinful
creature may do! I said you would do nothing to harm her now when Susan
was safe. Hush, dear! we must never breathe a word of it to Susan, or
any one. Susan is changed, Arthur; sometimes I am glad of it, sometimes
I could cry. She is not an innocent girl now. She is a woman--oh,
Arthur! a great deal stronger than her mother; she would clear herself
somehow if she knew; she would not bear that suspicion. She is more like
your dear papa," said the mother, wiping her eyes, "than I ever thought
to see one of my children. I can see his high-minded ways in her,
Arthur--and steadier than you and me; for you have my quick temper,
dear. Wait just another moment, Arthur. This poor child dotes upon
Susan; and her mother asked me," said poor Mrs. Vincent, pausing, and
looking her son in the face, "if--I would keep her with me."

"Keep her with you! Let us be rid of them," cried the minister; "they
have brought us nothing but misery ever since we heard their names."

"Yes, Arthur dear; but the poor child never did any one any harm. They
have made her a ward in Chancery now. It should have been done long ago
but for the wickedness and the disputes; and, my dear boy," said Mrs.
Vincent, anxiously, "I will have to leave Lonsdale, you know, my poor
child could not go back there; and we will not stay with you in
Carlingford to get you into trouble with your flock," continued the
widow, gazing wistfully in his face to see if she could gather anything
of his purpose from his looks; "and with my little income, you know, it
would be hard work without coming on you; but all the difficulty is
cleared away if we take this child. I was thinking I might take Susan
abroad," said the widow, with a little sigh; "it is the best thing, I
have always heard, after such trouble; and it would be an occupation for
her when she got better. My dear boy, don't be hasty; your dear father
always took a little time to think upon a thing before he would speak;
but you have always had my temper, Arthur. I won't say any more; we will
speak of it, dear, in your sister's room, when we come home from the
meeting to-night."

"I think you had better not go to the meeting to-night; there will be
nothing said to please you, mother," said the minister, rising from the
table, and taking his favourite position on the hearthrug. His mother
turned round frightened, but afraid to show her fright, determined still
to look as if she believed everything was going well.

"No fine speeches, Arthur? My dear boy, I always like to hear you speak.
I know you will say what you ought," said the widow, smiling, with a
patient determination in her face. Then there was a pause. "Perhaps you
will give me a little sketch of what you are going to say," she went on,
with a tender artifice, concealing her anxiety. "Your dear papa often
did, Arthur, when anything was going on among the flock."

But Arthur made no reply. His clouded face filled his mother with a host
of indefinite fears. But she saw, as she had seen so often, that
womanish entreaties were not practicable, and that he must be left to
himself. "He will tell me as we go to Salem," she said in her heart, to
quiet its anxious throbbing. "Perhaps you would like to have the room to
yourself a little, dear," she said aloud. "I will go to Susan till it is
time to leave; and I know my Arthur will ask the counsel of God," she
added softly, just touching his hand with a tender momentary clasp. It
was all the minister could do to resist the look of anxious inquiry with
which this little caress was accompanied; and then she left him to
prepare for his meeting. Whether he asked advice or not of his Father in
heaven, the widow asked it for him with tears in her anxious eyes. She
had done all that she could do. When the minister was left to himself,
he opened his desk and took out the manuscript with which he had been
busy last night. It was the speech he had intended to deliver, and he
had been pleased with it. He sat down now and read it over to himself,
by the white-covered table, on which his mother's lamp burned bright.
Sheet by sheet, as he read it over, the impatient young man tossed into
the fire, with hasty exclamations of disgust. He was excited; his mind
was in fiery action; his heart moved to the depths. No turgid Homerton
eloquence would do now. What he said must be not from the lips, but from
the heart.




CHAPTER XXII.


MRS. VINCENT was ready in very good time for the meeting; she brought
her son a cup of coffee with her own hand when she was dressed in her
bonnet and shawl. She had put on her best bonnet--her newest black silk
dress. Perhaps she knew that device of Tozer's, of which the minister
yet was not aware; but Arthur for once was too peremptory and decided
for his mother. She who knew how to yield when resistance was
impossible, had to give in to him at last. It was better to stay at
home, anxious as her heart was, than to exasperate her boy, who had so
many other things to trouble him. With much heroism the widow took off
her bonnet again and returned to Susan's room. There could be little
doubt now what the minister was going to do. While she seated herself
once more by her daughter's bedside, in a patience which was all but
unbearable, her son went alone to his last meeting with his flock. He
walked rapidly through Grove Street, going through the stream of Salem
people, who were moving in twos and threes in the same direction. A
little excitement had sprung up in Carlingford on the occasion. The
public in general had begun to find out, as the public generally does,
that here was a man who was apt to make disclosures not only of his
opinions but of himself wherever he appeared, and that a chance was
hereby afforded to the common eye of seeing that curious phenomenon, a
human spirit in action--a human heart as it throbbed and changed--a
sight more interesting than any other dramatic performance under heaven.
There was an unusual throng that night in Grove Street, and the audience
was not less amazed than the minister when they found what awaited them
in the Salem schoolroom. There Phoebe Tozer and her sister-spirits had
been busy all day. Again there were evergreen wreaths on the walls, and
the stiff iron gaslights were bristling with holly. Phoebe's genius
had even gone further than on the last great occasion, for there were
pink and white roses among the green leaves, and one of the texts which
hung on the wall had been temporarily elevated over the platform, framed
in wreaths and supported by extempore fastenings, the doubtful security
of which filled Phoebe's artless soul with many a pang of terror. It
was the tender injunction, "Love one another," which had been elevated
to this post of honour, and this was the first thing which met Vincent's
eye as he entered the room. Underneath, the platform table was already
filled with the elite of the flock. The ladies were all in their best
bonnets in that favoured circle, and Tozer stood glorious in his Sunday
attire--but in his own mind privately a little anxious as to the effect
of all this upon the sensitive mind of the minister--by the side of the
empty chair which had been left for the president of the assembly. When
Vincent was seen to enter, it was Tozer who gave the signal for a burst
of cheering, which the pleased assembly, newly aware of the treat thus
provided for it, performed heartily with all its boots and umbrellas.
Through this applause the minister made his way to the platform with
abstracted looks. The cheer made no difference upon the stubborn
displeasure and annoyance of his face. Nothing that could possibly have
been done to aggravate his impatient spirit and make his resolve
unalterable, could have been more entirely successful than poor Tozer's
expedient for the conciliation of the flock. Angry, displeased, humbled
in his own estimation, the unfortunate pastor made his way through the
people, who were all smiles and conscious favour. A curt general bow and
cold courtesy was all he had even for his friends on the platform, who
beamed upon him as he advanced. He was not mollified by the universal
applause; he was not to be moved to complaisance by any such argument.
He would not take the chair, though Tozer, with anxious officiousness,
put it ready for him, and Phoebe looked up with looks of entreaty from
behind the urn. In the sight of all the people he refused the honour,
and sat down on a little supernumerary seat behind, where he was not
visible to the increasing crowd. This refusal sent a thrill through all
the anxious deacons on the platform. They gathered round him to make
remonstrances, to which the minister paid no regard. It was a dreadful
moment. Nobody knew what to do in the emergency. The throng streamed in
till there was no longer an inch of standing-ground, nor a single seat
vacant, except that one empty chair which perplexed the assembly. The
urns began to smoke less hotly; the crowd gave murmurous indications of
impatience as the deacons cogitated-- What was to be done?--the tea at
least must not be permitted to get cold. At last Mr. Brown stood up and
proposed feebly, that as Mr. Vincent did not wish to preside, Mr. Tozer
should be chairman on this joyful occasion. The Salem folks, who thought
it a pity to neglect the good things before them, assented with some
perplexity, and then the business of the evening began.

It was very lively business for the first half-hour. Poor Mrs. Tufton,
who was seated immediately in front of the minister, disturbed by his
impatient movements, took fright for the young man; and could not but
wonder in herself how people managed to eat cake and drink tea in such
an impromptu fashion, who doubtless had partaken of that meal before
leaving home, as she justly reflected. The old minister's wife stood by
the young minister with a natural esprit the corps, and was more anxious
than she could account for. A certain cloud subdued the hilarity of the
table altogether; everybody was aware of the dark visage of the
minister, indignant and annoyed, behind. A certain hush was upon the
talk, and Tozer himself had grown pale in the chair, where the good
butterman by no means enjoyed his dignity. Tozer was not so eloquent as
usual when he got up to speak. He told the refreshed and exhilarated
flock that he had made bold to give them a little treat, out of his own
head, seeing that everything had gone off satisfactory last night; and
they would agree with him as the minister had no call to take no further
trouble in the way of explanations. A storm of applause was the response
of the Salem folks to this suggestion; they were in the highest
good-humour both with themselves and the minister--ready to vote him a
silver tea-service on the spot, if anybody had been prompt enough to
suggest it. But a certain awe stole over even that delighted assembly
when Mr. Vincent came forward to the front of the table and confronted
them all, turning his back upon his loyal supporters. They did not know
what to make of the dark aspect and clouded face of the pastor, relieved
as it was against the alarmed and anxious countenances behind him. A
panic seized upon Salem: something which they had not anticipated--something
very different from the programme--was in the minister's eye.

The Pigeons were in a back seat--very far back, where Mrs. Vincent had
been the previous evening--spies to see what was going on, plotting the
Temperance Hall and an opposition preacher in their treacherous hearts;
but even Mrs. Pigeon bent forward with excitement in the general
flutter. When the minister said "My friends," you could have heard a pin
drop in the crowded meeting; and when, a minute after, a leaf of holly
detached itself and fluttered down from one of the gaslights, the whole
row of people among whom it fell thrilled as if they had received a
blow. Hush! perhaps it is not going to be so bad after all. He is
talking of the text there over the platform, in its evergreen frame,
which Phoebe trembles to think may come down any moment with a crash
upon her father's anxious head. "Love one another!" Is Mr. Vincent
telling them that he is not sure what that means, though he is a
minister--that he is not very sure what anything means--that life is a
great wonder, and that he only faintly guesses how God, being pitiful,
had the heart to make man and leave him on this sad earth? Is that what
he says as he stands pale before the silent assembly, which scarcely
dares draw breath, and is ashamed of its own lightness of heart and
vulgar satisfaction with things in general? That is what the minister
says. "The way is full of such pitfalls--the clouds so heavy
overhead--the heavens, so calm and indifferent, out of reach--cannot we
take hands and help each other through this troubled journey?" says the
orator, with a low voice and solemn eyes. When he pauses thus and looks
them all in the face, the heart of Salem fails. The very gaslights seem
to darken in the air, in the silence, and there is not one of the
managers who does not hear the beating of his own heart. Then suddenly
the speaker raises his voice, raises his hand, storms over their heads
in a burst of indignation not loud but grand. He says "No."--"No!"
exclaims the minister--"not in the world, not in the church, nowhere on
earth can we be unanimous except by moments. We throw our brother down,
and then extend a hand to him in charity--but we have lost the art of
standing side by side. Love! it means that you secure a certain woman to
yourself to make your hearth bright, and to be yours for ever; it means
that you have children who are yours, to perpetuate your name and your
tastes and feelings. It does not mean that you stand by your brother for
him and not for you!"

Then there followed another pause. The Salem people drew a long breath
and looked in each other's faces. They were guilty, self-convicted; but
they could not tell what was to come of it, nor guess what the speaker
meant. The anxious faces behind, gazing at him and his audience, were
blank and horror-stricken, like so many conspirators whose leader was
betraying their cause. They could not tell what accusation he might be
going to make against them, to be confirmed by their consciences; but
nobody except Tozer had the least conception what he was about to say.

The minister resumed his interrupted speech. Nobody had ventured to
cheer him; but during this last pause, seeing that he himself waited,
and by way of cheering up their own troubled hearts, a few feeble and
timid plaudits rose from the further end of the room. Mr. Vincent
hurriedly resumed to stop this, with characteristic impatience. "Wait
before you applaud me," said the Nonconformist. "I have said nothing
that calls for applause. I have something more to tell you--more novel
than what I have been saying. I am going to leave Carlingford. It was
you who elected me, it is you who have censured me, it was you last
night who consented to look over my faults and give me a new trial. I am
one of those who have boasted in my day that I received my title to
ordination from no bishop, from no temporal provision, from no
traditionary church, but from the hands of the people. Perhaps I am
less sure than I was at first, when you were all disposed to praise me,
that the voice of the people is the voice of God; but, however that may
be, what I received from you I can but render up to you. I resign into
your hands your pulpit, which you have erected with your money, and hold
as your property. I cannot hold it as your vassal. If there is any truth
in the old phrase which calls a church a cure of souls, it is certain
that no cure of souls can be delegated to a preacher by the souls
themselves who are to be his care. I find my old theories inadequate to
the position in which I find myself, and all I can do is to give up the
post where they have left me in the lurch. I am either your servant,
responsible to you, or God's servant, responsible to Him--which is it? I
cannot tell; but no man can serve two masters, as you know. Many of you
have been kind to me--chief among all," said Vincent, turning once round
to look in Tozer's anxious face, "my friend here, who has spared no
pains either to make me such a pastor as you wished, or to content me
with that place when he had secured it. I cannot be content. It is no
longer possible. So there remains nothing but to say
good-bye--good-bye!--farewell! I will see you again to say it more
formally. I only wish you to understand now that this is the decision I
have come to, and that I consider myself no longer the minister of Salem
from this night."

Vincent drew back instantly when he had said these words, but not before
half the people on the platform had got up on their feet, and many had
risen in the body of the room. The women stretched out their hands to
him with gestures of remonstrance and entreaty. "He don't mean it; he's
not going for to leave us; he's in a little pet, that's all," cried Mrs.
Brown, loud out. Phoebe Tozer, forgetting all about the text and the
evergreens, had buried her face in her handkerchief and was weeping, not
without demonstration of the fact. Tozer himself grasped at the
minister's shoulder, and called out to the astonished assembly that
"they weren't to take no notice. Mr. Vincent would hear reason. They
weren't a-going to let him go, not like this." The minister had almost
to struggle through the group of remonstrant deacons. "You don't mean
it, Mr. Vincent?" said Mrs. Tozer; "only say as it's a bit o' temper,
and you don't mean it!" Phoebe, on her part, raised a tear-wet cheek
to listen to the pastor's reply; but the pastor only shook his head, and
made no answer to the eager appeals which assailed him. When he had
extricated himself from their hands and outcries, he hastened down the
tumultuous and narrow passage between the benches, where he would not
hear anything that was addressed to him, but passed through with a brief
nod to his anxious friends. Just as Vincent reached the door, he
perceived, with eyes which excitement had made clearer than usual, that
his enemy, Pigeon, had just got to his feet, who shouted out that the
pastor had spoken up handsome, and that there wasn't one in Salem,
whatever was their inclination, as did not respect him that day. Though
he paid no visible attention to the words, perhaps the submission of
his adversary gave a certain satisfaction to the minister's soul; but he
took no notice of this nor anything else, as he hurried out into the
silent street, where the lamps were lighted, and the stars shining
unobserved overhead. Not less dark than the night were the prospects
which lay before him. He did not know what he was to do--could not see a
day before him of his new career; but, nevertheless, took his way out of
Salem with a sense of freedom, and a thrill of new power and vigour in
his heart.

Behind he left a most tumultuous and disorderly meeting. After the first
outburst of dismay and sudden popular desire to retain the impossible
possession which had thus slid out of their hands--after Tozer's
distressed entreaty that they would all wait and see if Mr. Vincent
didn't hear reason--after Pigeon's reluctant withdrawal of enmity and
burst of admiration, the meeting broke up into knots, and became not one
meeting, but a succession of groups, all buzzing in different tones over
the great event. Resolutions, however, were proposed and carried all the
same. Another deputation was appointed to wait on Mr. Vincent. A
proposal was made to raise his "salary," and a subscription instituted
on the spot to present him with a testimonial. When all these things
were concluded, nothing remained but to dismiss the assembly, which
dispersed not without hopes of a satisfactory conclusion. The deacons
remained for a final consultation, perplexed with alarms and doubts. The
repentant Pigeon, restored to them by this emergency, was the most
hopeful of all. Circumstances which had changed his mind must surely
influence the pastor. An additional fifty pounds of "salary"--a piece of
plate--a congregational ovation--was it to be supposed that any
Dissenting minister bred at Homerton could withstand such conciliatory
overtures as these?




CHAPTER XXIII.


BUT the deputation and the increased salary and the silver salver were
all ineffectual. Arthur would not hear reason, as his mother knew. It
was with bitter restrained tears of disappointment and vexation that she
heard from him, when he returned to that conference in Susan's room, the
events of the evening. It came hard upon the widow, who had invited her
son to his sister's bedside that they might for the first time talk
together as of old over all their plans. But though her heart ached over
the opportunity thus thrown away, and though she asked herself with
terror, "What was Arthur to do now?" his mother knew he was not to be
persuaded. She smiled on Tozer next morning, ready to cry with vexation
and anxiety as she was. "When my son has made up his mind, it will be
vain for any one to try to move him," said the widow, proud of him in
spite of all, though her heart cried out against his imprudence and
foolishness; and so it proved. The minister made his acknowledgments so
heartily to the good butterman, that Tozer's disclaimer of any special
merit, and declaration that he had but tried to "do his dooty," was made
with great faltering and unsteadiness; but the Nonconformist himself
never wavered in his resolve. Half of Carlingford sat in tears to hear
Mr. Vincent's last sermon. Such a discourse had never been heard in
Salem. Scarcely one of the deacons could find a place in the crowded
chapel to which all the world rushed; and Tozer himself listened to the
last address of his minister from one of the doors of the gallery, where
his face formed the apex and culminating point of the crowd to Mr.
Vincent's eyes. When Tozer brushed his red handkerchief across his face,
as he was moved to do two or three times in the course of the sermon,
the gleam seemed to the minister, who was himself somewhat excited, to
redden over the entire throng. It was thus that Mr. Vincent ended his
connection with Salem Chapel. It was a heavy blow to the congregation
for the time--so heavy that the spirit of the butterman yielded; he was
not seen in his familiar seat for three full Sundays after; but the
place was mismanaged in Pigeon's hands, and regard for the connection
brought Tozer to the rescue. They had Mr. Beecher down from Homerton,
who made a very good impression. The subsequent events are so well known
in Carlingford, that it is hardly necessary to mention the marriage of
the new minister, which took place about six months afterwards. Old Mr.
Tufton blessed the union of his dear young brother with the blushing
Phoebe, who made a most suitable minister's wife in Salem after the
first disagreeables were over; and Mr. Beecher proved a great deal more
tractable than any man of genius. If he was not quite equal to Mr.
Vincent in the pulpit, he was much more complaisant at all the
tea-parties; and, after a year's experience, was fully acknowledged,
both by himself and others, to have made an 'it.

Vincent meanwhile plunged into that world of life which the young man
did not know; not that matters looked badly for him when he left
Carlingford--on the contrary, the connection in general thrilled to hear
of his conduct and his speech. The enthusiasm in Homerton was too great
to be kept within bounds. Such a demonstration of the rightful claims of
the preacher had not been made before in the memory of man; and the
enlightened Nonconforming community did honour to the martyr. Three
vacant congregations at least wooed him to their pulpits; his fame
spread over the country: but he did not accept any of these invitations;
and after a while the eminent Dissenting families who invited him to
dinner, found so many other independencies cropping out in the young
man, that the light of their countenances dimmed upon him. It began to
be popularly reported, that a man so apt to hold opinions of his own,
and so convinced of the dignity of his office, had best have been in the
Church where people knew no better. Such, perhaps, might have been the
conclusion to which he came himself; but education and prejudice and
Homerton stood invincible in the way. A Church of the Future--an ideal
corporation, grand and primitive, not yet realised, but surely real, to
be come at one day--shone before his eyes, as it shines before so many;
but, in the mean time, the Nonconformist went into literature, as was
natural, and was, it is believed in Carlingford, the founder of the
'Philosophical Review,' that new organ of public opinion. He had his
battle to fight, and fought it out in silence, saying little to any one.
Sundry old arrows were in his heart, still quivering by times as he
fought with the devil and the world in his desert; but he thought
himself almost prosperous, and perfectly composed and eased of all
fanciful and sentimental sorrows, when he went, two or three years after
these events, to Folkestone, to meet his mother and sister, who had been
living abroad, away from him, with their charge, and to bring them to
the little house he had prepared for them in London, and where he said
to himself he was prepared, along with them--a contented but
neutral-coloured household--to live out his life.

But when Mr. Vincent met his mother at Folkestone, not even the haze of
the spring evening, nor the agitation of the meeting, which brought back
again so forcibly all the events which accompanied the parting, could
soften to him the wonderful thrill of surprise, almost a shock, with
which he looked upon two of the party. The widow, in her close white cap
and black bonnet, was unchanged as when she fell, worn out, into his
arms on her first visit to Carlingford. She gave a little cry of joy as
she saw her son. She trembled so with emotion and happiness, that he
had to steady her on his arm and restrain his own feelings till another
time. The other two walked by their side to the hotel where they were to
rest all night. He had kissed Susan in the faint evening light, but her
brother did not know that grand figure, large and calm and noble like a
Roman woman, at whom the other passengers paused to look as they went
on; and his first glance at the younger face by her side sent the blood
back to his heart with a sudden pang and thrill which filled him with
amazement at himself. He heard the two talking to each other, as they
went up the crowded pier in the twilight, like a man walking in a dream.
What his mother said, leaning on his arm, scarcely caught his attention.
He answered to her in monosyllables, and listened to the voices--the
low, sweet laughter, the sound of the familiar names. Nothing in Susan's
girlish looks had prophesied that majestic figure, that air of quiet
command and power. And a wilder wonder still attracted the young man's
heart as he listened to the beautiful young voice which kept calling on
Susan, Susan, like some sweet echo of a song. These two, had they been
into another world, an enchanted country? When they came into the
lighted room, and he saw them divest themselves of their wrappings, and
beheld them before him, visible tangible creatures and no dreams,
Vincent was struck dumb. He seemed to himself to have been suddenly
carried out of the meaner struggles of his own life into the air of a
court, the society of princes. When Susan came up to him and laid her
two beautiful hands on his shoulders, and looked with her blue eyes into
his face, it was all he could do to preserve his composure, and conceal
the almost awe which possessed him. The wide sleeve had fallen back from
her round beautiful arm. It was the same arm that used to lie stretched
out uncovered upon her sick-bed like a glorious piece of marble. Her
brother could scarcely rejoice in the change, it struck him with so much
wonder, and was so different from his thoughts. Poor Susan! he had said
in his heart for many a day. He could not say poor Susan now.

"Arthur does not know me," she said, with a low, liquid voice, fuller
than the common tones of women. "He forgets how long it is ago since we
went away. He thinks you cannot have anything so big belonging to you,
my little mother. But it is me, Arthur. Susan all the same."

"Susan perhaps, since you say so--but not all the same," said Arthur,
with his astonished eyes.

"And I daresay you don't know Alice either," said his sister. "I was
little and Alice was foolish when we went away. At least I was little in
Lonsdale, where nobody minded me. Somehow most people mind me now,
because I am so big, I suppose; and Alice, instead of being foolish, is
a little wise woman. Come here, Alice, and let my brother see you. You
have heard of him every day for three years. At last here is Arthur;
but what am I to do if he has forgotten me?"

"I have forgotten neither of you," said the young man. He was glad to
escape from Susan's eyes, which somehow looked as if they were a bit of
the sky, a deep serene of blue; and the little Alice imagined he did not
look at her at all, and was a little mortified in her tender heart.
Things began to grow familiar to him after a while. However wonderful
they were, they were real creatures, who did not vanish away, but were
close by him all the evening, moving about--this with lovely fairy
lightness, that with majestic maiden grace--talking in a kind of dual,
harmonious movement of sound, filling the soft spring night with a world
of vague and strange fascination. The window was opened in their
sitting-room, where they could see the lights and moving figures, and,
farther off, the sea--and hear outside the English voices, which were
sweet to hear to the strangers newly come home. Vincent, while he
recovered himself, stood near this window by his mother's chair, paying
her such stray filial attentions as he could in the bewilderment of his
soul, and slowly becoming used to the two beautiful young women,
unexpected apparitions, who transformed life itself and everything in
it. Was one his real sister, strange as it seemed? and the other----?
Vincent fell back and resigned himself to the strange, sweet,
unlooked-for influence. They went up to London together next day.
Sunshine did not disperse them into beautiful mists, as he had almost
feared. It came upon him by glimpses to see that fiery sorrow and
passion had acted like some tropical tempestuous sun upon his sister's
youth; and the face of his love looked back upon him from the storm in
which it died, as if somehow what was impossible might be possible
again. Mrs. Mildmay, a wandering restless soul as she was, happened to
be absent from London just then. Alice was still to stay with her
dearest friends. The Nonconformist went back to his little home with the
sensation of an enchanted prince in a fairy tale. Instead of the
mud-coloured existence, what a glowing, brilliant firmament! Life became
glorious again under their touch. As for Mrs. Vincent, she was too happy
in getting home--in seeing Susan, after all the anguishes and struggles
which no one knew of fully but herself, rising up in all the strength of
her youth to this renewed existence--to feel as much distressed as she
had expected about Arthur's temporary withdrawal from his profession. It
was only a temporary withdrawal, she hoped. He still wore his clerical
coat, and called himself "clergyman" in the Blue Book--and he was doing
well, though he was not preaching. The Nonconformist himself naturally
was less sober in his thoughts. He could not tell what wonderful thing
he might not yet do in this wonderful elevation and new inspiring of his
heart. His genius broke forth out of the clouds. Seeing these two as
they went about the house, hearing their voices as they talked in
perpetual sweet accord, with sweeter jars of difference, surprised the
young man's life out of all its shadows;--one of them his sister--the
other----. After all his troubles, the loves and the hopes came back
with the swallows to build under his eaves and stir in his heart.

THE END.

PRINTING OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHER.

       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

I hope the congregration will=> I hope the congregation will {pg 180}

shoked in all her gentle politeness=> shocked in all her gentle
politeness {pg 278}






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Salem Chapel, v. 2/2, by Mrs. Oliphant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALEM CHAPEL, V. 2/2 ***

***** This file should be named 42044.txt or 42044.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/0/4/42044/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
