Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 1 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Clarissa, Volume 1 (of 9)

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: November, 2005 [EBook #9296]
Posting Date: August 1, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 1 (OF 9) ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks




CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

Nine Volumes

Volume I.


     Comprehending
     The most Important Concerns of Private Life.
     And particularly shewing,
     The Distresses that may attend the Misconduct
     Both of Parents and Children,
     In Relation to Marriage.




PREFACE


The following History is given in a series of letters, written
Principally in a double yet separate correspondence;

Between two young ladies of virtue and honor, bearing an inviolable
friendship for each other, and writing not merely for amusement, but
upon the most interesting subjects; in which every private family, more
or less, may find itself concerned; and,

Between two gentlemen of free lives; one of them glorying in his
talents for stratagem and invention, and communicating to the other, in
confidence, all the secret purposes of an intriguing head and resolute
heart.

But here it will be proper to observe, for the sake of such as may
apprehend hurt to the morals of youth, from the more freely-written
letters, that the gentlemen, though professed libertines as to the
female sex, and making it one of their wicked maxims, to keep no faith
with any of the individuals of it, who are thrown into their power,
are not, however, either infidels or scoffers; nor yet such as think
themselves freed from the observance of those other moral duties which
bind man to man.

On the contrary, it will be found, in the progress of the work, that
they very often make such reflections upon each other, and each upon
himself and his own actions, as reasonable beings must make, who
disbelieve not a future state of rewards and punishments, and who one
day propose to reform--one of them actually reforming, and by that means
giving an opportunity to censure the freedoms which fall from the gayer
pen and lighter heart of the other.

And yet that other, although in unbosoming himself to a select friend,
he discovers wickedness enough to entitle him to general detestation,
preserves a decency, as well in his images as in his language, which
is not always to be found in the works of some of the most celebrated
modern writers, whose subjects and characters have less warranted the
liberties they have taken.

In the letters of the two young ladies, it is presumed, will be
found not only the highest exercise of a reasonable and practicable
friendship, between minds endowed with the noblest principles of
virtue and religion, but occasionally interspersed, such delicacy of
sentiments, particularly with regard to the other sex; such instances
of impartiality, each freely, as a fundamental principle of their
friendship, blaming, praising, and setting right the other, as are
strongly to be recommended to the observation of the younger part (more
specially) of female readers.

The principle of these two young ladies is proposed as an exemplar to
her sex. Nor is it any objection to her being so, that she is not in
all respects a perfect character. It was not only natural, but it was
necessary, that she should have some faults, were it only to show the
reader how laudably she could mistrust and blame herself, and carry to
her own heart, divested of self-partiality, the censure which arose from
her own convictions, and that even to the acquittal of those, because
revered characters, whom no one else would acquit, and to whose much
greater faults her errors were owing, and not to a weak or reproachable
heart. As far as it is consistent with human frailty, and as far as she
could be perfect, considering the people she had to deal with, and those
with whom she was inseparably connected, she is perfect. To have been
impeccable, must have left nothing for the Divine Grace and a purified
state to do, and carried our idea of her from woman to angel. As such is
she often esteemed by the man whose heart was so corrupt that he could
hardly believe human nature capable of the purity, which, on every trial
or temptation, shone out in her's [sic].

Besides the four principal person, several others are introduced, whose
letters are characteristic: and it is presumed that there will be found
in some of them, but more especially in those of the chief character
among the men, and the second character among the women, such strokes of
gayety, fancy, and humour, as will entertain and divert, and at the same
time both warn and instruct.

All the letters are written while the hearts of the writers must be
supposed to be wholly engaged in their subjects (the events at the time
generally dubious): so that they abound not only in critical situations,
but with what may be called instantaneous descriptions and reflections
(proper to be brought home to the breast of the youthful reader;) as
also with affecting conversations; many of them written in the dialogue
or dramatic way.

'Much more lively and affecting,' says one of the principal character,
'must be the style of those who write in the height of a present
distress; the mind tortured by the pangs of uncertainty (the events then
hidden in the womb of fate;) than the dry, narrative, unanimated style
of a person relating difficulties and danger surmounted, can be; the
relater perfectly at ease; and if himself unmoved by his own story, not
likely greatly to affect the reader.'

What will be found to be more particularly aimed at in the following
work is--to warn the inconsiderate and thoughtless of the one sex,
against the base arts and designs of specious contrivers of the
other--to caution parents against the undue exercise of their natural
authority over their children in the great article of marriage--to warn
children against preferring a man of pleasure to a man of probity upon
that dangerous but too-commonly-received notion, that a reformed rake
makes the best husband--but above all, to investigate the highest and
most important doctrines not only of morality, but of Christianity, by
showing them thrown into action in the conduct of the worthy characters;
while the unworthy, who set those doctrines at defiance, are condignly,
and, as may be said, consequentially punished.

From what has been said, considerate readers will not enter upon the
perusal of the piece before them as if it were designed only to divert
and amuse. It will probably be thought tedious to all such as dip into
it, expecting a light novel, or transitory romance; and look upon story
in it (interesting as that is generally allowed to be) as its sole end,
rather than as a vehicle to the instruction.

Different persons, as might be expected, have been of different
opinions, in relation to the conduct of the Heroine in particular
situations; and several worthy persons have objected to the general
catastrophe, and other parts of the history. Whatever is thought
material of these shall be taken notice of by way of Postscript, at the
conclusion of the History; for this work being addressed to the public
as a history of life and manners, those parts of it which are
proposed to carry with them the force of an example, ought to be as
unobjectionable as is consistent with the design of the whole, and with
human nature.




NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL PERSONS


  MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, a young lady of great beauty and merit.
  ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ. her admirer.
  JAMES HARLOWE, ESQ. father of Clarissa.
  MRS. HARLOWE, his lady.
  JAMES HARLOWE, their only son.
  ARABELLA, their elder daughter.
  JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. elder brother of James Harlowe, sen.
  ANTONY HARLOWE, third brother.
  ROGER SOLMES, ESQ. an admirer of Clarissa, favoured by her friends.
  MRS. HERVEY, half-sister of Mrs. Harlowe.
  MISS DOLLY HERVEY, her daughter.
  MRS. JUDITH NORTON, a woman of great piety and discretion, who had a
  principal share in the education of Clarissa.
  COL. WM. MORDEN, a near relation of the Harlowes.
  MISS HOWE, the most intimate friend, companion, and correspondent of
  Clarissa.
  MRS. HOWE, her mother.
  CHARLES HICKMAN, ESQ. an admirer of Miss Howe.
  LORD M., uncle to Mr. Lovelace.
  LADY SARAH SADLEIR, LADY BETTY LAWRANCE, half-sisters of Lord M.
  MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE, MISS PATTY MONTAGUE, nieces of the same
  nobleman.
  DR. LEWEN, a worthy divine.
  MR. ELIAS BRAND, a pedantic young clergyman.
  DR. H. a humane physician.
  MR. GODDARD, an honest and skilful apothecary.
  JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. Mr. Lovelace's principal intimate and confidant.
  RICHARD MOWBRAY, THOMAS DOLEMAN, JAMES TOURVILLE, THOMAS BELTON,
  ESQRS. libertine friends of Mr. Lovelace.
  MRS. MOORE, a widow, keeping a lodging-house at Hampstead.
  MISS RAWLINS, a notable young gentlewoman there.
  MRS. BEVIS, a lively young widow of the same place.
  MRS. SINCLAIR, the pretended name of a private brothel-keeper in
  London.
  CAPTAIN TOMLINSON, the assumed name of a vile pander to the
  debaucheries of Mr. Lovelace.
  SALLY MARTIN, POLLY HORTON, assistants of, and partners with, the
  infamous Sinclair.
  DORCAS WYKES, an artful servant at the vile house.





LETTERS OF VOLUME I


LETTER I. Miss Howe to Miss Clarissa Harlowe.--Desires from her the
particulars of the rencounter between Mr. Lovelace and her brother; and
of the usage she receives upon it: also the whole of her story from the
time Lovelace was introduced as a suitor to her sister Arabella. Admires
her great qualities, and glories in the friendship between them.

LETTER II. III. IV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Gives the requested
particulars. Together with the grounds of her brother's and sister's
ill-will to her; and of the animosity between her brother and
Lovelace.--Her mother connives at the private correspondence between
her and Lovelace, for the sake of preventing greater evils. Character
of Lovelace, from an enemy.--Copy of the preamble to her grandfather's
will.

LETTER V. From the same.--Her father, mother, brother, briefly
characterized. Her brother's consequence in the family. Wishes Miss Howe
had encouraged her brother's address. Endeavors to find excuses for her
father's ill temper, and for her mother's passiveness.

LETTER VI. From the same.--Mr. Symmes, Mr. Mullins, Mr. Wyerley, in
return, proposed to her, in malice to Lovelace; and, on their being
rejected, Mr. Solmes. Leave given her to visit Miss Howe for a few days.
Her brother's insolent behaviour upon it.

LETTER VII. From the same.--The harsh reception she meets with on her
return from Miss Howe. Solmes's first visit.

LETTER VIII. From the same.--All her family determined in Solmes's
favour. Her aversion to him. She rejects him, and is forbid going to
church, visiting, receiving visits, or writing to any body out of the
house.

LETTER IX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her expedient to carry on a private
correspondence with Miss Howe. Regrets the necessity she is laid under
to take such a clandestine step.

LETTER X. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Inveighs against the Harlowe family
for proposing such a man as Solmes. Characterizes them. Is jealous
of Antony Harlowe's visits to her mother. Rallies her friend on her
supposed regard to Lovelace.

LETTER XI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Is nettled and alarmed at her
raillery. Her reasons for not giving way to a passion for Lovelace.

LETTER XII. Miss Howe in reply.--Continues her raillery. Gives
Lovelace's character from Mrs. Fortescue.

LETTER XIII. XIV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--The views of her family in
favouring the address of Solmes. Her brother's and sister's triumph upon
the difficulties into which they have plunged her.

LETTER XV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--She accounts for Arabella's malice.
Blames her for having given up the power over the estate left her by her
grandfather.

LETTER XVI. XVII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Offends her father by her
behaviour to Solmes in his presence. Tender conversation between her
mother and her.--Offers to give up all thoughts of Lovelace, if she may
be freed from Solmes's address. Substance of one of Lovelace's letters,
of her answer, and of his reply. Makes a proposal. Her mother goes down
with it.

LETTER XVIII. From the same.--The proposal rejected. Her mother affects
severity to her. Another interesting conversation between them.

LETTER XIX. From the same.--Her dutiful motives for putting her estate
into her father's power. Why she thinks she ought not to have Solmes.
Afflicted on her mother's account.

LETTER XX. XXI. From the same.--Another conference with her mother, who
leaves her in anger.--She goes down to beg her favour. Solmes comes in.
She offers to withdraw; but is forbid. What follows upon it.

LETTER XXII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Substance of a letter from
Lovelace. She desires leave to go to church. Is referred to her brother,
and insultingly refused by him. Her letter to him. His answer.

LETTER XXIII. XXIV. XXV. From the same.--Her faithful Hannah
disgracefully dismissed. Betty Barnes, her sister's maid, set over her.
A letter from her brother forbidding her to appear in the presence of
any of her relations without leave. Her answer. Writes to her mother.
Her mother's answer. Writes to her father. His answer.

LETTER XXVI. From the same.--Is desirous to know the opinion Lord M.'s
family have of her. Substance of a letter from Lovelace, resenting the
indignities he receives from her relations. She freely acquaints him
that he has nothing to expect from her contrary to her duty. Insists
that his next letter shall be his last.

LETTER XXVII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Advises her to resume her estate.
Her satirical description of Solmes. Rallies her on her curiosity to
know what opinion Lord M. and his family have of her. Ascribes to the
difference in each of their tempers their mutual love. Gives particulars
of a conversation between her mother and her on Clarissa's case.
Reflects on the Harlowe family, and particularly on Mrs. Harlowe, for
her passiveness.

LETTER XXVIII. Clarissa. In answer.--Chides her for the liberties she
takes with her relations. Particularly defends her mother. Chides her
also for her lively airs to her own mother. Desires her to treat her
freely; but wishes not that she should impute love to her; and why.

LETTER XXIX. From the same.--Her expostulatory letter to her brother and
sister. Their answers.

LETTER XXX. From the same.--Exceedingly angry with Lovelace, on his
coming to their church. Reflections on pride, &c.

LETTER XXXI. Mr. Lovelace to John Belford, Esq.--Pride, revenge, love,
ambition, or a desire of conquest, his avowedly predominant passions.
His early vow to ruin as many of the fair sex as he can get into his
power. His pretences for it. Breathes revenge against the Harlowe
family. Glories in his contrivances. Is passionately in love with
Clarissa. His high notions of her beauty and merit. Yet is incensed
against her for preferring her own relations to him. Clears her,
however, of intentional pride, scorn, haughtiness, or want of
sensibility. What a triumph over the sex, and over her whole family, if
he can carry off a lady so watchful and so prudent! Is resolved, if he
cannot have the sister, to carry off the brother. Libertine as he is,
can have no thoughts of any other woman but Clarissa. Warns Belford,
Mowbray, Tourville, and Belton, to hold themselves in readiness to
obey his summons, on the likelihood there is of room for what he calls
glorious mischief.

LETTER XXXII. XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Copies of her letters to
her two uncles; and of their characteristic answer.--Her expostulatory
letter to Solmes. His answer.--An insolent letter from her brother, on
her writing to Solmes.

LETTER XXXIV. Lovelace to Belford.--He directs him to come down to him.
For what end. Description of the poor inn he puts up at in disguise; and
of the innocent daughter there, whom he calls his Rosebud. He resolves
to spare her. Pride and policy his motives, and not principle. Ingenuous
reflections on his own vicious disposition. He had been a rogue, he
says, had he been a plough-boy. Resolves on an act of generosity for
his Rosebud, by way of atonement, as he calls it, for some of his bad
actions; and for other reasons which appear in the sequel.

LETTER XXXV. From the same.--His artful contrivances and dealings with
Joseph Leman. His revenge and his love uppermost by turns. If the latter
succeeds not, he vows that the Harlowes shall feel the former, although
for it he become an exile from his country forever. He will throw
himself into Clarissa's presence in the woodhouse. If he thought he had
no prospect of her favour, he would attempt to carry her off: that, he
says, would be a rape worthy of a Jupiter. The arts he is resolved to
practise when he sees her, in order to engage her future reliance upon
his honour.

LETTER XXXVI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Lovelace, in disguise, surprises
her in the woodhouse. Her terrors on first seeing him. He greatly
engages her confidence (as he had designed) by his respectful behaviour.

LETTER XXXVII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--After rallying her on her not
readily owning the passion which she supposes she has for Lovelace, she
desires to know how far she thinks him eligible for his best qualities,
how far rejectable for his worst.

LETTER XXXVIII. XXXIX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--She disclaims tyranny to
a man who respects her. Her unhappy situation to be considered, in
which the imputed love is held by her parents to be an undutiful, and
therefore a criminal passion, and where the supposed object of it is a
man of faulty morals. Is interrupted by a visit from Mrs. Norton, who
is sent up to her to influence her in Solmes's favour. An affecting
conversation between them. What passes upon it, and after it.

LETTER XL. From the same.--Resumes the requested subject. What sort of
man she could have preferred to Mr. Lovelace. Arguments she has used to
herself in his favour, and in his disfavour. Frankly owns that were he
now a moral man, she would prefer him to all the men she ever saw. Yet
is persuaded, that she could freely give up the one man to get rid of
the other, as she had offered to her friends. Her delicacy affected
by Miss Howe's raillery; and why. Gives her opinion of the force which
figure or person may be allowed to have upon her sex.

LETTER XLI. From the same.--A letter from her mother (with patterns of
rich silks) in which she entreats her to comply with all their wishes.
What ought to be the principal view of a good wife in adorning her
person. Her distress. Begs leave to wait upon her mother alone. Her
father's angry letter, ordering her to prepare for her wedding-day.
Solmes requests to see her. She refuses. All in tumults below upon
it. Her brother and her sister desire that she may be left to their
management.

LETTER XLII. From the same.--A very warm dialogue between her sister
and her. Her sister's envy, unnatural behaviour, and violence. Clarissa
sends down proposals in writing to her friends, and a letter to her
brother. His insolent answer; in which he tells her, that her proposal
will be considered in full assembly next morning; but that, if they
shall be complied with, he will retire to Scotland, and never more
return to Harlowe-place.

LETTER XLIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Hardly doubts but her proposals
will be accepted. Paints to herself, as her relations arrive one by one,
what their deliberations, and the result of them will be, when they are
all assembled. Her proposals rejected. Her sister's cruel insults on the
occasion produce another warm dialogue between them. Her sister leaves
her in a fury. She is greatly disturbed at the contents of a letter from
Lovelace.

LETTER XLIV. From the same.--Her aunt Hervey, accompanied by her sister,
makes her a visit. Farther insults from her sister. Her aunt's fruitless
pleas in Solmes's favour.





THE HISTORY OF CLARISSA HARLOWE




LETTER I

MISS ANNA HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE JAN 10.


I am extremely concerned, my dearest friend, for the disturbances that
have happened in your family. I know how it must hurt you to become
the subject of the public talk: and yet, upon an occasion so generally
known, it is impossible but that whatever relates to a young lady, whose
distinguished merits have made her the public care, should engage every
body's attention. I long to have the particulars from yourself; and of
the usage I am told you receive upon an accident you could not help; and
in which, as far as I can learn, the sufferer was the aggressor.

Mr. Diggs, the surgeon, whom I sent for at the first hearing of the
rencounter, to inquire, for your sake, how your brother was, told me,
that there was no danger from the wound, if there were none from the
fever; which it seems has been increased by the perturbation of his
spirits.

Mr. Wyerley drank tea with us yesterday; and though he is far from being
partial to Mr. Lovelace, as it may well be supposed, yet both he and Mr.
Symmes blame your family for the treatment they gave him when he went
in person to inquire after your brother's health, and to express his
concern for what had happened.

They say, that Mr. Lovelace could not avoid drawing his sword: and that
either your brother's unskilfulness or passion left him from the very
first pass entirely in his power.

This, I am told, was what Mr. Lovelace said upon it; retreating as he
spoke: 'Have a care, Mr. Harlowe--your violence puts you out of your
defence. You give me too much advantage. For your sister's sake, I will
pass by every thing:--if--'

But this the more provoked his rashness, to lay himself open to the
advantage of his adversary--who, after a slight wound given him in the
arm, took away his sword.

There are people who love not your brother, because of his natural
imperiousness and fierce and uncontroulable temper: these say, that
the young gentleman's passion was abated on seeing his blood gush
plentifully down his arm; and that he received the generous offices of
his adversary (who helped him off with his coat and waistcoat, and bound
up his arm, till the surgeon could come,) with such patience, as was far
from making a visit afterwards from that adversary, to inquire after his
health, appear either insulting or improper.

Be this as it may, every body pities you. So steady, so uniform in your
conduct: so desirous, as you always said, of sliding through life to the
end of it unnoted; and, as I may add, not wishing to be observed
even for your silent benevolence; sufficiently happy in the noble
consciousness which attends it: Rather useful than glaring, your
deserved motto; though now, to your regret, pushed into blaze, as I may
say: and yet blamed at home for the faults of others--how must such a
virtue suffer on every hand!--yet it must be allowed, that your present
trial is but proportioned to your prudence.

As all your friends without doors are apprehensive that some other
unhappy event may result from so violent a contention, in which it seems
the families on both sides are now engaged, I must desire you to enable
me, on the authority of your own information, to do you occasional
justice.

My mother, and all of us, like the rest of the world, talk of nobody but
you on this occasion, and of the consequences which may follow from the
resentments of a man of Mr. Lovelace's spirit; who, as he gives out, has
been treated with high indignity by your uncles. My mother will have
it, that you cannot now, with any decency, either see him, or correspond
with him. She is a good deal prepossessed by your uncle Antony; who
occasionally calls upon us, as you know; and, on this rencounter, has
represented to her the crime which it would be in a sister to encourage
a man who is to wade into her favour (this was his expression) through
the blood of her brother.

Write to me therefore, my dear, the whole of your story from the
time that Mr. Lovelace was first introduced into your family; and
particularly an account of all that passed between him and your sister;
about which there are different reports; some people scrupling not to
insinuate that the younger sister has stolen a lover from the elder: and
pray write in so full a manner as may satisfy those who know not so much
of your affairs as I do. If anything unhappy should fall out from the
violence of such spirits as you have to deal with, your account of all
things previous to it will be your best justification.

You see what you draw upon yourself by excelling all your sex. Every
individual of it who knows you, or has heard of you, seems to think
you answerable to her for your conduct in points so very delicate and
concerning.

Every eye, in short, is upon you with the expectation of an example. I
wish to heaven you were at liberty to pursue your own methods: all
would then, I dare say, be easy, and honourably ended. But I dread your
directors and directresses; for your mother, admirably well qualified
as she is to lead, must submit to be led. Your sister and brother will
certainly put you out of your course.

But this is a point you will not permit me to expatiate upon: pardon me
therefore, and I have done.--Yet, why should I say, pardon me? when your
concerns are my concerns? when your honour is my honour? when I love
you, as never woman loved another? and when you have allowed of that
concern and of that love; and have for years, which in persons so young
may be called many, ranked in the first class of your friends,

Your ever grateful and affectionate, ANNA HOWE.


Will you oblige me with a copy of the preamble to the clauses in your
grandfather's will in your favour; and allow me to send it to my aunt
Harman?--She is very desirous to see it. Yet your character has so
charmed her, that, though a stranger to you personally, she assents to
the preference given you in that will, before she knows the testator's
reasons for giving you that preference.




LETTER II

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE HARLOWE-PLACE, JAN. 13.


How you oppress me, my dearest friend, with your politeness! I cannot
doubt your sincerity; but you should take care, that you give me not
reason from your kind partiality to call in question your judgment. You
do not distinguish that I take many admirable hints from you, and have
the art to pass them upon you for my own: for in all you do, in all you
say, nay, in your very looks (so animated!) you give lessons to one
who loves you and observes you as I love you and observe you, without
knowing that you do--So pray, my dear, be more sparing of your praise
for the future, lest after this confession we should suspect that you
secretly intend to praise yourself, while you would be thought only to
commend another.

Our family has indeed been strangely discomposed.--Discomposed!--It has
been in tumults, ever since the unhappy transaction; and I have borne
all the blame; yet should have had too much concern from myself, had I
been more justly spared by every one else.

For, whether it be owing to a faulty impatience, having been too
indulgently treated to be inured to blame, or to the regret I have to
hear those censured on my account, whom it is my duty to vindicate; I
have sometimes wished, that it had pleased God to have taken me in my
last fever, when I had every body's love and good opinion; but oftener
that I had never been distinguished by my grandfather as I was: since
that distinction has estranged from me my brother's and sister's
affections; at least, has raised a jealousy with regard to the
apprehended favour of my two uncles, that now-and-then overshadows their
love.

My brother being happily recovered of his fever, and his wound in a
hopeful way, although he has not yet ventured abroad, I will be as
particular as you desire in the little history you demand of me. But
heaven forbid that any thing should ever happen which may require it to
be produced for the purpose you mention!

I will begin, as you command, with Mr. Lovelace's address to my sister;
and be as brief as possible. I will recite facts only; and leave you
to judge of the truth of the report raised, that the younger sister has
robbed the elder.

It was in pursuance of a conference between Lord M. and my uncle Antony,
that Mr. Lovelace [my father and mother not forbidding] paid his respect
to my sister Arabella. My brother was then in Scotland, busying himself
in viewing the condition of the considerable estate which was left him
there by his generous godmother, together with one as considerable in
Yorkshire. I was also absent at my Dairy-house, as it is called,* busied
in the accounts relating to the estate which my grandfather had
the goodness to devise to me; and which once a year was left to my
inspection, although I have given the whole into my father's power.


     * Her grandfather, in order to invite her to him as often as
     her other friends would spare her, indulged her in erecting
     and fitting up a diary-house in her own taste. When
     finished, it was so much admired for its elegant simplicity
     and convenience, that the whole seat (before, of old time,
     from its situation, called The Grove) was generally known by
     the name of The Dairy-house. Her grandfather in particular
     was fond of having it so called.


My sister made me a visit there the day after Mr. Lovelace had been
introduced; and seemed highly pleased with the gentleman. His birth, his
fortune in possession, a clear 2000L. a year, as Lord M. had assured
my uncle; presumptive heir to that nobleman's large estate: his great
expectations from Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrence; who with
his uncle interested themselves very warmly (he being the last of his
line) to see him married.

'So handsome a man!--O her beloved Clary!' (for then she was ready
to love me dearly, from the overflowings of her good humour on his
account!) 'He was but too handsome a man for her!--Were she but as
amiable as somebody, there would be a probability of holding his
affections!--For he was wild, she heard; very wild, very gay; loved
intrigue--but he was young; a man of sense: would see his error, could
she but have patience with his faults, if his faults were not cured by
marriage!'

Thus she ran on; and then wanted me 'to see the charming man,' as she
called him.--Again concerned, 'that she was not handsome enough for
him;' with, 'a sad thing, that the man should have the advantage of
the woman in that particular!'--But then, stepping to the glass, she
complimented herself, 'That she was very well: that there were many
women deemed passable who were inferior to herself: that she was always
thought comely; and comeliness, let her tell me, having not so much
to lose as beauty had, would hold, when that would evaporate or fly
off:--nay, for that matter,' [and again she turned to the glass] 'her
features were not irregular; her eyes not at all amiss.' And I remember
they were more than usually brilliant at that time.--'Nothing, in short,
to be found fault with, though nothing very engaging she doubted--was
there, Clary.'

Excuse me, my dear, I never was thus particular before; no, not to you.
Nor would I now have written thus freely of a sister, but that she makes
a merit to my brother of disowning that she ever liked him; as I shall
mention hereafter: and then you will always have me give you minute
descriptions, nor suffer me to pass by the air and manner in which
things are spoken that are to be taken notice of; rightly observing,
that air and manner often express more than the accompanying words.

I congratulated her upon her prospects. She received my compliments with
a great deal of self-complacency.

She liked the gentleman still more at his next visit; and yet he made no
particular address to her, although an opportunity was given him for
it. This was wondered at, as my uncle has introduced him into our family
declaredly as a visitor to my sister. But as we are ever ready to make
excuses when in good humour with ourselves for the perhaps not unwilful
slights of those whose approbation we wish to engage; so my sister found
out a reason much to Mr. Lovelace's advantage for his not improving
the opportunity that was given him.--It was bashfulness, truly, in him.
[Bashfulness in Mr. Lovelace, my dear!]--Indeed, gay and lively as he
is, he has not the look of an impudent man. But, I fancy, it is many,
many years ago since he was bashful.

Thus, however, could my sister make it out--'Upon her word, she believed
Mr. Lovelace deserved not the bad character he had as to women.--He was
really, to her thinking, a modest man. He would have spoken out, she
believed; but once or twice as he seemed to intend to do so, he was
under so agreeable a confusion! Such a profound respect he seemed to
shew her! A perfect reverence, she thought: she loved dearly that a man
in courtship should shew a reverence to his mistress'--So indeed we all
do, I believe: and with reason; since, if I may judge from what I
have seen in many families, there is little enough of it shewn
afterwards.--And she told my aunt Hervey, that she would be a little
less upon the reserve next time he came: 'She was not one of those
flirts, not she, who would give pain to a person that deserved to be
well-treated; and the more pain for the greatness of his value for
her.'--I wish she had not somebody whom I love in her eye.

In his third visit, Bella governed herself by this kind and considerate
principle: so that, according to her own account of the matter, the man
might have spoken out.--But he was still bashful: he was not able to
overcome this unseasonable reverence. So this visit went off as the
former.

But now she began to be dissatisfied with him. She compared his general
character with this his particular behaviour to her; and having never
been courted before, owned herself puzzled how to deal with so odd a
lover. 'What did the man mean, she wondered? Had not her uncle brought
him declaredly as a suitor to her?--It could not be bashfulness (now she
thought of it) since he might have opened his mind to her uncle, if he
wanted courage to speak directly to her.--Not that she cared much for
the man neither: but it was right, surely, that a woman should be put
out of doubt early as to a man's intentions in such a case as this, from
his own mouth.--But, truly, she had begun to think, that he was more
solicitous to cultivate her mamma's good opinion, than hers!--Every
body, she owned, admired her mother's conversation; but he was mistaken
if he thought respect to her mother only would do with her. And
then, for his own sake, surely he should put it into her power to
be complaisant to him, if he gave her reason to approve of him. This
distant behaviour, she must take upon herself to say, was the more
extraordinary, as he continued his visits, and declared himself
extremely desirous to cultivate a friendship with the whole family; and
as he could have no doubt about her sense, if she might take upon her to
join her own with the general opinion; he having taken great notice of,
and admired many of her good things as they fell from her lips. Reserves
were painful, she must needs say, to open and free spirits, like hers:
and yet she must tell my aunt,' (to whom all this was directed) 'that
she should never forget what she owed to her sex, and to herself, were
Mr. Lovelace as unexceptionable in his morals as in his figure, and were
he to urge his suit ever so warmly.'

I was not of her council. I was still absent. And it was agreed upon
between my aunt Hervey and her, that she was to be quite solemn and shy
in his next visit, if there were not a peculiarity in his address to
her.

But my sister it seems had not considered the matter well. This was not
the way, as it proved, to be taken for matters of mere omission, with a
man of Mr. Lovelace's penetration. Nor with any man; since if love has
not taken root deep enough to cause it to shoot out into declaration, if
an opportunity be fairly given for it, there is little room to expect,
that the blighting winds of anger or resentment will bring it forward.
Then my poor sister is not naturally good-humoured. This is too
well-known a truth for me to endeavor to conceal it, especially from
you. She must therefore, I doubt, have appeared to great disadvantages
when she aimed to be worse tempered than ordinary.

How they managed it in their next conversation I know not. One would be
tempted to think by the issue, that Mr. Lovelace was ungenerous enough
to seek the occasion given,* and to improve it. Yet he thought fit to
put the question too:--But, she says, it was not till, by some means
or other (she knew not how) he had wrought her up to such a pitch of
displeasure with him, that it was impossible for her to recover herself
at the instant. Nevertheless he re-urged his question, as expecting
a definitive answer, without waiting for the return of her temper,
or endeavouring to mollify her; so that she was under a necessity of
persisting in her denial: yet gave him reason to think she did not
dislike his address, only the manner of it; his court being rather made
to her mother than to herself, as if he was sure of her consent at any
time.


     * See Mr. Lovelace's Letter, No. XXXI, in which he briefly
     accounts for his conduct in this affair.


A good encouraging denial, I must own: as was the rest of her plea; to
wit, 'A disinclination to change her state. Exceedingly happy as she
was: she never could be happier!' And such-like consenting negatives,
as I may call them, and yet not intend a reflection upon my sister: for
what can any young creature in the like circumstances say, when she is
not sure but a too-ready consent may subject her to the slights of a sex
that generally values a blessing either more or less as it is obtained
with difficulty or ease? Miss Biddulph's answer to a copy of verse from
a gentleman, reproaching our sex as acting in disguise, is not a bad
one, although you may perhaps think it too acknowledging for the female
character.

 Ungen'rous Sex!--To scorn us if we're kind;
   And yet upbraid us if we seem severe!
 Do you, t' encourage us to tell our mind,
   Yourselves put off disguise, and be sincere.
 You talk of coquetry!--Your own false hearts
 Compel our sex to act dissembling parts.

Here I am obliged to lay down my pen. I will soon resume it.




LETTER III

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE JAN. 13, 14.


And thus, as Mr. Lovelace thought fit to take it, had he his answer from
my sister. It was with very great regret, as he pretended, [I doubt
the man is an hypocrite, my dear] that he acquiesced in it. 'So much
determinedness; such a noble firmness in my sister, that there was no
hope of prevailing upon her to alter sentiments she had adopted on full
consideration.' He sighed, as Bella told us, when he took his leave of
her: 'Profoundly sighed; grasped her hand, and kissed it with such an
ardour--Withdrew with such an air of solemn respect--She could almost
find it in her heart, although he had vexed her, to pity him.' A good
intentional preparative to love, this pity; since, at the time, she
little thought that he would not renew his offer.

He waited on my mother after he had taken leave of Bella, and reported
his ill success in so respectful a manner, as well with regard to my
sister, as to the whole family, and with so much concern that he was
not accepted as a relation to it, that it left upon them all (my brother
being then, as I have said, in Scotland) impressions in his favour, and
a belief that this matter would certainly be brought on again. But Mr.
Lovelace going up directly to town, where he staid a whole fortnight,
and meeting there with my uncle Antony, to whom he regretted his niece's
cruel resolution not to change her state; it was seen that there was a
total end of the affair.

My sister was not wanting to herself on this occasion. She made a
virtue of necessity; and the man was quite another man with her. 'A vain
creature! Too well knowing his advantages: yet those not what she had
conceived them to be!--Cool and warm by fits and starts; an ague-like
lover. A steady man, a man of virtue, a man of morals, was worth a
thousand of such gay flutterers. Her sister Clary might think it worth
her while perhaps to try to engage such a man: she had patience: she
was mistress of persuasion: and indeed, to do the girl justice, had
something of a person: But as for her, she would not have a man of whose
heart she could not be sure for one moment; no, not for the world: and
most sincerely glad was she that she had rejected him.'

But when Mr. Lovelace returned into the country, he thought fit to visit
my father and mother; hoping, as he told them, that, however unhappy
he had been in the rejection of the wished-for alliance, he might be
allowed to keep up an acquaintance and friendship with a family which he
should always respect. And then unhappily, as I may say, was I at home
and present.

It was immediately observed, that his attention was fixed on me. My
sister, as soon as he was gone, in a spirit of bravery, seemed desirous
to promote his address, should it be tendered.

My aunt Hervey was there; and was pleased to say, we should make the
finest couple in England--if my sister had no objection.--No, indeed!
with a haughty toss, was my sister's reply--it would be strange if she
had, after the denial she had given him upon full deliberation.

My mother declared, that her only dislike of his alliance with either
daughter, was on account of his reputed faulty morals.

My uncle Harlowe, that his daughter Clary, as he delighted to call me
from childhood, would reform him if any woman in the world could.

My uncle Antony gave his approbation in high terms: but referred, as my
aunt had done, to my sister.

She repeated her contempt of him; and declared, that, were there not
another man in England, she would not have him. She was ready, on the
contrary, she could assure them, to resign her pretensions under hand
and seal, if Miss Clary were taken with his tinsel, and if every one
else approved of his address to the girl.

My father indeed, after a long silence, being urged by my uncle Antony
to speak his mind, said, that he had a letter from his son, on his
hearing of Mr. Lovelace's visits to his daughter Arabella; which he had
not shewn to any body but my mother; that treaty being at an end when
he received it: that in this letter he expressed great dislike to an
alliance with Mr. Lovelace on the score of his immoralities: that he
knew, indeed, there was an old grudge between them; but that, being
desirous to prevent all occasions of disunion and animosity in his
family, he would suspend the declaration of his own mind till his son
arrived, and till he had heard his further objections: that he was the
more inclined to make his son this compliment, as Mr. Lovelace's general
character gave but too much ground for his son's dislike of him; adding,
that he had hear (so, he supposed, had every one,) that he was a very
extravagant man; that he had contracted debts in his travels: and
indeed, he was pleased to say, he had the air of a spendthrift.

These particulars I had partly from my aunt Hervey, and partly from my
sister; for I was called out as soon as the subject was entered upon.
When I returned, my uncle Antony asked me, how I should like Mr.
Lovelace? Every body saw, he was pleased to say, that I had made a
conquest.

I immediately answered, that I did not like him at all: he seemed to
have too good an opinion both on his person and parts, to have any
regard to his wife, let him marry whom he would.

My sister particularly was pleased with this answer, and confirmed it to
be just; with a compliment to my judgment.--For it was hers.

But the very next day Lord M. came to Harlowe-Place [I was then absent];
and in his nephew's name made a proposal in form; declaring, that it was
the ambition of all his family to be related to ours: and he hoped his
kinsman would not have such an answer on the part of the younger sister,
as he had on that of the elder.

In short, Mr. Lovelace's visits were admitted as those of a man who had
not deserved disrespect from our family; but as to his address to
me, with a reservation, as above, on my father's part, that he would
determine nothing without his son. My discretion as to the rest was
confided in: for still I had the same objections as to the man: nor
would I, when we were better acquainted, hear any thing but general talk
from him; giving him no opportunity of conversing with me in private.

He bore this with a resignation little expected from his natural temper,
which is generally reported to be quick and hasty; unused it seems
from childhood to check or controul. A case too common in considerable
families where there is an only son: and his mother never had any
other child. But, as I have heretofore told you, I could perceive,
notwithstanding this resignation, that he had so good an opinion of
himself, as not to doubt, that his person and accomplishments would
insensibly engage me: And could that be once done, he told my aunt
Hervey, he should hope, from so steady a temper, that his hold in my
affections would be durable: While my sister accounted for his patience
in another manner, which would perhaps have had more force if it had
come from a person less prejudiced: 'That the man was not fond of
marrying at all: that he might perhaps have half a score mistresses: and
that delay might be as convenient for his roving, as for my well-acted
indifference.' That was her kind expression.

Whatever was his motive for a patience so generally believed to be out
of his usual character, and where the object of his address was supposed
to be of fortune considerable enough to engage his warmest attention,
he certainly escaped many mortifications by it: for while my father
suspended his approbation till my brother's arrival, Mr. Lovelace
received from every one those civilities which were due to his birth:
and although we heard from time to time reports to his disadvantage with
regard to morals, yet could we not question him upon them without giving
him greater advantages in his own opinion than the situation he was in
with us would justify to prudence; since it was much more likely that
his address would not be allowed of, than that it would.

And thus was he admitted to converse with our family almost upon his own
terms; for while my friends saw nothing in his behaviour but what was
extremely respectful, and observed in him no violent importunity,
they seemed to have taken a great liking to his conversation: While I
considered him only as a common guest when he came; and thought myself
no more concerned in his visits, not at his entrance and departure, than
any other of the family.

But this indifference on my side was the means of procuring him one
very great advantage; since upon it was grounded that correspondence by
letters which succeeded;--and which, had it been to be begun when the
family animosity broke out, would never have been entered into on my
part. The occasion was this:

My uncle Hervey has a young gentleman intrusted to his care, whom he has
thoughts of sending abroad a year or two hence, to make the Grand Tour,
as it is called; and finding Mr. Lovelace could give a good account
of every thing necessary for a young traveller to observe upon such an
occasion, he desired him to write down a description of the courts and
countries he had visited, and what was most worthy of curiosity in them.

He consented, on condition that I would direct his subjects, as he
called it: and as every one had heard his manner of writing commended;
and thought his narratives might be agreeable amusements in winter
evenings; and that he could have no opportunity particularly to address
me directly in them, since they were to be read in full assembly before
they were given to the young gentleman, I made the less scruple to
write, and to make observations, and put questions for our further
information--Still the less perhaps as I love writing; and those who do,
are fond, you know, of occasions to use the pen: And then, having
ever one's consent, and my uncle Hervey's desire that I would write,
I thought that if I had been the only scrupulous person, it would have
shewn a particularity that a vain man might construe to his advantage;
and which my sister would not fail to animadvert upon.

You have seen some of these letters; and have been pleased with this
account of persons, places, and things; and we have both agreed, that he
was no common observer upon what he had seen.

My sister allowed that the man had a tolerable knack of writing and
describing: And my father, who had been abroad in his youth, said, that
his remarks were curious, and shewed him to be a person of reading,
judgment and taste.

Thus was a kind of correspondence begun between him and me, with general
approbation; while every one wondered at, and was pleased with, his
patient veneration of me; for so they called it. However, it was not
doubted but he would soon be more importunate, since his visits were
more frequent, and he acknowledged to my aunt Hervey a passion for me,
accompanied with an awe that he had never known before; to which he
attributed what he called his but seeming acquiescence with my father's
pleasure, and the distance I kept him at. And yet, my dear, this may be
his usual manner of behaviour to our sex; for had not my sister at first
all his reverence?

Mean time, my father, expecting his importunity, kept in readiness the
reports he had heard in his disfavour, to charge them upon him then, as
so many objections to address. And it was highly agreeable to me that he
did so: it would have been strange if it were not; since the person who
could reject Mr. Wyerley's address for the sake of his free opinions,
must have been inexcusable, had she not rejected another's for his freer
practices.

But I should own, that in the letters he sent me upon the general
subject, he more than once inclosed a particular one, declaring his
passionate regards for me, and complaining with fervour enough, of my
reserves. But of these I took not the least notice: for, as I had not
written to him at all, but upon a subject so general, I thought it was
but right to let what he wrote upon one so particular pass off as if I
had never seen it; and the rather, as I was not then at liberty (from
the approbation his letters met with) to break off the correspondence,
unless I had assigned the true reason for doing so. Besides, with all
his respectful assiduities, it was easy to observe, (if it had not been
his general character) that his temper is naturally haughty and violent;
and I had seen too much of that untractable spirit in my brother to like
it in one who hoped to be still more nearly related to me.

I had a little specimen of this temper of his upon the very occasion I
have mentioned: For after he had sent me a third particular letter with
the general one, he asked me the next time he came to Harlowe-Place,
if I had not received such a one from him?--I told him I should never
answer one so sent; and that I had waited for such an occasion as he had
now given me, to tell him so: I desired him therefore not to write again
on the subject; assuring him, that if he did, I would return both, and
never write another line to him.

You can't imagine how saucily the man looked; as if, in short, he was
disappointed that he had not made a more sensible impression upon me:
nor, when he recollected himself (as he did immediately), what a visible
struggle it cost him to change his haughty airs for more placid ones.
But I took no notice of either; for I thought it best to convince him,
by the coolness and indifference with which I repulsed his forward hopes
(at the same time intending to avoid the affectation of pride or
vanity) that he was not considerable enough in my eyes to make me take
over-ready offence at what he said, or at his haughty looks: in other
words, that I had not value enough for him to treat him with peculiarity
either by smiles or frowns. Indeed he had cunning enough to give me,
undesignedly, a piece of instruction which taught me this caution; for
he had said in conversation once, 'That if a man could not make a woman
in courtship own herself pleased with him, it was as much and oftentimes
more to his purpose to make her angry with him.'

I must break off here, but will continue the subject the very first
opportunity. Mean time, I am

Your most affectionate friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER IV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE JAN. 15.


Such, my dear, was the situation Mr. Lovelace and I were in when my
brother arrived from Scotland.

The moment Mr. Lovelace's visits were mentioned to him, he, without
either hesitation or apology, expressed his disapprobation of them. He
found great flaws in his character; and took the liberty to say in so
many words, that he wondered how it came into the heads of his uncles
to encourage such a man for either of his sisters: At the same time
returning his thanks to my father for declining his consent till he
arrived, in such a manner, I thought, as a superior would do, when he
commended an inferior for having well performed his duty in his absence.

He justified his avowed inveteracy by common fame, and by what he had
known of him at college; declaring, that he had ever hated him; ever
should hate him; and would never own him for a brother, or me for a
sister, if I married him.

That early antipathy I have heard accounted for in this manner:

Mr. Lovelace was always noted for his vivacity and courage; and no less,
it seems, for the swift and surprising progress he made in all parts of
literature: for diligence in his studies in the hours of study, he
had hardly his equal. This it seems was his general character at the
university; and it gained him many friends among the more learned; while
those who did not love him, feared him, by reason of the offence his
vivacity made him too ready to give, and of the courage he shewed in
supporting the offence when given; which procured him as many followers
as he pleased among the mischievous sort.--No very amiable character,
you'll say, upon the whole.

But my brother's temper was not more happy. His native haughtiness could
not bear a superiority so visible; and whom we fear more than love, we
are not far from hating: and having less command of his passions than
the other, he was evermore the subject of his perhaps indecent
ridicule: so that every body, either from love or fear, siding with his
antagonist, he had a most uneasy time of it while both continued in the
same college.--It was the less wonder therefore that a young man who is
not noted for the gentleness of his temper, should resume an antipathy
early begun, and so deeply rooted.

He found my sister, who waited but for the occasion, ready to join him
in his resentments against the man he hated. She utterly disclaimed
all manner of regard for him: 'Never liked him at all:--His estate was
certainly much incumbered: it was impossible it should be otherwise; so
entirely devoted as he was to his pleasures. He kept no house; had no
equipage: Nobody pretended that he wanted pride: the reason therefore
was easy to be guessed at.' And then did she boast of, and my brother
praised her for, refusing him: and both joined on all occasions to
depreciate him, and not seldom made the occasions; their displeasure
against him causing every subject to run into this, if it began not with
it.

I was not solicitous to vindicate him when I was not joined in their
reflection. I told them I did not value him enough to make a difference
in the family on his account: and as he was supposed to have given
much cause for their ill opinion of him, I thought he ought to take the
consequence of his own faults.

Now and then indeed, when I observed that their vehemence carried them
beyond all bounds of probability in their charges against him, I thought
it but justice to put in a word for him. But this only subjected me
to reproach, as having a prepossession in his favour which I would not
own.--So that, when I could not change the subject, I used to retire
either to my music, or to my closet.

Their behaviour to him, when they could not help seeing him, was very
cold and disobliging; but as yet not directly affrontive. For they were
in hopes of prevailing upon my father to forbid his visits. But as there
was nothing in his behaviour, that might warrant such a treatment of
a man of his birth and fortune, they succeeded not: And then they were
very earnest with me to forbid them. I asked, what authority I had to
take such a step in my father's house; and when my behaviour to him was
so distant, that he seemed to be as much the guest of any other person
of the family, themselves excepted, as mine?--In revenge, they told me,
that it was cunning management between us; and that we both understood
one another better than we pretended to do. And at last they gave such a
loose to their passions, all of a sudden* as I may say, that instead of
withdrawing, as they used to do when he came, they threw themselves in
his way purposely to affront him.


     * The reason of this their more openly shown animosity is
     given in Letter XIII.


Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brooked this: but nevertheless
contented himself to complain of it to me: in high terms, however,
telling me, that but for my sake my brother's treatment of him was not
to be borne.

I was sorry for the merit this gave him in his own opinion with me: and
the more, as some of the affronts he received were too flagrant to be
excused: But I told him, that I was determined not to fall out with
my brother, if I could help it, whatever faults he had: and since they
could not see one another with temper, should be glad that he would not
throw himself in my brother's way; and I was sure my brother would not
seek him.

He was very much nettled at this answer: But said, he must bear his
affronts if I would have it so. He had been accused himself of violence
in his temper; but he hoped to shew on this occasion that he had a
command of his passions which few young men, so highly provoked, would
be able to shew; and doubted not but it would be attributed to a proper
motive by a person of my generosity and penetration.

My brother had just before, with the approbation of my uncles, employed
a person related to a discharged bailiff or steward of Lord M. who had
had the management of some part of Mr. Lovelace's affairs (from which
he was also dismissed by him) to inquire into his debts, after his
companions, into his amours, and the like.

My aunt Hervey, in confidence, gave me the following particulars of what
the man had said of him.

'That he was a generous landlord: that he spared nothing for solid and
lasting improvements upon his estate; and that he looked into his own
affairs, and understood them: that he had been very expensive when
abroad; and contracted a large debt (for he made no secret of his
affairs); yet chose to limit himself to an annual sum, and to decline
equipage, in order to avoid being obliged to his uncle and aunts; from
whom he might have what money he pleased; but that he was very jealous
of their controul; had often quarrels with them; and treated them so
freely, that they were all afraid of him. However, that his estate was
never mortgaged, as my brother had heard it was; his credit was always
high; and the man believed, he was by this time near upon, if not quite,
clear of the world.

'He was a sad gentleman, he said, as to women:--If his tenants had
pretty daughters, they chose to keep them out of his sight. He believed
he kept no particular mistress; for he had heard newelty, that was the
man's word, was every thing with him. But for his uncle's and aunt's
teazings, the man fancied he would not think of marriage: he was never
known to be disguised with liquor; but was a great plotter, and a great
writer: That he lived a wild life in town, by what he had heard: had six
or seven companions as bad as himself; whom now and then he brought down
with him; and the country was always glad when they went up again. He
would have it, that although passionate, he was good-humoured; loved
as well to take a jest as to give one; and would rally himself upon
occasion the freest of any man he ever knew.'

This was his character from an enemy; for, as my aunt observed, every
thing the man said commendably of him came grudgingly, with a must needs
say--to do him justice, &c. while the contrary was delivered with a free
good-will. And this character, as a worse was expected, though this was
bad enough, not answering the end of inquiring after it, my brother and
sister were more apprehensive than before, that his address would be
encouraged, since the worst part of it was known, or supposed, when he
was first introduced to my sister.

But, with regard to myself, I must observe in his disfavour, that,
notwithstanding the merit he wanted to make with me for his patience
upon my brother's ill-treatment of him, I owed him no compliments
for trying to conciliate with him. Not that I believe it would have
signified any thing if he had made ever such court either to him or to
my sister: yet one might have expected from a man of his politeness, and
from his pretensions, you know, that he would have been willing to try.
Instead of which, he shewed such a contempt both of my brother and my
sister, especially my brother, as was construed into a defiance of
them. And for me to have hinted at an alteration in his behaviour to my
brother, was an advantage I knew he would have been proud of; and which
therefore I had no mind to give him. But I doubted not that having so
very little encouragement from any body, his pride would soon take fire,
and he would of himself discontinue his visits, or go to town; where,
till he came acquainted with our family, he used chiefly to reside: And
in this latter case he had no reason to expect, that I would receive,
much less answer, his Letters: the occasions which had led me to receive
any of his, being by this time over.

But my brother's antipathy would not permit him to wait for such an
event; and after several excesses, which Mr. Lovelace still returned
with contempt, and a haughtiness too much like that of the aggressor, my
brother took upon himself to fill up the door-way once when he came, as
if to oppose his entrance: And upon his asking for me, demanded, what
his business was with his sister?

The other, with a challenging air, as my brother says, told him, he
would answer a gentleman any question; but he wished that Mr. James
Harlowe, who had of late given himself high airs, would remember that he
was not now at college.

Just then the good Dr. Lewen, who frequently honours me with a visit of
conversation, as he is pleased to call it, and had parted with me in my
own parlour, came to the door: and hearing the words, interposed; both
having their hands upon their swords: and telling Mr. Lovelace where
I was, he burst by my brother, to come to me; leaving him chafing, he
said, like a hunted boar at bay.

This alarmed us all. My father was pleased to hint to Mr. Lovelace,
that he wished he would discontinue his visits for the peace-sake of the
family: And I, by his command, spoke a great deal plainer.

But Mr. Lovelace is a man not easily brought to give up his purpose,
especially in a point wherein he pretends his heart is so much engaged:
and no absolute prohibition having been given, things went on for a
little while as before: for I saw plainly, that to have denied myself to
his visits (which however I declined receiving as often as I could) was
to bring forward some desperate issue between the two; since the offence
so readily given on one side was brooked by the other only out of
consideration to me.

And thus did my brother's rashness lay me under an obligation where I
would least have owed it.

The intermediate proposals of Mr. Symmes and Mr. Mullins, both (in turn)
encouraged by my brother, induced him to be more patient for a while,
as nobody thought me over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's favour; for he hoped
that he should engage my father and uncles to approve of the one or the
other in opposition to the man he hated. But when he found that I
had interest enough to disengage myself from the addresses of those
gentlemen, as I had (before he went to Scotland, and before Mr. Lovelace
visited here) of Mr. Wyerley's, he then kept no measures: and first set
himself to upbraid me for supposed prepossession, which he treated as
if it were criminal; and then to insult Mr. Lovelace in person, at Mr.
Edward Symmes's, the brother of the other Symmes, two miles off; and
no good Dr. Lewen being there to interpose, the unhappy rencounter
followed. My brother was disarmed, as you have heard; and on being
brought home, and giving us ground to suppose he was much worse hurt
than he really was, and a fever ensuing, every one flamed out; and all
was laid at my door.

Mr. Lovelace for three days together sent twice each day to inquire
after my brother's health; and although he received rude and even
shocking returns, he thought fit on the fourth day to make in person
the same inquiries; and received still greater incivilities from my two
uncles, who happened to be both there. My father also was held by force
from going to him with his sword in his hand, although he had the gout
upon him.

I fainted away with terror, seeing every one so violent, and hearing Mr.
Lovelace swear that he would not depart till he had made my uncles ask
his pardon for the indignities he had received at their hands; a door
being held fast locked between him and them. My mother all the time
was praying and struggling to with-hold my father in the great parlour.
Meanwhile my sister, who had treated Mr. Lovelace with virulence, came
in to me, and insulted me as fast as I recovered. But when Mr. Lovelace
was told how ill I was, he departed; nevertheless vowing revenge.

He was ever a favourite with our domestics. His bounty to them, and
having always something facetious to say to each, had made them all of
his party: and on this occasion they privately blamed every body else,
and reported his calm and gentlemanly behaviour (till the provocations
given him ran very high) in such favourable terms, that those reports,
and my apprehensions of the consequence of this treatment, induced me to
read a letter he sent me that night; and, it being written in the most
respectful terms (offering to submit the whole to my decision, and to
govern himself entirely by my will) to answer it some days after.

To this unhappy necessity was owing our renewed correspondence, as I
may call it; yet I did not write till I had informed myself from Mr.
Symmes's brother, that he was really insulted into the act of drawing
his sword by my brother's repeatedly threatening (upon his excusing
himself out of regard to me) to brand me ir he did not; and, by all the
inquiry I could make, that he was again the sufferer from my uncles in a
more violent manner than I have related.

The same circumstances were related to my father and other relations by
Mr. Symmes; but they had gone too far in making themselves parties
to the quarrel either to retract or forgive; and I was forbidden to
correspond with him, or to be seen a moment in his company.

One thing however I can say, but that in confidence, because my mother
commanded me not to mention it:--That, expressing her apprehension of
the consequences of the indignities offered to Mr. Lovelace, she told
me, she would leave it to my prudence to do all I could to prevent the
impending mischief on one side.

I am obliged to break off. But I believe I have written enough to answer
very fully all that you have required of me. It is not for a child
to seek to clear her own character, or to justify her actions, at the
expense of the most revered ones: yet, as I know that the account of
all those further proceedings by which I may be affected, will be
interesting to so dear a friend (who will communicate to others no more
than what is fitting) I will continue to write, as I have opportunity,
as minutely as we are used to write to each other. Indeed I have
no delight, as I have often told you, equal to that which I take in
conversing with you by letter, when I cannot in person.

Mean time, I cannot help saying, that I am exceedingly concerned to
find, that I am become so much the public talk as you tell me I am. Your
kind, your precautionary regard for my fame, and the opportunity you
have given me to tell my own story previous to any new accident (which
heaven avert!) is so like the warm friend I have ever found in my dear
Miss Howe, that, with redoubled obligation, you bind me to be

Your ever grateful and affectionate, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


Copy of the requested Preamble to the clauses in her Grandfather's Will:
inclosed in the preceding Letter.


As the particular estate I have mentioned and described above, is
principally of my own raising: as my three sons have been uncommonly
prosperous; and are very rich: the eldest by means of the unexpected
benefits he reaps from his new found mines; the second, by what has, as
unexpectedly, fallen in to him on the deaths of several relations of
his present wife, the worthy daughter by both sides of very honourable
families; over and above the very large portion which he received with
her in marriage: my son Antony by his East-India traffic, and successful
voyages: as furthermore my grandson James will be sufficiently provided
for by his grandmother Lovell's kindness to him; who, having no near
relations, hath assured me, that she hath, as well by deed of gift as
by will, left him both her Scottish and English estates: for never
was there a family more prosperous in all its branches, blessed be God
therefore: and as my said son James will very probably make it up to
my grand-daughter Arabella; to whom I intend no disrespect; nor have
reason; for she is a very hopeful and dutiful child: and as my sons,
John and Antony, seem not inclined to a married life; so that my son
James is the only one who has children, or is likely to have any. For
all these reasons; and because my dearest and beloved grand-daughter
Clarissa hath been from her infancy a matchless young creature in her
duty to me, and admired by all who knew her, as a very extraordinary
child; I must therefore take the pleasure of considering her as my own
peculiar child; and this without intending offence; and I hope it
will not be taken as any, since my son James can bestow his favours
accordingly, and in greater proportion, upon his son James, and upon his
daughter Arabella.--

These, I say, are the reasons which move me to dispose of the
above-described estate in the precious child's favour; who is the
delight of my old age: and, I verily think, has contributed, by her
amiable duty and kind and tender regards, to prolong my life.

Wherefore it is my express will and commandment, and I enjoin my said
three sons, John, James, and Antony, and my grandson James, and my
grand-daughter Arabella, as they value my blessing, and will regard my
memory, and would wish their own last wills and desires to be fulfilled
by their survivors, that they will not impugn or contest the following
bequests and devises in favour of my said grand-daughter Clarissa,
although they should not be strictly conformable to law or to the forms
thereof; nor suffer them to be controverted or disputed on any pretence
whatsoever.

And in this confidence, &c. &c. &c.




LETTER V

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE JAN. 20


I have been hindered from prosecuting my intention. Neither nights nor
mornings have been my own. My mother has been very ill; and would have
no other nurse but me. I have not stirred from her bedside (for she kept
her bed); and two nights I had the honour of sharing it with her.

Her disorder was a very violet colic. The contentions of these fierce,
these masculine spirits, and the apprehension of mischiefs that may
arise from the increasing animosity which all here have against Mr.
Lovelace, and his too well known resenting and intrepid character, she
cannot bear. Then the foundations laid, as she dreads, for jealousy and
heart-burnings in her own family, late so happy and so united, afflict
exceedingly a gentle and sensible mind, which has from the beginning, on
all occasions, sacrificed its own inward satisfaction to outward peace.
My brother and sister, who used very often to jar, are now so entirely
one, and are so much together, (caballing was the word that dropt from
my mother's lips, as if at unawares,) that she is very fearful of the
consequences that may follow;--to my prejudice, perhaps, is her kind
concern; since she sees that they behave to me every hour with more and
more shyness and reserve: yet, would she but exert that authority which
the superiority of her fine talents gives her, all these family feuds
might perhaps be extinguished in their but yet beginnings; especially as
she may be assured that all fitting concessions shall be made by me,
not only as my brother and sister are my elders, but for the sake of so
excellent and so indulgent a mother.

For, if I may say to you, my dear, what I would not to any other person
living, it is my opinion, that had she been of a temper that would have
borne less, she would have had ten times less to bear, than she has had.
No commendation, you'll say, of the generosity of those spirits which
can turn to its own disquiet so much condescending goodness.

Upon my word I am sometimes tempted to think that we may make the world
allow for and respect us as we please, if we can but be sturdy in our
wills, and set out accordingly. It is but being the less beloved for it,
that's all: and if we have power to oblige those we have to do with, it
will not appear to us that we are. Our flatterers will tell us any thing
sooner than our faults, or what they know we do not like to hear.

Were there not truth in this observation, is it possible that my brother
and sister could make their very failings, their vehemences, of such
importance to all the family? 'How will my son, how will my nephew, take
this or that measure? What will he say to it? Let us consult him about
it;' are references always previous to every resolution taken by his
superiors, whose will ought to be his. Well may he expect to be treated
with this deference by every other person, when my father himself,
generally so absolute, constantly pays it to him; and the more since his
godmother's bounty has given independence to a spirit that was before
under too little restraint.--But whither may these reflections lead
me!--I know you do not love any of us but my mother and me; and, being
above all disguises, make me sensible that you do not oftener than I
wish.--Ought I then to add force to your dislikes of those whom I wish
you to like?--of my father especially; for he, alas! has some excuse
for his impatience of contradiction. He is not naturally an ill-tempered
man; and in his person and air, and in his conversation too, when not
under the torture of a gouty paroxysm, every body distinguishes the
gentleman born and educated.

Our sex perhaps must expect to bear a little--uncourtliness shall I call
it?--from the husband whom as the lover they let know the preference
their hearts gave him to all other men.--Say what they will of
generosity being a manly virtue; but upon my word, my dear, I have ever
yet observed, that it is not to be met with in that sex one time in ten
that it is to be found in ours.--But my father was soured by the cruel
distemper I have named; which seized him all at once in the very prime
of life, in so violent a manner as to take from the most active of
minds, as his was, all power of activity, and that in all appearance for
life.--It imprisoned, as I may say, his lively spirits in himself,
and turned the edge of them against his own peace; his extraordinary
prosperity adding to his impatiency. Those, I believe, who want the
fewest earthly blessings, most regret that they want any.

But my brother! What excuse can be made for his haughty and morose
temper? He is really, my dear, I am sorry to have occasion to say it, an
ill-temper'd young man; and treats my mother sometimes--Indeed he is not
dutiful.--But, possessing every thing, he has the vice of age, mingled
with the ambition of youth, and enjoys nothing--but his own haughtiness
and ill-temper, I was going to say.--Yet again am I adding force to your
dislikes of some of us.--Once, my dear, it was perhaps in your power to
have moulded him as you pleased.--Could you have been my sister!--Then
had I friend in a sister.--But no wonder that he does not love you now;
who could nip in the bud, and that with a disdain, let me say, too
much of kin to his haughtiness, a passion that would not have wanted
a fervour worthy of the object; and which possibly would have made him
worthy.

But no more of this. I will prosecute my former intention in my next;
which I will sit down to as soon as breakfast is over; dispatching this
by the messenger whom you have so kindly sent to inquire after us on my
silence. Mean time, I am,


Your most affectionate and obliged friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER VI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE HARLOWE-PLACE, JAN. 20.


I will now resume my narrative of proceedings here.--My brother being
in a good way, although you may be sure that his resentments are rather
heightened than abated by the galling disgrace he has received, my
friends (my father and uncles, however, if not my brother and sister)
begin to think that I have been treated unkindly. My mother been so good
as to tell me this since I sent away my last.

Nevertheless I believe they all think that I receive letters from Mr.
Lovelace. But Lord M. being inclined rather to support than to blame his
nephew, they seem to be so much afraid of Mr. Lovelace, that they do
not put it to me whether I do or not; conniving on the contrary, as it
should seem, at the only method left to allay the vehemence of a spirit
which they have so much provoked: For he still insists upon satisfaction
from my uncles; and this possibly (for he wants not art) as the best way
to be introduced again with some advantage into our family. And indeed
my aunt Hervey has put it to my mother, whether it were not best to
prevail upon my brother to take a turn to his Yorkshire estate (which he
was intending to do before) and to stay there till all is blown over.

But this is very far from being his intention: For he has already
began to hint again, that he shall never be easy or satisfied till I
am married; and, finding neither Mr. Symmes nor Mr. Mullins will be
accepted, has proposed Mr. Wyerley once more, on the score of his
great passion for me. This I have again rejected; and but yesterday he
mentioned one who has applied to him by letter, making high offers. This
is Mr. Solmes; Rich Solmes you know they call him. But this application
has not met with the attention of one single soul.

If none of his schemes of getting me married take effect, he has
thoughts, I am told, of proposing to me to go to Scotland, that as the
compliment is, I may put his house there in such order as our own is in.
But this my mother intends to oppose for her own sake; because having
relieved her, as she is pleased to say, of the household cares (for
which my sister, you know, has no turn) they must again devolve upon her
if I go. And if she did not oppose it, I should; for, believe me, I have
no mind to be his housekeeper; and I am sure, were I to go with him, I
should be treated rather as a servant than a sister:--perhaps, not the
better because I am his sister. And if Mr. Lovelace should follow me,
things might be worse than they are now.

But I have besought my mother, who is apprehensive of Mr. Lovelace's
visits, and for fear of whom my uncles never stir out without arms and
armed servants (my brother also being near well enough to go abroad),
to procure me permission to be your guest for a fortnight, or so.--Will
your mother, think you, my dear, give me leave?

I dare not ask to go to my dairy-house, as my good grandfather would
call it: for I am now afraid of being thought to have a wish to enjoy
that independence to which his will has entitled me: and as matter are
situated, such a wish would be imputed to my regard to the man to whom
they have now so great an antipathy. And indeed could I be as easy and
happy here as I used to be, I would defy that man and all his sex; and
never repent that I have given the power of my fortune into my father's
hands.


***


Just now, my mother has rejoiced me with the news that my requested
permission is granted. Every one thinks it best that I should go to you,
except my brother. But he was told, that he must not expect to rule in
every thing. I am to be sent for into the great parlour, where are my
two uncles and my aunt Hervey, and to be acquainted with this concession
in form.

You know, my dear, that there is a good deal of solemnity among us.
But never was there a family more united in its different branches than
ours. Our uncles consider us as their own children, and declare that it
is for our sakes that they live single. So that they are advised
with upon every article relating to us, or that may affect us. It is
therefore the less wonder, at a time when they understand that Mr.
Lovelace is determined to pay us an amicable visit, as he calls it, (but
which I am sure cannot end amicably,) that they should both be consulted
upon the permission I had desired to attend you.


***


I will acquaint you with what passed at the general leave given me to be
your guest. And yet I know that you will not love my brother the better
for my communication. But I am angry with him myself, and cannot help
it. And besides, it is proper to let you know the terms I go upon, and
their motives for permitting me to go.

Clary, said my mother, as soon as I entered the great parlour, your
request to go to Miss Howe's for a few days has been taken into
consideration, and granted--

Much against my liking, I assure you, said my brother, rudely
interrupting her.

Son James! said my father, and knit his brows.

He was not daunted. His arm was in a sling. He often has the mean art
to look upon that, when any thing is hinted that may be supposed to lead
toward the least favour to or reconciliation with Mr. Lovelace.--Let the
girl then [I am often the girl with him] be prohibited seeing that vile
libertine.

Nobody spoke.

Do you hear, sister Clary? taking their silence for approbation of what
he had dictated; you are not to receive visits from Lord M.'s nephew.

Every one still remained silent.

Do you so understand the license you have, Miss? interrogated he.

I would be glad, Sir, said I, to understand that you are my
brother;--and that you would understand that you are only my brother.

O the fond, fond heart! with a sneer of insult, lifting up his hands.

Sir, said I, to my father, to your justice I appeal: If I have deserved
reflection, let me be not spared. But if I am to be answerable for the
rashness--

No more!--No more of either side, said my father. You are not to receive
the visits of that Lovelace, though.--Nor are you, son James, to reflect
upon your sister. She is a worthy child.

Sir, I have done, replied he:--and yet I have her honour at heart, as
much as the honour of the rest of the family.

And hence, Sir, retorted I, your unbrotherly reflections upon me?

Well, but you observe, Miss, said he, that it is not I, but your father,
that tells you, that you are not to receive the visits of that Lovelace.

Cousin Harlowe, said my aunt Hervey, allow me to say, that my cousin
Clary's prudence may be confided in.

I am convinced it may, joined my mother.

But, aunt, but, madam (put in my sister) there is no hurt, I presume, in
letting my sister know the condition she goes to Miss Howe upon; since,
if he gets a nack of visiting her there--

You may be sure, interrupted my uncle Harlowe, he will endeavour to see
her there.

So would such an impudent man here, said my uncle Antony: and 'tis
better done there than here.

Better no where, said my father.--I command you (turning to me) on pain
of displeasure, that you see him not at all.

I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I do assure you: not at
all, if I can properly avoid it.

You know with what indifference, said my mother, she has hitherto seen
him.--Her prudence may be trusted to, as my sister Hervey says.

With what appa--rent indifference, drawled my brother.

Son James! said my father sternly.

I have done, Sir, said he. But again, in a provoking manner, he reminded
me of the prohibition.

Thus ended the conference.

Will you engage, my dear, that the hated man shall not come near your
house?--But what an inconsistence is this, when they consent to my
going, thinking his visits here no otherwise to be avoided!--But if he
does come, I charge you never to leave us alone together.

As I have no reason to doubt a welcome from your good mother, I will put
every thing in order here, and be with you in two or three days.

Mean time, I am Your most affectionate and obliged, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER VII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [AFTER HER RETURN FROM HER.]
HARLOWE-PLACE, FEB. 20.


I beg your excuse for not writing sooner. Alas! my dear, I have sad
prospects before me! My brother and sister have succeeded in all their
views. They have found out another lover for me; an hideous one!--Yet
he is encouraged by every body. No wonder that I was ordered home so
suddenly. At an hour's warning!--No other notice, you know, than what
was brought with the chariot that was to carry me back.--It was for
fear, as I have been informed [an unworthy fear!] that I should have
entered into any concert with Mr. Lovelace had I known their motive for
commanding me home; apprehending, 'tis evident, that I should dislike
the man they had to propose to me.

And well might they apprehend so:--For who do you think he is?--No
other than that Solmes--Could you have believed it?--And they are all
determined too; my mother with the rest!--Dear, dear excellence! how
could she be thus brought over, when I am assured, that on his first
being proposed she was pleased to say, That had Mr. Solmes the Indies
in possession, and would endow me with them, she should not think him
deserving of her Clarissa!

The reception I met with at my return, so different from what I used to
meet with on every little absence [and now I had been from them three
weeks], convinced me that I was to suffer for the happiness I had had
in your company and conversation for that most agreeable period. I will
give you an account of it.

My brother met me at the door, and gave me his hand when I stepped out
of the chariot. He bowed very low: pray, Miss, favour me.--I thought it
in good humour; but found it afterwards mock respect: and so he led
me in great form, I prattling all the way, inquiring of every body's
health, (although I was so soon to see them, and there was hardly time
for answers,) into the great parlour; where were my father, mother, my
two uncles, and sister.

I was struck all of a heap as soon as I entered, to see a solemnity
which I had been so little used to on the like occasions in the
countenance of every dear relation. They all kept their seats. I ran
to my father, and kneeled: then to my mother: and met from both a cold
salute: From my father a blessing but half pronounced: My mother indeed
called me child; but embraced me not with her usual indulgent ardour.

After I had paid my duty to my uncles, and my compliments to my sister,
which she received with solemn and stiff form, I was bid to sit down.
But my heart was full: and I said it became me to stand, if I could
stand, upon a reception so awful and unusual. I was forced to turn my
face from them, and pull out my handkerchief.

My unbrotherly accuser hereupon stood forth, and charged me with having
received no less than five or six visits at Miss Howe's from the
man they had all so much reason to hate [that was the expression];
notwithstanding the commands I had had to the contrary. And he bid me
deny it if I could.

I had never been used, I said, to deny the truth, nor would I now. I
owned I had in the three weeks passed seen the person I presumed he
meant oftener than five or six times [Pray hear me, brother, said I; for
he was going to flame out], but he always asked for Mrs. or Miss Howe,
when he came.

I proceeded, that I had reason to believe, that both Mrs. Howe and Miss,
as matters stood, would much rather have excused his visits; but they
had more than once apologized, that having not the same reason my papa
had to forbid him their house, his rank and fortune entitled him to
civility.

You see, my dear, I made not the pleas I might have made.

My brother seemed ready to give a loose to his passion: My father put
on the countenance which always portends a gathering storm: My uncles
mutteringly whispered: And my sister aggravatingly held up her hands.
While I begged to be heard out:--And my mother said, let the child, that
was her kind word, be heard.

I hoped, I said, there was no harm done: that it became not me to
prescribe to Mrs. or Miss Howe who should be their visitors: that Mrs.
Howe was always diverted with the raillery that passed between Miss and
him: that I had no reason to challenge her guest for my visitor, as I
should seem to have done had I refused to go into their company when he
was with them: that I had never seen him out of the presence of one or
both of those ladies; and had signified to him once, on his urging a
few moments' private conversation with me, that, unless a reconciliation
were effected between my family and his, he must not expect that I would
countenance his visits, much less give him an opportunity of that sort.

I told him further, that Miss Howe so well understood my mind, that she
never left me a moment while Mr. Lovelace was there: that when he came,
if I was not below in the parlour, I would not suffer myself to be
called to him: although I thought it would be an affectation which would
give him an advantage rather than the contrary, if I had left company
when he came in; or refused to enter into it when I found he would stay
any time.

My brother heard me out with such a kind of impatience as shewed he was
resolved to be dissatisfied with me, say what I would. The rest, as the
event has proved, behaved as if they would have been satisfied, had
they not further points to carry by intimidating me. All this made it
evident, as I mentioned above, that they themselves expected not my
voluntary compliance; and was a tacit confession of the disagreeableness
of the person they had to propose.

I was no sooner silent than my brother swore, although in my father's
presence, (swore, unchecked either by eye or countenance,) That for his
part, he would never be reconciled to that libertine: and that he would
renounce me for a sister, if I encouraged the addresses of a man so
obnoxious to them all.

A man who had like to have been my brother's murderer, my sister said,
with a face even bursting with restraint of passion.

The poor Bella has, you know, a plump high-fed face, if I may be allowed
the expression. You, I know, will forgive me for this liberty of speech
sooner than I can forgive myself: Yet how can one be such a reptile as
not to turn when trampled upon!

My father, with vehemence both of action and voice [my father has, you
know, a terrible voice when he is angry] told me that I had met with too
much indulgence in being allowed to refuse this gentleman, and the other
gentleman,; and it was now his turn to be obeyed!

Very true, my mother said:--and hoped his will would not now be disputed
by a child so favoured.

To shew they were all of a sentiment, my uncle Harlowe said, he hoped
his beloved niece only wanted to know her father's will, to obey it.

And my uncle Antony, in his rougher manner, added, that surely I would
not give them reason to apprehend, that I thought my grandfather's
favour to me had made me independent of them all.--If I did, he would
tell me, the will could be set aside, and should.

I was astonished, you must needs think.--Whose addresses now, thought I,
is this treatment preparative to?--Mr. Wyerley's again?--or whose? And
then, as high comparisons, where self is concerned, sooner than low,
come into young people's heads; be it for whom it will, this is wooing
as the English did for the heiress of Scotland in the time of Edward
the Sixth. But that it could be for Solmes, how should it enter into my
head?

I did not know, I said, that I had given occasion for this harshness.
I hoped I should always have a just sense of every one's favour to me,
superadded to the duty I owed as a daughter and a niece: but that I was
so much surprised at a reception so unusual and unexpected, that I hoped
my papa and mamma would give me leave to retire, in order to recollect
myself.

No one gainsaying, I made my silent compliments, and withdrew;--leaving
my brother and sister, as I thought, pleased; and as if they wanted to
congratulate each other on having occasioned so severe a beginning to be
made with me.

I went up to my chamber, and there with my faithful Hannah deplored the
determined face which the new proposal it was plain they had to make me
wore.

I had not recovered myself when I was sent for down to tea. I begged
my maid to be excused attending; but on the repeated command, went down
with as much cheerfulness as I could assume; and had a new fault to
clear myself of: for my brother, so pregnant a thing is determined
ill-will, by intimations equally rude and intelligible, charged my
desire of being excused coming down, to sullens, because a certain
person had been spoken against, upon whom, as he supposed, my fancy ran.

I could easily answer you, Sir, said I, as such a reflection deserves:
but I forbear. If I do not find a brother in you, you shall have a
sister in me.

Pretty meekness! Bella whisperingly said; looking at my brother, and
lifting up her lip in contempt.

He, with an imperious air, bid me deserve his love, and I should be sure
to have it.

As we sat, my mother, in her admirable manner, expatiated upon brotherly
and sisterly love; indulgently blamed my brother and sister for having
taken up displeasure too lightly against me; and politically, if I may
say so, answered for my obedience to my father's will.--The it would be
all well, my father was pleased to say: Then they should dote upon me,
was my brother's expression: Love me as well as ever, was my sister's:
And my uncles, That I then should be the pride of their hearts.--But,
alas! what a forfeiture of all these must I make!

This was the reception I had on my return from you.

Mr. Solmes came in before we had done tea. My uncle Antony presented
him to me, as a gentleman he had a particular friendship for. My uncle
Harlowe in terms equally favourable for him. My father said, Mr. Solmes
is my friend, Clarissa Harlowe. My mother looked at him, and looked at
me, now-and-then, as he sat near me, I thought with concern.--I at her,
with eyes appealing for pity. At him, when I could glance at him, with
disgust little short of affrightment. While my brother and sister Mr.
Solmes'd him, and Sirr'd--yet such a wretch!--But I will at present only
add, My humble thanks and duty to your honoured mother (to whom I will
particularly write, to express the grateful sense I have of her goodness
to me); and that I am

Your ever obliged, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER VIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FEB. 24.


They drive on here at a furious rate. The man lives here, I think.
He courts them, and is more and more a favourite. Such terms, such
settlements! That's the cry.

O my dear, that I had not reason to deplore the family fault, immensely
rich as they all are! But this I may the more unreservedly say to you,
as we have often joined in the same concern: I, for a father and uncles;
you, for a mother; in every other respect, faultless.

Hitherto, I seem to be delivered over to my brother, who pretends as
great a love to me as ever.

You may believe I have been very sincere with him. But he affects
to rally me, and not to believe it possible, that one so dutiful and
discreet as his sister Clary can resolve to disoblige all her friends.

Indeed, I tremble at the prospect before me; for it is evident that they
are strangely determined.

My father and mother industriously avoid giving me opportunity of
speaking to them alone. They ask not for my approbation, intended, as it
should seem, to suppose me into their will. And with them I shall hope
to prevail, or with nobody. They have not the interest in compelling me,
as my brother and sister have: I say less therefore to them, reserving
my whole force for an audience of my father, if he will permit me a
patient ear. How difficult is it, my dear, to give a negative where both
duty and inclination join to make one wish to oblige!

I have already stood the shock of three of this man's particular visits,
besides my share in his more general ones; and find it is impossible
I should ever endure him. He has but a very ordinary share of
understanding; is very illiterate; knows nothing but the value of
estates, and how to improve them, and what belongs to land-jobbing and
husbandry. Yet I am as one stupid, I think. They have begun so cruelly
with me, that I have not spirit enough to assert my own negative.

They had endeavoured it seems to influence my good Mrs. Norton before I
came home--so intent are they to carry their point! And her opinion
not being to their liking, she has been told that she would do well to
decline visiting here for the present: yet she is the person of all the
world, next to my mother, the most likely to prevail upon me, were the
measures they are engaged in reasonable measures, or such as she could
think so.

My aunt likewise having said that she did not think her niece could ever
be brought to like Mr. Solmes, has been obliged to learn another lesson.

I am to have a visit from her to-morrow. And, since I have refused so
much as to hear from my brother and sister what the noble settlements
are to be, she is to acquaint me with the particulars; and to receive
from me my determination: for my father, I am told, will not have
patience but to suppose that I shall stand in opposition to his will.

Mean time it has been signified to me, that it will be acceptable if I
do not think of going to church next Sunday.

The same signification was made for me last Sunday; and I obeyed. They
are apprehensive that Mr. Lovelace will be there with design to come
home with me.

Help me, dear Miss Howe, to a little of your charming spirit: I never
more wanted it.

The man, this Solmes, you may suppose, has no reason to boast of his
progress with me. He has not the sense to say any thing to the purpose.
His courtship indeed is to them; and my brother pretends to court me
as his proxy, truly!--I utterly, to my brother, reject his address; but
thinking a person, so well received and recommended by all my family,
entitled to good manners, all I say against him is affectedly attributed
to coyness: and he, not being sensible of his own imperfections,
believes that my avoiding him when I can, and the reserves I express,
are owing to nothing else: for, as I said, all his courtship is to
them; and I have no opportunity of saying no, to one who asks me not the
question. And so, with an air of mannish superiority, he seems rather to
pity the bashful girl, than to apprehend that he shall not succeed.


FEBRUARY 25.


I have had the expected conference with my aunt.

I have been obliged to hear the man's proposals from her; and have been
told also what their motives are for espousing his interest with so much
warmth. I am even loth to mention how equally unjust it is for him to
make such offers, or for those I am bound to reverence to accept of
them. I hate him more than before. One great estate is already obtained
at the expense of the relations to it, though distant relations; my
brother's, I mean, by his godmother: and this has given the hope,
however chimerical that hope, of procuring others; and that my own at
least may revert to the family. And yet, in my opinion, the world is
but one great family. Originally it was so. What then is this narrow
selfishness that reigns in us, but relationship remembered against
relationship forgot?

But here, upon my absolute refusal of him upon any terms, have I had
a signification made me that wounds me to the heart. How can I tell it
you? Yet I must. It is, my dear, that I must not for a month to come, or
till license obtained, correspond with any body out of the house.

My brother, upon my aunt's report, (made, however, as I am informed,
in the gentlest manner, and even giving remote hopes, which she had no
commission from me to give,) brought me, in authoritative terms, the
prohibition.

Not to Miss Howe? said I.

No, not to Miss Howe, Madam, tauntingly: for have you not acknowledged,
that Lovelace is a favourite there?

See, my dear Miss Howe--!

And do you think, Brother, this is the way--

Do you look to that.--But your letters will be stopt, I can tell
you.--And away he flung.

My sister came to me soon after--Sister Clary, you are going on in a
fine way, I understand. But as there are people who are supposed to
harden you against your duty, I am to tell you, that it will be taken
well if you avoid visits or visitings for a week or two till further
order.

Can this be from those who have authority--

Ask them; ask them, child, with a twirl of her finger.--I have delivered
my message. Your father will be obeyed. He is willing to hope you to be
all obedience, and would prevent all incitements to refractoriness.

I know my duty, said I; and hope I shall not find impossible condition
annexed to it.

A pert young creature, vain and conceited, she called me. I was the only
judge, in my own wise opinion, of what was right and fit. She, for her
part, had long seen into my specious ways: and now I should shew every
body what I was at bottom.

Dear Bella! said I, hands and eyes lifted up--why all this?--Dear, dear
Bella, why--

None of your dear, dear Bella's to me.--I tell you, I see through your
witchcrafts [that was her strange word]. And away she flung; adding, as
she went, and so will every body else very quickly, I dare say.

Bless me, said I to myself, what a sister have I!--How have I deserved
this?

Then I again regretted my grandfather's too distinguishing goodness to
me.


FEB. 25, IN THE EVENING.


What my brother and sister have said against me I cannot tell:--but I am
in heavy disgrace with my father.

I was sent for down to tea. I went with a very cheerful aspect: but had
occasion soon to change it.

Such a solemnity in every body's countenance!--My mother's eyes were
fixed upon the tea-cups; and when she looked up, it was heavily, as if
her eye-lids had weights upon them; and then not to me. My father sat
half-aside in his elbow-chair, that his head might be turned from me:
his hands clasped, and waving, as it were, up and down; his fingers,
poor dear gentleman! in motion, as if angry to the very ends of them. My
sister was swelling. My brother looked at me with scorn, having measured
me, as I may say, with his eyes as I entered, from head to foot. My aunt
was there, and looked upon me as if with kindness restrained, bending
coldly to my compliment to her as she sat; and then cast an eye first on
my brother, then on my sister, as if to give the reason [so I am willing
to construe it] of her unusual stiffness.--Bless me, my dear! that they
should choose to intimidate rather than invite a mind, till now, not
thought either unpersuadable or ungenerous!

I took my seat. Shall I make tea, Madam, to my mother?--I always used,
you know, my dear, to make tea.

No! a very short sentence, in one very short word, was the expressive
answer. And she was pleased to take the canister in her own hand.

My brother bid the footman, who attended, leave the room--I, he said,
will pour out the water.

My heart was up in my mouth. I did not know what to do with myself. What
is to follow? thought I.

Just after the second dish, out stept my mother--A word with you, sister
Hervey! taking her in her hand. Presently my sister dropt away. Then my
brother. So I was left alone with my father.

He looked so very sternly, that my heart failed me as twice or thrice
I would have addressed myself to him: nothing but solemn silence on all
hands having passed before.

At last, I asked, if it were his pleasure that I should pour him out
another dish?

He answered me with the same angry monosyllable, which I had received
from my mother before; and then arose, and walked about the room. I
arose too, with intent to throw myself at his feet; but was too much
overawed by his sternness, even to make such an expression of my duty to
him as my heart overflowed with.

At last, as he supported himself, because of his gout, on the back of a
chair, I took a little more courage; and approaching him, besought him
to acquaint me in what I had offended him?

He turned from me, and in a strong voice, Clarissa Harlowe, said he,
know that I will be obeyed.

God forbid, Sir, that you should not!--I have never yet opposed your
will--

Nor I your whimsies, Clarissa Harlowe, interrupted he.--Don't let me
run the fate of all who shew indulgence to your sex; to be the more
contradicted for mine to you.

My father, you know, my dear, has not (any more than my brother) a kind
opinion of our sex; although there is not a more condescending wife in
the world than my mother.

I was going to make protestations of duty--No protestations, girl! No
words! I will not be prated to! I will be obeyed! I have no child, I
will have no child, but an obedient one.

Sir, you never had reason, I hope--

Tell me not what I never had, but what I have, and what I shall have.

Good Sir, be pleased to hear me--My brother and sister, I fear--

Your brother and sister shall not be spoken against, girl!--They have a
just concern for the honour of my family.

And I hope, Sir--

Hope nothing.--Tell me not of hopes, but of facts. I ask nothing of you
but what is in your power to comply with, and what it is your duty to
comply with.

Then, Sir, I will comply with it--But yet I hope from your goodness--

No expostulations! No but's, girl! No qualifyings! I will be obeyed, I
tell you; and cheerfully too!--or you are no child of mine!

I wept.

Let me beseech you, my dear and ever-honoured Papa, (and I dropt down
on my knees,) that I may have only yours and my mamma's will, and not my
brother's, to obey.

I was going on; but he was pleased to withdraw, leaving me on the floor;
saying, That he would not hear me thus by subtilty and cunning aiming to
distinguish away my duty: repeating, that he would be obeyed.

My heart is too full;--so full, that it may endanger my duty, were I
to try to unburden it to you on this occasion: so I will lay down my
pen.--But can--Yet positively, I will lay down my pen--!




LETTER IX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FEB. 26, IN THE MORNING.


My aunt, who staid here last night, made me a visit this morning as
soon as it was light. She tells me, that I was left alone with my
father yesterday on purpose that he might talk with me on my expected
obedience; but that he owned he was put beside his purpose by reflecting
on something my brother had told him in my disfavour, and by his
impatience but to suppose, that such a gentle spirit as mine had
hitherto seemed to be, should presume to dispute his will in a point
where the advantage of the whole family was to be so greatly promoted by
my compliance.

I find, by a few words which dropt unawares from my aunt, that they have
all an absolute dependence upon what they suppose to be meekness in my
temper. But in this they may be mistaken; for I verily think, upon a
strict examination of myself, that I have almost as much in me of my
father's as of my mother's family.

My uncle Harlowe it seems is against driving me upon extremities: But
my brother has engaged, that the regard I have for my reputation, and
my principles, will bring me round to my duty; that's the expression.
Perhaps I shall have reason to wish I had not known this.

My aunt advises me to submit for the present to the interdicts they
have laid me under; and indeed to encourage Mr. Solmes's address. I have
absolutely refused the latter, let what will (as I have told her) be the
consequence. The visiting prohibition I will conform to. But as to that
of not corresponding with you, nothing but the menace that our letters
shall be intercepted, can engage my observation of it.

She believes that this order is from my father, and that my mother
has not been consulted upon it. She says, that it is given, as she has
reason think, purely in consideration to me, lest I should mortally
offend him; and this from the incitements of other people (meaning you
and Miss Lloyd, I make no doubt) rather than by my own will. For still,
as she tells me, he speaks kind and praiseful things of me.

Here is clemency! Here is indulgence!--And so it is, to prevent a
headstrong child, as a good prince would wish to deter disaffected
subjects, from running into rebellion, and so forfeiting every thing!
But this is allowing to the young-man's wisdom of my brother; a plotter
without a head, and a brother without a heart!

How happy might I have been with any other brother in the world but
James Harlowe; and with any other sister but his sister! Wonder not, my
dear, that I, who used to chide you for these sort of liberties with my
relations, now am more undutiful than you ever was unkind. I cannot bear
the thought of being deprived of the principal pleasure of my life; for
such is your conversation by person and by letter. And who, besides, can
bear to be made the dupe of such low cunning, operating with such high
and arrogant passions?

But can you, my dear Miss Howe, condescend to carry on a private
correspondence with me?--If you can, there is one way I have thought of,
by which it may be done.

You must remember the Green Lane, as we call it, that runs by the side
of the wood-house and poultry-yard where I keep my bantams, pheasants,
and pea-hens, which generally engage my notice twice a day; the more
my favourites because they were my grandfather's, and recommended to my
care by him; and therefore brought hither from my Dairy-house since his
death.

The lane is lower than the floor of the wood-house; and, in the side of
the wood-house, the boards are rotted away down to the floor for half an
ell together in several places. Hannah can step into the lane, and make
a mark with chalk where a letter or parcel may be pushed in, under some
sticks; which may be so managed as to be an unsuspected cover for the
written deposits from either.


***


I have been just now to look at the place, and find it will answer. So
your faithful Robert may, without coming near the house, and as only
passing through the Green Lame which leads to two or three farm-houses
[out of livery if you please] very easily take from thence my letters
and deposit yours.

This place is the more convenient, because it is seldom resorted to
but by myself or Hannah, on the above-mentioned account; for it is the
general store-house for firing; the wood for constant use being nearer
the house.

One corner of this being separated off for the roosting-place of my
little poultry, either she or I shall never want a pretence to go
thither.

Try, my dear, the success of a letter this way; and give me your opinion
and advice what to do in this disgraceful situation, as I cannot but
call it; and what you think of my prospects; and what you would do in my
case.

But before-hand I will tell you, that your advice must not run in favour
of this Solmes: and yet it is very likely they will endeavour to engage
your mother, in order to induce you, who have such an influence over me,
to favour him.

Yet, on second thoughts, if you incline to that side of the question,
I would have you write your whole mind. Determined as I think I am, and
cannot help it, I would at least give a patient hearing to what may be
said on the other side. For my regards are not so much engaged [upon my
word they are not; I know not myself if they be] to another person as
some of my friends suppose; and as you, giving way to your lively vein,
upon his last visits, affected to suppose. What preferable favour I
may have for him to any other person, is owing more to the usage he has
received, and for my sake borne, than to any personal consideration.

I write a few lines of grateful acknowledgement to your good mother for
her favours to me in the late happy period. I fear I shall never know
such another. I hope she will forgive me, that I did not write sooner.

The bearer, if suspected and examined, is to produce that as the only
one he carries.

How do needless watchfulness and undue restraint produce artifice and
contrivance! I should abhor these clandestine correspondences, were they
not forced upon me. They have so mean, so low an appearance to myself,
that I think I ought not to expect that you should take part in them.

But why (as I have also expostulated with my aunt) must I be pushed
into a state, which I have no wish to enter into, although I reverence
it?--Why should not my brother, so many years older, and so earnest to
see me engaged, be first engaged?--And why should not my sister be first
provided for?

But here I conclude these unavailing expostulations, with the assurance,
that I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER X

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE FEB. 27


What odd heads some people have!--Miss Clarissa Harlowe to be sacrificed
in marriage to Mr. Roger Solmes!--Astonishing!

I must not, you say, give my advice in favour of this man!--You now
convince me, my dear, that you are nearer of kin than I thought you,
to the family that could think of so preposterous a match, or you would
never have had the least notion of my advising in his favour.

Ask for his picture. You know I have a good hand at drawing an ugly
likeness. But I'll see a little further first: for who knows what may
happen, since matters are in such a train; and since you have not the
courage to oppose so overwhelming a torrent?

You ask me to help you to a little of my spirit. Are you in earnest?
But it will not now, I doubt, do you service.--It will not sit naturally
upon you. You are your mother's girl, think what you will; and have
violent spirits to contend with. Alas! my dear, you should have borrowed
some of mine a little sooner;--that is to say, before you had given the
management of your estate into the hands of those who think they have a
prior claim to it. What though a father's!--Has not the father two elder
children?--And do they not both bear more of his stamp and image than
you do?--Pray, my dear, call me not to account for this free question;
lest your application of my meaning, on examination, prove to be as
severe as that.

Now I have launched out a little, indulge me one word more in the same
strain--I will be decent, I promise you. I think you might have know,
that Avarice and Envy are two passions that are not to be satisfied, the
one by giving, the other by the envied person's continuing to deserve
and excel.--Fuel, fuel both, all the world over, to flames insatiate and
devouring.

But since you ask for my opinion, you must tell me all you know or
surmise of their inducements. And if you will not forbid me to make
extracts from your letters for the entertainment of my aunt and cousin
in the little island, who long to hear more of your affairs, it will be
very obliging.

But you are so tender of some people who have no tenderness for any body
but themselves, that I must conjure you to speak out. Remember, that
a friendship like ours admits of no reserves. You may trust my
impartiality. It would be an affront to your own judgment, if you did
not: For do you not ask my advice? And have you not taught me that
friendship should never give a bias against justice?--Justify them,
therefore, if you can. Let us see if there be any sense, whether
sufficient reason or not in their choice. At present I cannot (and yet
I know a good deal of your family) have any conception how all of them,
your mother and your aunt Hervey in particular, can join with the rest
against judgments given. As to some of the others, I cannot wonder at
any thing they do, or attempt to do, where self is concerned.

You ask, Why may not your brother be first engaged in wedlock? I'll tell
you why: His temper and his arrogance are too well known to induce women
he would aspire to, to receive his addresses, notwithstanding his great
independent acquisitions, and still greater prospects. Let me tell you,
my dear, those acquisitions have given him more pride than reputation.
To me he is the most intolerable creature that I ever conversed with.
The treatment you blame, he merited from one whom he addressed with the
air of a person who presumes that he is about to confer a favour, rather
than to receive one. I ever loved to mortify proud and insolent spirits.
What, think you, makes me bear Hickman near me, but that the man is
humble, and knows and keeps his distance?

As to your question, Why your elder sister may not be first provided
for? I answer, Because she must have no man, but one who has a great and
clear estate; that's one thing. Another is, Because she has a younger
sister. Pray, my dear, be so good as to tell me, What man of a great and
clear estate would think of that eldest sister, while the younger were
single?

You are all too rich to be happy, child. For must not each of you, by
the constitutions of your family, marry to be still richer? People who
know in what their main excellence consists, are not to be blamed (are
they) for cultivating and improving what they think most valuable?--Is
true happiness any part of your family view?--So far from it, that none
of your family but yourself could be happy were they not rich. So let
them fret on, grumble and grudge, and accumulate; and wondering what
ails them that they have not happiness when they have riches, think the
cause is want of more; and so go on heaping up, till Death, as greedy an
accumulator as themselves, gathers them into his garner.

Well then once more I say, do you, my dear, tell me what you know of
their avowed and general motives; and I will tell you more than you will
tell me of their failings! Your aunt Hervey, you say,* has told you: Why
must I ask you to let me know them, when you condescend to ask my advice
on the occasion?


    * See Letter VIII.


That they prohibit your corresponding with me, is a wisdom I neither
wonder at, nor blame them for: since it is an evidence to me, that they
know their own folly: And if they do, is it strange that they should be
afraid to trust one another's judgment upon it?

I am glad you have found out a way to correspond with me. I approve
it much. I shall more, if this first trial of it prove successful. But
should it not, and should it fall into their hands, it would not concern
me but for your sake.

We have heard before you wrote, that all was not right between your
relations and you at your coming home: that Mr. Solmes visited you, and
that with a prospect of success. But I concluded the mistake lay in the
person; and that his address was to Miss Arabella. And indeed had she
been as good-natured as your plump ones generally are, I should have
thought her too good for him by half. This must certainly be the thing,
thought I; and my beloved friend is sent for to advise and assist in her
nuptial preparations. Who knows, said I to my mother, but that when
the man has thrown aside his yellow full-buckled peruke, and his
broad-brimmed beaver (both of which I suppose were Sir Oliver's best
of long standing) he may cut a tolerable figure dangling to church
with Miss Bell!--The woman, as she observes, should excel the man in
features: and where can she match so well for a foil?

I indulged this surmise against rumour, because I could not believe that
the absurdest people in England could be so very absurd as to think of
this man for you.

We heard, moreover, that you received no visiters. I could assign no
reason for this, except that the preparations for your sister were to be
private, and the ceremony sudden, for fear this man should, as another
man did, change his mind. Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph were with me to
inquire what I knew of this; and of your not being in church, either
morning or afternoon, the Sunday after your return from us; to the
disappointment of a little hundred of your admirers, to use their words.
It was easy for me to guess the reason to be what you confirm--their
apprehensions that Lovelace would be there, and attempt to wait on you
home.

My mother takes very kindly your compliments in your letter to her. Her
words upon reading it were, 'Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an admirable young
lady: wherever she goes, she confers a favour: whomever she leaves, she
fills with regret.'--And then a little comparative reflection--'O my
Nancy, that you had a little of her sweet obligingness!'

No matter. The praise was yours. You are me; and I enjoyed it. The more
enjoyed it, because--Shall I tell you the truth?--Because I think myself
as well as I am--were it but for this reason, that had I twenty brother
James's, and twenty sister Bell's, not one of them, nor all of them
joined together, would dare to treat me as yours presume to treat you.
The person who will bear much shall have much to bear all the world
through; it is your own sentiment,* grounded upon the strongest instance
that can be given in your own family; though you have so little improved
by it.


     * Letter V.


The result is this, that I am fitter for this world than you; you for
the next than me:--that is the difference.--But long, long, for my sake,
and for hundreds of sakes, may it be before you quit us for company more
congenial to you and more worthy of you!

I communicated to my mother the account you give of your strange
reception; also what a horrid wretch they have found out for you; and
the compulsory treatment they give you. It only set her on magnifying
her lenity to me, on my tyrannical behaviour, as she will call it
[mothers must have their way, you know, my dear] to the man whom she so
warmly recommends, against whom it seems there can be no just exception;
and expatiating upon the complaisance I owe her for her indulgence. So I
believe I must communicate to her nothing farther--especially as I know
she would condemn the correspondence between us, and that between you
and Lovelace, as clandestine and undutiful proceedings, and divulge our
secret besides; for duty implicit is her cry. And moreover she lends
a pretty open ear to the preachments of that starch old bachelor your
uncle Antony; and for an example to her daughter would be more careful
how she takes your part, be the cause ever so just.

Yet is this not the right policy neither. For people who allow nothing
will be granted nothing: in other words, those who aim at carrying too
many points will not be able to carry any.

But can you divine, my dear, what the old preachment-making,
plump-hearted soul, your uncle Antony, means by his frequent amblings
hither?--There is such smirking and smiling between my mother and him!
Such mutual praises of economy; and 'that is my way!'--and 'this I
do!'--and 'I am glad it has your approbation, Sir!'--and 'you look into
every thing, Madam!'--'Nothing would be done, if I did not!'--

Such exclamations against servants! Such exaltings of self! And
dear heart, and good lack!--and 'las a-day!--And now-and-then their
conversation sinking into a whispering accent, if I come across
them!--I'll tell you, my dear, I don't above half like it.

Only that these old bachelors usually take as many years to resolve upon
matrimony as they can reasonably expect to live, or I should be ready
to fire upon his visits; and to recommend Mr. Hickman to my mother's
acceptance, as a much more eligible man: for what he wants in years,
he makes up in gravity; and if you will not chide me, I will say, that
there is a primness in both (especially when the man has presumed too
much with me upon my mother's favour for him, and is under discipline on
that account) as make them seem near of kin: and then in contemplation
of my sauciness, and what they both fear from it, they sigh away! and
seem so mightily to compassionate each other, that if pity be but one
remove from love, I am in no danger, while they are both in a great
deal, and don't know it.

Now, my dear, I know you will be upon me with your grave airs: so in for
the lamb, as the saying is, in for the sheep; and do you yourself look
about you; for I'll have a pull with you by way of being aforehand.
Hannibal, we read, always advised to attack the Romans upon their own
territories.

You are pleased to say, and upon your word too! that your regards (a
mighty quaint word for affections) are not so much engaged, as some
of your friends suppose, to another person. What need you give one to
imagine, my dear, that the last month or two has been a period extremely
favourable to that other person, whom it has made an obliger of the
niece for his patience with the uncles.

But, to pass that by--so much engaged!--How much, my dear?--Shall I
infer? Some of your friends suppose a great deal. You seem to own a
little.

Don't be angry. It is all fair: because you have not acknowledged to
me that little. People I have heard you say, who affect secrets, always
excite curiosity.

But you proceed with a kind of drawback upon your averment, as if
recollection had given you a doubt--you know not yourself, if they be
[so much engaged]. Was it necessary to say this to me?--and to say
it upon your word too?--But you know best.--Yet you don't neither,
I believe. For a beginning love is acted by a subtle spirit; and
oftentimes discovers itself to a by-stander, when the person possessed
(why should I not call it possessed?) knows not it has such a demon.

But further you say, what preferable favour you may have for him to any
other person, is owing more to the usage he has received, and for your
sake borne, than to any personal consideration.

This is generously said. It is in character. But, O my friend, depend
upon it, you are in danger. Depend upon it, whether you know it or not,
you are a little in for't. Your native generosity and greatness of mind
endanger you: all your friends, by fighting against him with
impolitic violence, fight for him. And Lovelace, my life for yours,
notwithstanding all his veneration and assiduities, has seen further
than that veneration and those assiduities (so well calculated to your
meridian) will let him own he has seen--has seen, in short, that his
work is doing for him more effectually than he could do it for himself.
And have you not before now said, that nothing is so penetrating as the
eye of a lover who has vanity? And who says Lovelace wants vanity?

In short, my dear, it is my opinion, and that from the easiness of his
heart and behaviour, that he has seen more than I have seen; more than
you think could be seen--more than I believe you yourself know, or else
you would let me know it.

Already, in order to restrain him from resenting the indignities he has
received, and which are daily offered him, he has prevailed upon you to
correspond with him privately. I know he has nothing to boast of from
what you have written: but is not his inducing you to receive his
letters, and to answer them, a great point gained? By your insisting
that he should keep the correspondence private, it appears there is one
secret which you do not wish the world should know: and he is master of
that secret. He is indeed himself, as I may say, that secret! What an
intimacy does this beget for the lover! How is it distancing the parent!

Yet who, as things are situated, can blame you?--Your condescension has
no doubt hitherto prevented great mischiefs. It must be continued,
for the same reasons, while the cause remains. You are drawn in by
a perverse fate against inclination: but custom, with such
laudable purposes, will reconcile the inconveniency, and make an
inclination.--And I would advise you (as you would wish to manage on an
occasion so critical with that prudence which governs all your actions)
not to be afraid of entering upon a close examination into the true
springs and grounds of this your generosity to that happy man.

It is my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that on inquiry it will
come out to be LOVE--don't start, my dear!--Has not your man himself had
natural philosophy enough to observe already to your aunt Hervey, that
love takes the deepest root in the steadiest minds? The deuce take his
sly penetration, I was going to say; for this was six or seven weeks
ago.

I have been tinctured, you know. Nor on the coolest reflection, could
I account how and when the jaundice began: but had been over head and
ears, as the saying is, but for some of that advice from you, which I
now return you. Yet my man was not half so--so what, my dear--to be sure
Lovelace is a charming fellow. And were he only--but I will not make
you glow, as you read--upon my word I will not.--Yet, my dear, don't you
find at your heart somewhat unusual make it go throb, throb, throb, as
you read just here?--If you do, don't be ashamed to own it--it is your
generosity, my love, that's all.--But as the Roman augur said, Caesar,
beware of the Ides of March!

Adieu, my dearest friend.--Forgive, and very speedily, by the new found
expedient, tell me that you forgive,

Your ever-affectionate, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1.


You both nettled and alarmed me, my dearest Miss Howe, by the concluding
part of your last. At first reading it, I did not think it necessary,
said I to myself, to guard against a critic, when I was writing to so
dear a friend. But then recollecting myself, is there not more in it,
said I, than the result of a vein so naturally lively? Surely I must
have been guilty of an inadvertence. Let me enter into the close
examination of myself which my beloved friend advises.

I do so; and cannot own any of the glow, any of the throbs you
mention.--Upon my word I will repeat, I cannot. And yet the passages in
my letter, upon which you are so humourously severe, lay me fairly open
to your agreeable raillery. I own they do. And I cannot tell what turn
my mind had taken to dictate so oddly to my pen.

But, pray now--is it saying so much, when one, who has no very
particular regard to any man, says, there are some who are preferable to
others? And is it blamable to say, they are the preferable, who are not
well used by one's relations; yet dispense with that usage out of regard
to one's self which they would otherwise resent? Mr. Lovelace, for
instance, I may be allowed to say, is a man to be preferred to Mr.
Solmes; and that I do prefer him to that man: but, surely, this may be
said without its being a necessary consequence that I must be in love
with him.

Indeed I would not be in love with him, as it is called, for the world:
First, because I have no opinion of his morals; and think it a fault in
which our whole family (my brother excepted) has had a share, that he
was permitted to visit us with a hope, which, however, being distant,
did not, as I have observed heretofore,* entitle any of us to call
him to account for such of his immoralities as came to our ears. Next,
because I think him to be a vain man, capable of triumphing (secretly at
least) over a person whose heart he thinks he has engaged. And, thirdly,
because the assiduities and veneration which you impute to him, seem to
carry an haughtiness in them, as if he thought his address had a merit
in it, that would be more than an equivalent to a woman's love. In
short, his very politeness, notwithstanding the advantages he must have
had from his birth and education, appear to be constrained; and, with
the most remarkable easy and genteel person, something, at times,
seems to be behind in his manner that is too studiously kept in. Then,
good-humoured as he is thought to be in the main to other people's
servants, and this even to familiarity (although, as you have observed,
a familiarity that has dignity in it not unbecoming to a man of quality)
he is apt sometimes to break out into a passion with his own: An oath
or a curse follows, and such looks from those servants as plainly shew
terror, and that they should have fared worse had they not been in my
hearing: with a confirmation in the master's looks of a surmise too well
justified.


     * Letter III.


Indeed, my dear, THIS man is not THE man. I have great objections to
him. My heart throbs not after him. I glow not, but with indignation
against myself for having given room for such an imputation. But you
must not, my dearest friend, construe common gratitude into love. I
cannot bear that you should. But if ever I should have the misfortune to
think it love, I promise you upon my word, which is the same as upon my
honour, that I will acquaint you with it.

You bid me to tell you very speedily, and by the new-found expedient,
that I am not displeased with you for your agreeable raillery: I
dispatch this therefore immediately, postponing to my next the account
of the inducements which my friends have to promote with so much
earnestness the address of Mr. Solmes.

Be satisfied, my dear, mean time, that I am not displeased with you:
indeed I am not. On the contrary, I give you my hearty thanks for your
friendly premonitions; and I charge you (as I have often done) that if
you observe any thing in me so very faulty as would require from you
to others in my behalf the palliation of friendly and partial love, you
acquaint me with it: for methinks I would so conduct myself as not to
give reason even for an adversary to censure me; and how shall so weak
and so young a creature avoid the censure of such, if my friend will not
hold a looking-glass before me to let me see my imperfections?

Judge me, then, my dear, as any indifferent person (knowing what you
know of me) would do. I may be at first be a little pained; may glow a
little perhaps to be found less worthy of your friendship than I wish
to be; but assure yourself, that your kind correction will give me
reflection that shall amend me. If it do not, you will have a fault to
accuse me of, that will be utterly inexcusable: a fault, let me add,
that should you not accuse me of it (if in your opinion I am guilty) you
will not be so much, so warmly, my friend as I am yours; since I have
never spared you on the like occasions.

Here I break off to begin another letter to you, with the assurance,
mean time, that I am, and ever will be,

Your equally affectionate and grateful, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING, MARCH 2.


Indeed you would not be in love with him for the world!--Your servant,
my dear. Nor would I have you. For, I think, with all the advantages of
person, fortune, and family, he is not by any means worthy of you. And
this opinion I give as well from the reasons you mention (which I cannot
but confirm) as from what I have heard of him but a few hours ago
from Mrs. Fortescue, a favourite of Lady Betty Lawrance, who knows him
well--but let me congratulate you, however, on your being the first of
our sex that ever I heard of, who has been able to turn that lion, Love,
at her own pleasure, into a lap-dog.

Well but, if you have not the throbs and the glows, you have not: and
are not in love; good reason why--because you would not be in love; and
there's no more to be said.--Only, my dear, I shall keep a good look-out
upon you; and so I hope you will be upon yourself; for it is no manner
of argument that because you would not be in love, you therefore are
not.--But before I part entirely with this subject, a word in your ear,
my charming friend--'tis only by way of caution, and in pursuance of the
general observation, that a stander-by is often a better judge of the
game than those that play.--May it not be, that you have had, and
have, such cross creatures and such odd heads to deal with, as have not
allowed you to attend to the throbs?--Or, if you had them a little now
and then, whether, having had two accounts to place them to, you have
not by mistake put them to the wrong one?

But whether you have a value for Lovelace or not, I know you will be
impatient to hear what Mrs. Fortescue has said of him. Nor will I keep
you longer in suspense.

An hundred wild stories she tells of him from childhood to manhood:
for, as she observed, having never been subject to contradiction, he
was always as mischievous as a monkey. But I shall pass over these whole
hundred of his puerile rogueries (although indicative ones, as I may
say) to take notice as well of some things you are not quite ignorant
of, as of others you know not, and to make a few observations upon him
and his ways.

Mrs. Fortescue owns, what every body knows, 'that he is notoriously,
nay, avowedly, a man of pleasure; yet says, that in any thing he sets
his heart upon or undertakes, he is the most industrious and persevering
mortal under the sun. He rests it seems not above six hours in the
twenty-four--any more than you. He delights in writing. Whether at Lord
M.'s, or at Lady Betty's, or Lady Sarah's, he has always a pen in his
fingers when he retires. One of his companions (confirming his love of
writing) has told her, that his thoughts flow rapidly to his pen:' And
you and I, my dear, have observed, on more occasions than one, that
though he writes even a fine hand, he is one of the readiest and
quickest of writers. He must indeed have had early a very docile genius;
since a person of his pleasurable turn and active spirit, could
never have submitted to take long or great pains in attaining the
qualifications he is master of; qualifications so seldom attained by
youth of quality and fortune; by such especially of those of either,
who, like him, have never known what it was to be controuled.

'He had once it seems the vanity, upon being complimented on these
talents (and on his surprising diligence, for a man of pleasure) to
compare himself to Julius Caesar; who performed great actions by day,
and wrote them down at night; and valued himself, that he only wanted
Caesar's out-setting, to make a figure among his contemporaries.

'He spoke of this indeed, she says, with an air of pleasantry: for
she observed, and so have we, that he has the art of acknowledging his
vanity with so much humour, that it sets him above the contempt which
is due to vanity and self-opinion; and at the same time half persuades
those who hear him, that he really deserves the exultation he gives
himself.'

But supposing it to be true that all his vacant nightly hours are
employed in writing, what can be his subjects? If, like Caesar, his own
actions, he must undoubtedly be a very enterprising and very wicked man;
since nobody suspects him to have a serious turn; and, decent as he is
in his conversation with us, his writings are not probably such as would
redound either to his own honour, or to the benefit of others, were they
to be read. He must be conscious of this, since Mrs. Fortescue says,
'that in the great correspondence by letters which he holds, he is
as secret and as careful as if it were of a treasonable nature;--yet
troubles not his head with politics, though nobody knows the interests
of princes and courts better than he is said to do.'

That you and I, my dear, should love to write, is no wonder. We have
always, from the time each could hold a pen, delighted in epistolary
correspondencies. Our employments are domestic and sedentary; and we can
scribble upon twenty innocent subjects, and take delight in them because
they are innocent; though were they to be seen, they might not much
profit or please others. But that such a gay, lively young fellow as
this, who rides, hunts, travels, frequents the public entertainments,
and has means to pursue his pleasures, should be able to set himself
down to write for hours together, as you and I have heard him say he
frequently does, that is the strange thing.

Mrs. Fortescue says, 'that he is a complete master of short-hand
writing.' By the way, what inducements could a swift writer as he have
to learn short-hand!

She says (and we know it as well as she) 'that he has a surprising
memory, and a very lively imagination.'

Whatever his other vices are, all the world, as well as Mrs. Fortescue,
says, 'he is a sober man. And among all his bad qualities, gaming, that
great waster of time as well as fortune, is not his vice:' So that he
must have his head as cool, and his reason as clear, as the prime of
youth and his natural gaiety will permit; and by his early morning
hours, a great portion of time upon his hands to employ in writing, or
worse.

Mrs. Fortescue says, 'he has one gentleman who is more his intimate and
correspondent than any of the rest.' You remember what his dismissed
bailiff said of him and of his associates.* I don't find but that Mrs.
Fortescue confirms this part of it, 'that all his relations are afraid
of him; and that his pride sets him above owing obligations to them.
She believes he is clear of the world; and that he will continue so;'
No doubt from the same motive that makes him avoid being obliged to his
relations.


* Letter IV.


A person willing to think favourably of him would hope, that a brave, a
learned, and a diligent, man, cannot be naturally a bad man.--But if he
be better than his enemies say he is (and if worse he is bad indeed) he
is guilty of an inexcusable fault in being so careless as he is of his
reputation. I think a man can be so but from one of these two reasons:
either that he is conscious he deserves the ill spoken of him; or, that
he takes a pride in being thought worse than he is. Both very bad and
threatening indications; since the first must shew him to be utterly
abandoned; and it is but natural to conclude from the other, that what
a man is not ashamed to have imputed to him, he will not scruple to be
guilty of whenever he has an opportunity.

Upon the whole, and upon all I could gather from Mrs. Fortescue, Mr.
Lovelace is a very faulty man. You and I have thought him too gay, too
inconsiderate, too rash, too little an hypocrite, to be deep. You see
he never would disguise his natural temper (haughty as it certainly
is) with respect to your brother's behaviour to him. Where he thinks
a contempt due, he pays it to the uttermost. Nor has he complaisance
enough to spare your uncles.

But were he deep, and ever so deep, you would soon penetrate him, if
they would leave you to yourself. His vanity would be your clue. Never
man had more: Yet, as Mrs. Fortescue observed, 'never did man carry
it off so happily.' There is a strange mixture in it of humourous
vivacity:--Since but for one half of what he says of himself, when he is
in the vein, any other man would be insufferable.


***


Talk of the devil, is an old saying. The lively wretch has made me a
visit, and is but just gone away. He is all impatience and resentment
at the treatment you meet with, and full of apprehensions too, that they
will carry their point with you.

I told him my opinion, that you will never be brought to think of such a
man as Solmes; but that it will probably end in a composition, never to
have either.

No man, he said, whose fortunes and alliances are so considerable, ever
had so little favour from a woman for whose sake he had borne so much.

I told him my mind as freely as I used to do. But whoever was in fault,
self being judge? He complained of spies set upon his conduct, and to
pry into his life and morals, and this by your brother and uncles.

I told him, that this was very hard upon him; and the more so, as
neither his life nor morals perhaps would stand a fair inquiry.

He smiled, and called himself my servant.--The occasion was too fair,
he said, for Miss Howe, who never spared him, to let it pass.--But, Lord
help the shallow souls of the Harlowes! Would I believe it! they were
for turning plotters upon him. They had best take care he did not pay
them in their own coin. Their hearts were better turned for such works
than their heads.

I asked him, If he valued himself upon having a head better turned than
theirs for such works, as he called them?

He drew off: and then ran into the highest professions of reverence and
affection for you.

The object so meritorious, who can doubt the reality of his professions?

Adieu, my dearest, my noble friend!--I love and admire you for the
generous conclusion of your last more than I can express. Though I began
this letter with impertinent raillery, knowing that you always loved to
indulge my mad vein; yet never was there a heart that more glowed with
friendly love, than that of

Your own ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1.


I now take up my pen to lay before you the inducements and motive which
my friends have to espouse so earnestly the address of this Mr. Solmes.

In order to set this matter in a clear light, it is necessary to go a
little back, and even perhaps to mention some things which you already
know: and so you may look upon what I am going to relate, as a kind of
supplement to my letters of the 15th and 20th of January last.*


* Letters IV. and V.


In those letters, of which I have kept memorandums, I gave you an
account of my brother's and sister's antipathy to Mr. Lovelace; and the
methods they took (so far as they had then come to my knowledge) to ruin
him in the opinion of my other friends. And I told you, that after a
very cold, yet not a directly affrontive behaviour to him, they all of
a sudden* became more violent, and proceeded to personal insults; which
brought on at last the unhappy rencounter between my brother and him.


     * See Letter IV.


Now you must know, that from the last conversation that passed between
my aunt and me, it comes out, that this sudden vehemence on my
brother's and sister's parts, was owing to stronger reasons than to the
college-begun antipathy on his side, or to slighted love on hers;
to wit, to an apprehension that my uncles intended to follow my
grandfather's example in my favour; at least in a higher degree
than they wish they should. An apprehension founded it seems on a
conversation between my two uncles and my brother and sister: which my
aunt communicated to me in confidence, as an argument to prevail upon
me to accept of Mr. Solmes's noble settlements: urging, that such a
seasonable compliance, would frustrate my brother's and sister's views,
and establish me for ever in the love of my father and uncles.

I will give you the substance of this communicated conversation, after
I have made a brief introductory observation or two, which however I
hardly need to make to you who are so well acquainted with us all, did
not the series or thread of the story require it.

I have more than once mentioned to you the darling view some of us have
long had of raising a family, as it is called. A reflection, as I have
often thought, upon our own, which is no considerable or upstart one, on
either side, on my mother's especially.--A view too frequently it
seems entertained by families which, having great substance, cannot be
satisfied without rank and title.

My uncles had once extended this view to each of us three children;
urging, that as they themselves intended not to marry, we each of
us might be so portioned, and so advantageously matched, as that
our posterity, if not ourselves, might make a first figure in our
country.--While my brother, as the only son, thought the two girls might
be very well provided for by ten or fifteen thousand pounds a-piece:
and that all the real estates in the family, to wit, my grandfather's,
father's, and two uncles', and the remainder of their respective
personal estates, together with what he had an expectation of from
his godmother, would make such a noble fortune, and give him such an
interest, as might entitle him to hope for a peerage. Nothing less would
satisfy his ambition.

With this view he gave himself airs very early; 'That his grandfather
and uncles were his stewards: that no man ever had better: that
daughters were but incumbrances and drawbacks upon a family:' and this
low and familiar expression was often in his mouth, and uttered always
with the self-complaisance which an imagined happy thought can be
supposed to give the speaker; to wit, 'That a man who has sons brings up
chickens for his own table,' [though once I made his comparison stagger
with him, by asking him, If the sons, to make it hold, were to have
their necks wrung off?] 'whereas daughters are chickens brought up
for tables of other men.' This, accompanied with the equally polite
reflection, 'That, to induce people to take them off their hands, the
family-stock must be impaired into the bargain,' used to put my sister
out of all patience: and, although she now seems to think a younger
sister only can be an incumbrance, she was then often proposing to me to
make a party in our own favour against my brother's rapacious views, as
she used to call them: while I was for considering the liberties he took
of this sort, as the effect of a temporary pleasantry, which, in a young
man, not naturally good-humoured, I was glad to see; or as a foible that
deserved raillery, but no other notice.

But when my grandfather's will (of the purport of which in my particular
favour, until it was opened, I was as ignorant as they) had lopped off
one branch of my brother's expectation, he was extremely dissatisfied
with me. Nobody indeed was pleased: for although every one loved me, yet
being the youngest child, father, uncles, brother, sister, all thought
themselves postponed, as to matter of right and power [Who loves not
power?]: And my father himself could not bear that I should be made
sole, as I may call it, and independent; for such the will, as to that
estate and the powers it gave, (unaccountably, as they all said,) made
me.

To obviate, therefore, every one's jealousy, I gave up to my father's
management, as you know, not only the estate, but the money bequeathed
me (which was a moiety of what my grandfather had by him at his death;
the other moiety being bequeathed to my sister); contenting myself
to take as from his bounty what he was pleased to allow me, without
desiring the least addition to my annual stipend. And then I hoped I had
laid all envy asleep: but still my brother and sister (jealous, as now
is evident, of my two uncles' favour of me, and of the pleasure I had
given my father and them by this act of duty) were every now-and-then
occasionally doing me covert ill offices: of which, however, I took the
less notice, when I was told of them, as I thought I had removed the
cause of their envy; and I imputed every thing of that sort to the
petulance they are both pretty much noted for.

My brother's acquisition then took place. This made us all very happy;
and he went down to take possession of it: and his absence (on so good
an account too) made us still happier. Then followed Lord M.'s proposal
for my sister: and this was an additional felicity for the time. I have
told you how exceedingly good-humoured it made my sister.

You know how that went off: you know what came on in its place.

My brother then returned; and we were all wrong again: and Bella, as
I observed in my letters abovementioned, had an opportunity to give
herself the credit of having refused Mr. Lovelace, on the score of his
reputed faulty morals. This united my brother and sister in one cause.
They set themselves on all occasions to depreciate Mr. Lovelace, and his
family too (a family which deserves nothing but respect): and this gave
rise to the conversation I am leading to, between my uncles and them: of
which I now come to give the particulars; after I have observed, that it
happened before the rencounter, and soon after the inquiry made into Mr.
Lovelace's affairs had come out better than my brother and sister hoped
it would.*


* See Letter IV.


They were bitterly inveighing against him, in their usual way,
strengthening their invectives with some new stories in his disfavour,
when my uncle Antony, having given them a patient hearing, declared,
'That he thought the gentleman behaved like a gentleman; his niece Clary
with prudence; and that a more honourable alliance for the family, as he
had often told them, could not be wished for: since Mr. Lovelace had a
very good paternal estate; and that, by the evidence of an enemy,
all clear. Nor did it appear, that he was so bad a man as he had been
represented to be: wild indeed; but it was a gay time of life: he was a
man of sense: and he was sure that his niece would not have him, if
she had not good reason to think him reformed, or that there was a
likelihood that she could reform him by her example.'

My uncle then gave one instance, my aunt told me, as a proof of a
generosity in Mr. Lovelace's spirit, which convinced him that he was not
a bad man in nature; and that he was of a temper, he was pleased to say,
like my own; which was, That when he (my uncle) had represented to him,
that he might, if he pleased, make three or four hundred pounds a year
of his paternal estate, more than he did; he answered, 'That his tenants
paid their rents well: that it was a maxim with his family, from which
he would by no means depart, Never to rack-rent old tenants, or their
descendants; and that it was a pleasure to him, to see all his tenants
look fat, sleek, and contented.'

I indeed had once occasionally heard him say something like this; and
thought he never looked so well as at that time;--except once; and that
was in an instance given by him on the following incident.

An unhappy tenant of my uncle Antony came petitioning to my uncle
for forbearance, in Mr. Lovelace's presence. When he had fruitlessly
withdrawn, Mr. Lovelace pleaded his cause so well, that the man was
called in again, and had his suit granted. And Mr. Lovelace privately
followed him out, and gave him two guineas, for present relief; the
man having declared, that, at the time, he had not five shilling in the
world.

On this occasion, he told my uncle (but without any airs of
ostentation), that he had once observed an old tenant and his wife in a
very mean habit at church; and questioning them about it the next day,
as he knew they had no hard bargain in their farm, the man said, he had
done some very foolish things with a good intention, which had put him
behind-hand, and he could not have paid his rent, and appear better.
He asked him how long it would take him to retrieve the foolish step
he acknowledged he had made. He said, Perhaps two or three years. Well
then, said he, I will abate you five pounds a year for seven years,
provided you will lay it upon your wife and self, that you may make a
Sunday-appearance like MY tenants. Mean time, take this (putting his
hand in his pocket, and giving him five guineas), to put yourselves in
present plight; and let me see you next Sunday at church, hand in hand,
like an honest and loving couple; and I bespeak you to dine with me
afterwards.

Although this pleased me when I heard it, as giving an instance of
generosity and prudence at the same time, not lessening (as my uncle
took notice) the yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I had no
throbs, no glows upon it!--Upon my word, I had not. Nevertheless I own
to you, that I could not help saying to myself on the occasion, 'Were it
ever to be my lot to have this man, he would not hinder me from pursuing
the methods I so much delight to take'--With 'A pity, that such a man
were not uniformly good!'

Forgive me this digression.

My uncle went on (as my aunt told me), 'That, besides his paternal
estate, he was the immediate heir to very splendid fortunes: that, when
he was in treaty for his niece Arabella, Lord M. told him (my uncle)
what great things he and his two half-sisters intended to do for him,
in order to qualify him for the title, which would be extinct at his
Lordship's death, and which they hoped to procure for him, or a still
higher, that of those ladies' father, which had been for some time
extinct on failure of heirs male: that it was with this view that his
relations were all so earnest for his marrying: that as he saw not
where Mr. Lovelace could better himself; so, truly, he thought there was
wealth enough in their own family to build up three considerable ones:
that, therefore, he must needs say, he was the more desirous of this
alliance, as there was a great probability, not only from Mr. Lovelace's
descent, but from his fortunes, that his niece Clarissa might one day
be a peeress of Great Britain:--and, upon that prospect [here was the
mortifying stroke], he should, for his own part, think it not wrong to
make such dispositions as should contribute to the better support of the
dignity.'

My uncle Harlowe, it seems, far from disapproving of what his brother
had said, declared, 'That there was but one objection to an alliance
with Mr. Lovelace; to wit, his faulty morals: especially as so much
could be done for Miss Bella, and for my brother too, by my father; and
as my brother was actually possessed of a considerable estate by virtue
of the deed of gift and will of his godmother Lovell.'

Had I known this before, I should the less have wondered at many things
I have been unable to account for in my brother's and sister's behaviour
to me; and been more on my guard than I imagined there was a necessity
to be.

You may easily guess how much this conversation affected my brother at
the time. He could not, you know, but be very uneasy to hear two of his
stewards talk at this rate to his face.

He had from early days, by his violent temper, made himself both feared
and courted by the whole family. My father himself, as I have lately
mentioned, very often (long before my brother's acquisition had made him
still more assuming) gave way to him, as to an only son who was to build
up the name, and augment the honour of it. Little inducement, therefore,
had my brother to correct a temper which gave him so much consideration
with every body.

'See, Sister Bella,' said he, in an indecent passion before my uncles,
on this occasion I have mentioned--'See how it is!--You and I ought to
look about us!--This little syren is in a fair way to out-uncle, as she
has already out-grandfather'd, us both!'

From this time (as I now find it plain upon recollection) did my brother
and sister behave to me, as to one who stood in their way; and to each
other as having but one interest: and were resolved, therefore, to bend
all their force to hinder an alliance from taking effect, which they
believed was likely to oblige them to contract their views.

And how was this to be done, after such a declaration from both my
uncles?

My brother found out the way. My sister (as I have said) went hand in
hand with him. Between them, the family union was broke, and every one
was made uneasy. Mr. Lovelace was received more and more coldly by all:
but not being to be put out of his course by slights only, personal
affronts succeeded; defiances next; then the rencounter: that, as you
have heard, did the business. And now, if I do not oblige them, my
grandfather's estate is to be litigated with me; and I, who never
designed to take advantage of the independency bequeathed me, am to be
as dependent upon my father's will, as a daughter ought to be who knows
not what is good for herself. This is the language of the family now.

But if I will suffer myself to be prevailed upon, how happy (as they lay
it out) shall we all be!--Such presents am I to have, such jewels, and
I cannot tell what, from every one in the family! Then Mr. Solmes's
fortunes are so great, and his proposals so very advantageous, (no
relation whom he values,) that there will be abundant room to raise
mine upon them, were the high-intended favours of my own relations to
be quite out of the question. Moreover, it is now, with this view,
found out, that I have qualifications which of themselves will be a full
equivalent to Mr. Solmes for the settlements he is to make; and still
leave him under an obligation to me for my compliance. He himself thinks
so, I am told--so very poor a creature is he, even in his own eyes, as
well as in theirs.

These desirable views answered, how rich, how splendid shall we all
three be! And I--what obligations shall I lay upon them all!--And that
only by doing an act of duty so suitable to my character, and manner of
thinking; if, indeed, I am the generous as well as dutiful creature I
have hitherto made them believe I am.

This is the bright side that is turned to my father and uncles, to
captivate them: but I am afraid that my brother's and sister's design is
to ruin me with them at any rate. Were it otherwise, would they not on
my return from you have rather sought to court than frighten me into
measures which their hearts are so much bent to carry? A method they
have followed ever since.

Mean time, orders are given to all the servants to shew the highest
respect to Mr. Solmes; the generous Mr. Solmes is now his character with
some of our family! But are not these orders a tacit confession,
that they think his own merit will not procure him respect? He is
accordingly, in every visit he makes, not only highly caressed by the
principals of our family, but obsequiously attended and cringed to by
the menials.--And the noble settlements are echoed from every mouth.

Noble is the word used to enforce the offers of a man who is mean enough
avowedly to hate, and wicked enough to propose to rob of their just
expectations, his own family, (every one of which at the same time
stands in too much need of his favour,) in order to settle all he is
worth upon me; and if I die without children, and he has none by any
other marriage, upon a family which already abounds. Such are his
proposals.

But were there no other motive to induce me to despise the upstart man,
is not this unjust one to his family enough?--The upstart man, I repeat;
for he was not born to the immense riches he is possessed of: riches
left by one niggard to another, in injury to the next heir, because that
other is a niggard. And should I not be as culpable, do you think, in my
acceptance of such unjust settlements, as he is in the offer of them, if
I could persuade myself to be a sharer in them, or suffer a reversionary
expectation of possessing them to influence my choice?

Indeed, it concerns me not a little, that my friends could be brought to
encourage such offers on such motives as I think a person of conscience
should not presume to begin the world with.

But this it seems is the only method that can be taken to disappoint Mr.
Lovelace; and at the same time to answer all my relations have wish for
each of us. And surely I will not stand against such an accession to the
family as may happen from marrying Mr. Solmes: since now a possibility
is discovered, (which such a grasping mind as my brother's can easily
turn into a probability,) that my grandfather's estate will revert to
it, with a much more considerable one of the man's own. Instances of
estates falling in, in cases far more unlikely than this, are insisted
upon; and my sister says, in the words of an old saw, It is good to be
related to an estate.

While Solmes, smiling no doubt to himself at a hope so remote, by offers
only, obtains all their interests; and doubts not to join to his own
the estate I am envied for; which, for the conveniency of its situation
between two of his, will it seems be of twice the value to him that
it would be of to any other person; and is therefore, I doubt not, a
stronger motive with him than the wife.

These, my dear, seem to me the principal inducements of my relations to
espouse so vehemently as they do this man's suit. And here, once more,
must I deplore the family fault, which gives those inducements such a
force as it will be difficult to resist.

And thus far, let matters with regard to Mr. Solmes and me come out as
they will, my brother has succeeded in his views; that is to say, he
has, in the first place, got my FATHER to make the cause his own, and to
insist upon my compliance as an act of duty.

My MOTHER has never thought fit to oppose my father's will, when once he
has declared himself determined.

My UNCLES, stiff, unbroken, highly-prosperous bachelors, give me leave
to say, (though very worthy persons in the main,) have as high notions
of a child's duty, as of a wife's obedience; in the last of which, my
mother's meekness has confirmed them, and given them greater reason to
expect the first.

My aunt HERVEY (not extremely happy in her own nuptials, and perhaps
under some little obligation) is got over, and chuses [sic] not to
open her lips in my favour against the wills of a father and uncles so
determined.

This passiveness in my mother and in my aunt, in a point so contrary
to their own first judgments, is too strong a proof that my father is
absolutely resolved.

Their treatment of my worthy MRS. NORTON is a sad confirmation of it:
a woman deserving of all consideration for her wisdom, and every body
thinking so; but who, not being wealthy enough to have due weight in a
point against which she has given her opinion, and which they seem
bent upon carrying, is restrained from visiting here, and even from
corresponding with me, as I am this very day informed.

Hatred to Lovelace, family aggrandizement, and this great motive
paternal authority!--What a force united must they be supposed to have,
when singly each consideration is sufficient to carry all before it!

This is the formidable appearance which the address of this disagreeable
man wears at present.

My BROTHER and my SISTER triumph.--They have got me down, as Hannah
overheard them exult. And so they have (yet I never knew that I
was insolently up); for now my brother will either lay me under an
obligation to comply to my own unhappiness, and so make me an instrument
of his revenge upon Lovelace; or, if I refuse, will throw me into
disgrace with my whole family.

Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried on by undermining
courtiers against one another, when a private family, but three of which
can possibly have clashing interests, and one of them (as she presumes
to think) above such low motives, cannot be free from them?

What at present most concerns me, is, the peace of my mother's mind!
How can the husband of such a wife (a good man too!--But oh! this
prerogative of manhood!) be so positive, so unpersuadable, to one who
has brought into the family means, which they know so well the value of,
that methinks they should value her the more for their sake?

They do indeed value her: but, I am sorry to say, she has purchased
that value by her compliances; yet has merit for which she ought to be
venerated; prudence which ought of itself to be conformed to in every
thing.

But whither roves my pen? How dare a perverse girl take these liberties
with relations so very respectable, and whom she highly respects? What
an unhappy situation is that which obliges her, in her own defence as it
were, to expose their failings?

But you, who know how much I love and reverence my mother, will judge
what a difficulty I am under, to be obliged to oppose a scheme which she
has engaged in. Yet I must oppose it (to comply is impossible); and must
without delay declare my opposition, or my difficulties will increase;
since, as I am just now informed, a lawyer has been this very day
consulted [Would you have believed it?] in relation to settlements.

Were ours a Roman Catholic family, how much happier for me, that they
thought a nunnery would answer all their views!--How happy, had not
a certain person slighted somebody! All then would have been probably
concluded between them before my brother had arrived to thwart
the match: then had I a sister; which now I have not; and two
brothers;--both aspiring; possibly both titled: while I should only have
valued that in either which is above title, that which is truly noble in
both!

But by what a long-reaching selfishness is my brother governed! By what
remote, exceedingly remote views! Views, which it is in the power of the
slightest accident, of a fever, for instance, (the seeds of which are
always vegetating, as I may say, and ready to burst forth, in his own
impetuous temper,) or of the provoked weapon of an adversary, to blow up
and destroy!

I will break off here. Let me write ever so freely of my friends, I am
sure of your kind construction: and I confide in your discretion, that
you will avoid reading to or transcribing for others such passages as
may have the appearance of treating too freely the parental, or even the
fraternal character, or induce others to censure for a supposed failure
in duty to the one, or decency to the other,

Your truly affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY EVENING, MARCH 2.


On Hannah's depositing my long letter, (begun yesterday, but by reason
of several interruptions not finished till within this hour,) she found
and brought me yours of this day. I thank you, my dear, for this kind
expedition. These few lines will perhaps be time enough deposited, to be
taken away by your servant with the other letter: yet they are only to
thank you, and to tell you my increasing apprehensions.

I must take or seek the occasion to apply to my mother for her
mediation; for I am in danger of having a day fixed, and antipathy taken
for bashfulness.--Should not sisters be sisters to each other? Should
not they make a common cause of it, as I may say, a cause of sex, on
such occasions as the present? Yet mine, in support of my brother's
selfishness, and, no doubt, in concert with him, has been urging in full
assembly it seems, (and that with an earnestness peculiar to herself
when she sets upon any thing,) that an absolute day be given me; and if
I comply not, to be told, that it shall be to the forfeiture of all my
fortunes, and of all their love.

She need not be so officious: my brother's interest, without hers, is
strong enough; for he has found means to confederate all the family
against me. Upon some fresh provocation, or new intelligence concerning
Mr. Lovelace, (I know not what it is,) they have bound themselves, or
are to bind themselves, by a signed paper, to one another [The Lord
bless me, my dear, what shall I do!] to carry their point in favour of
Mr. Solmes, in support of my father's authority, as it is called, and
against Mr. Lovelace, as a libertine, and an enemy to the family: and if
so, I am sure, I may say against me.--How impolitic in them all, to join
two people in one interest, whom they wish for ever to keep asunder!

What the discharged steward reported of him is surely bad enough: what
Mrs. Fortescue said, not only confirms that bad, but gives room to think
him still worse. And yet the something further which my friends have
come at, is of so heinous a nature (as Betty Barnes tells Hannah) that
it proves him almost to be the worst of men.--But, hang the man, I
had almost said--What is he to me? What would he be--were not this Mr.
Sol----O my dear, how I hate the man in the light he is proposed to me!

All of them, at the same time, are afraid of Mr. Lovelace; yet not
afraid to provoke him!--How am I entangled!--to be obliged to go on
corresponding with him for their sakes--Heaven forbid, that their
persisted-in violence should so drive me, as to make it necessary for my
own!

But surely they will yield--Indeed I cannot.

I believe the gentlest spirits when provoked (causelessly and cruelly
provoked) are the most determined. The reason may be, that not taking
up resolutions lightly--their very deliberation makes them the more
immovable.--And then when a point is clear and self-evident, how can
one with patience think of entering into an argument or contention upon
it?--

An interruption obliges me to conclude myself, in some hurry, as well as
fright, what I must ever be,

Yours more than my own, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE FRIDAY, MARCH 3.


I have both your letters at once. It is very unhappy, my dear, since
your friends will have you marry, that a person of your merit should be
addressed by a succession of worthless creatures, who have nothing but
their presumption for their excuse.

That these presumers appear not in this very unworthy light to some of
your friends, is, because their defects are not so striking to them
as to others.--And why? Shall I venture to tell you?--Because they are
nearer their own standard--Modesty, after all, perhaps has a concern in
it; for how should they think that a niece or sister of theirs [I will
not go higher, for fear of incurring your displeasure] should be an
angel?

But where indeed is the man to be found (who has the least share of due
diffidence) that dares to look up to Miss Clarissa Harlowe with hope, or
with any thing but wishes? Thus the bold and forward, not being sensible
of their defects, aspire; while the modesty of the really worthy fills
them with too much reverence to permit them to explain themselves. Hence
your Symmes's, your Byron's, your Mullins's, your Wyerley's (the best
of the herd), and your Solmes's, in turn, invade you--Wretches that,
looking upon the rest of your family, need not despair of succeeding in
an alliance with it--But to you, what an inexcusable presumption!

Yet I am afraid all opposition will be in vain. You must, you will, I
doubt, be sacrificed to this odious man. I know your family. There will
be no resisting such baits as he has thrown out. O, my dear, my beloved
friend! and are such charming qualities, is such exalted merit, to be
sunk in such a marriage!--You must not, your uncle tells your mother,
dispute their authority. AUTHORITY! what a full word is that in the
mouth of a narrow-minded person, who happened to be born thirty years
before one!--Of your uncles I speak; for as to the paternal authority,
that ought to be sacred.--But should not parents have reason for what
they do?

Wonder not, however, at your Bell's unsisterly behaviour in this affair:
I have a particular to add to the inducements your insolent brother is
governed by, which will account for all her driving. You have already
owned, that her outward eye was from the first struck with the figure
and address of the man whom she pretends to despise, and who, 'tis
certain, thoroughly despises her: but you have not told me, that still
she loves him of all men. Bell has a meanness in her very pride; that
meanness rises with her pride, and goes hand in hand with it; and no
one is so proud as Bell. She has owned her love, her uneasy days,
and sleepless nights, and her revenge grafted upon her love, to her
favourite Betty Barnes--To lay herself in the power of a servant's
tongue! Poor creature!--But LIKE little souls will find one another
out, and mingle, as well as LIKE great ones. This, however, she told the
wench in strict confidence: and thus, by way of the female round-about,
as Lovelace had the sauciness on such another occasion, in ridicule of
our sex, to call it, Betty (pleased to be thought worthy of a secret,
and to have an opportunity of inveighing against Lovelace's perfidy,
as she would have it to be) told it to one of her confidants:
that confidant, with like injunctions of secrecy, to Miss Lloyd's
Harriot--Harriot to Miss Lloyd--Miss Lloyd to me--I to you--with leave
to make what you please of it.

And now you will not wonder to find Miss Bell an implacable rival,
rather than an affectionate sister; and will be able to account for the
words witchcraft, syren, and such like, thrown out against you; and for
her driving on for a fixed day for sacrificing you to Solmes: in short,
for her rudeness and violence of every kind.

What a sweet revenge will she take, as well upon Lovelace as upon you,
if she can procure her rival sister to be married to the man that sister
hates; and so prevent her having the man whom she herself loves (whether
she have hope of him or not), and whom she suspects her sister loves!

Poisons and poniard have often been set to work by minds inflamed by
disappointed love, and actuated by revenge.--Will you wonder, then, that
the ties of relationship in such a case have no force, and that a sister
forgets to be a sister?

Now I know this to be her secret motive, (the more grating to her, as
her pride is concerned to make her disavow it), and can consider it
joined with her former envy, and as strengthened by a brother, who has
such an ascendant over the whole family; and whose interest (slave to it
as he always was) engaged him to ruin you with every one: both possessed
of the ears of all your family, and having it as much in their power as
in their will to misrepresent all you say, all you do; such subject also
as to the rencounter, and Lovelace's want of morals, to expatiate upon:
your whole family likewise avowedly attached to the odious man by means
of the captivating proposals he has made them;--when I consider all
these things, I am full of apprehensions for you.--O my dear, how will
you be able to maintain your ground;--I am sure, (alas! I am too sure)
that they will subdue such a fine spirit as yours, unused to opposition;
and (tell it not in Gath) you must be Mrs. Solmes!

Mean time, it is now easy, as you will observe, to guess from what
quarter the report I mentioned to you in one of my former, came,
That the younger sister has robbed the elder of her lover:* for Betty
whispered it, at the time she whispered the rest, that neither Lovelace
nor you had done honourably by her young mistress.--How cruel, my dear,
in you, to rob the poor Bella of the only lover she only had!--At the
instant too that she was priding herself, that now at last she should
have it in her power not only to gratify her own susceptibilities, but
to give an example to the flirts of her sex** (my worship's self in
her eye) how to govern their man with a silken rein, and without a
curb-bridle!


     * Letter I.

     ** Letter II.


Upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their persevering in favour of
the despicable Solmes; and of their dependence upon the gentleness of
your temper, and the regard you have for their favour, and for your own
reputation. And now I am more than ever convinced of the propriety of
the advice I formerly gave you, to keep in your own hands the estate
bequeathed to you by your grandfather.--Had you done so, it would have
procured you at least an outward respect from your brother and sister,
which would have made them conceal the envy and ill-will that now are
bursting upon you from hearts so narrow.

I must harp a little more upon this string--Do not you observe, how much
your brother's influence has overtopped yours, since he has got into
fortunes so considerable, and since you have given some of them an
appetite to continue in themselves the possession of your estate, unless
you comply with their terms?

I know your dutiful, your laudable motives; and one would have thought,
that you might have trusted to a father who so dearly loved you. But had
you been actually in possession of that estate, and living up to it, and
upon it, (your youth protected from blighting tongues by the company
of your prudent Norton, as you had proposed,) do you think that your
brother, grudging it to you at the time as he did, and looking upon it
as his right as an only son, would have been practising about it, and
aiming at it? I told you some time ago, that I thought your trials but
proportioned to your prudence:* but you will be more than woman, if
you can extricate yourself with honour, having such violent spirits and
sordid minds in some, and such tyrannical and despotic wills in others,
to deal with. Indeed, all may be done, and the world be taught further
to admire you for your blind duty and will-less resignation, if you can
persuade yourself to be Mrs. Solmes.


     * Letter I.


I am pleased with the instances you give me of Mr. Lovelace's
benevolence to his own tenants, and with his little gift to your
uncle's. Mrs. Fortescue allows him to be the best of landlords: I might
have told you that, had I thought it necessary to put you into some
little conceit of him. He has qualities, in short, that may make him
a tolerable creature on the other side of fifty: but God help the
poor woman to whose lot he shall fall till then! women, I should say,
perhaps; since he may break half-a-dozen hearts before that time.--But
to the point I was upon--Shall we not have reason to commend the
tenant's grateful honesty, if we are told, that with joy the poor man
called out your uncle, and on the spot paid him in part of his debt
those two guineas?--But what shall we say of that landlord, who, though
he knew the poor man to be quite destitute, could take it; and, saying
nothing while Mr. Lovelace staid, as soon as he was gone, tell of it in
praise of the poor fellow's honesty?--Were this so, and were not that
landlord related to my dearest friend, how should I despise such a
wretch?--But, perhaps, the story is aggravated. Covetous people have
every one's ill word: and so indeed they ought; because they are
only solicitous to keep that which they prefer to every one's good
one.--Covetous indeed would they be, who deserved neither, yet expected
both!

I long for your next letter. Continue to be as particular as possible.
I can think of no other subject but what relates to you and to your
affairs: for I am, and ever will be, most affectionately,

Your own, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [HER PRECEDING NOT AT THAT TIME
RECEIVED.] FRIDAY, MARCH 3.


O my dear friend, I have had a sad conflict! Trial upon trial;
conference upon conference!--But what law, what ceremony, can give a
man a right to a heart which abhors him more than it does any living
creature?

I hope my mother will be able to prevail for me.--But I will recount it
all, though I sit up the whole night to do it; for I have a vast deal to
write, and will be as minute as you wish me to be.

I concluded my last in a fright. It was occasioned by a conversation
that passed between my mother and my aunt, part of which Hannah
overheard. I need not give you the particulars; since what I have to
relate to you from different conversations that have passed between my
mother and me, in the space of a very few hours, will include them all.
I will begin then.

I went down this morning when breakfast was ready with a very uneasy
heart, from what Hannah had informed me of yesterday afternoon; wishing
for an opportunity, however, to appeal to my mother, in hopes to engage
her interest in my behalf, and purposing to try to find one when she
retired to her own apartment after breakfast: but, unluckily, there was
the odious Solmes, sitting asquat between my mother and sister, with so
much assurance in his looks!--But you know, my dear, that those we love
not, cannot do any thing to please us.

Had the wretch kept his seat, it might have been well enough: but the
bend and broad-shouldered creature must needs rise, and stalk towards a
chair, which was just by that which was set for me.

I removed it to a distance, as if to make way to my own: and down I sat,
abruptly I believe; what I had heard all in my head.

But this was not enough to daunt him. The man is a very confident, he is
a very bold, staring man!--Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident.

He took the removed chair, and drew it so near mine, squatting in it
with his ugly weight, that he pressed upon my hoop.--I was so offended
(all I had heard, as I said, in my head) that I removed to another
chair. I own I had too little command of myself. It gave my brother
and sister too much advantage. I day say they took it. But I did it
involuntarily, I think. I could not help it.--I knew not what I did.

I saw that my father was excessively displeased. When angry, no man's
countenance ever shews it so much as my father's. Clarissa Harlowe! said
he with a big voice--and there he stopped. Sir! said I, trembling and
courtesying (for I had not then sat down again); and put my chair nearer
the wretch, and sat down--my face, as I could feel, all in a glow.

Make tea, child, said my kind mamma; sit by me, love, and make tea.

I removed with pleasure to the seat the man had quitted; and being
thus indulgently put into employment, soon recovered myself; and in the
course of the breakfasting officiously asked two or three questions
of Mr. Solmes, which I would not have done, but to make up with my
father.--Proud spirits may be brought to! Whisperingly spoke my sister
to me, over her shoulder, with an air of triumph and scorn: but I did
not mind her.

My mother was all kindness and condescension. I asked her once, if she
were pleased with the tea? She said, softly, (and again called me dear,)
she was pleased with all I did. I was very proud of this encouraging
goodness: and all blew over, as I hoped, between my father and me; for
he also spoke kindly to me two or three times.

Small accidents these, my dear, to trouble you with; only as they lead
to greater, as you shall hear.

Before the usual breakfast-time was over, my father withdrew with my
mother, telling her he wanted to speak with her. Then my sister and next
my aunt (who was with us) dropt away.

My brother gave himself some airs of insult, which I understood well
enough; but which Mr. Solmes could make nothing of: and at last he arose
from his seat--Sister, said he, I have a curiosity to shew you. I will
fetch it. And away he went shutting the door close after him.

I saw what all this was for. I arose; the man hemming up for a speech,
rising, and beginning to set his splay-feet [indeed, my dear, the man in
all his ways is hateful to me] in an approaching posture.--I will
save my brother the trouble of bringing to me his curiosity, said I. I
courtesied--Your servant, sir--The man cried, Madam, Madam, twice, and
looked like a fool.--But away I went--to find my brother, to save my
word.--But my brother, indifferent as the weather was, was gone to
walk in the garden with my sister. A plain case, that he had left his
curiosity with me, and designed to shew me no other.

I had but just got into my own apartment, and began to think of sending
Hannah to beg an audience of my mother (the more encouraged by her
condescending goodness at breakfast) when Shorey, her woman, brought me
her commands to attend me in her closet.

My father, Hannah told me, was just gone out of it with a positive angry
countenance. Then I as much dreaded the audience as I had wished for it
before.

I went down however; but, apprehending the subject she intended to
talk to me upon, approached her trembling, and my heart in visible
palpitations.

She saw my concern. Holding out her kind arms, as she sat, Come kiss
me, my dear, said she, with a smile like a sun-beam breaking through
the cloud that overshadowed her naturally benign aspect--Why flutters my
jewel so?

This preparative sweetness, with her goodness just before, confirmed my
apprehensions. My mother saw the bitter pill wanted gilding.

O my Mamma! was all I could say; and I clasped my arms round her neck,
and my face sunk into her bosom.

My child! my child! restrain, said she, your powers of moving! I dare
not else trust myself with you.--And my tears trickled down her bosom,
as hers bedewed my neck.

O the words of kindness, all to be expressed in vain, that flowed from
her lips!

Lift up your sweet face, my best child, my own Clarissa Harlowe!--O my
daughter, best beloved of my heart, lift up a face so ever amiable to
me!--Why these sobs?--Is an apprehended duty so affecting a thing, that
before I can speak--But I am glad, my love, you can guess at what I have
to say to you. I am spared the pains of breaking to you what was a task
upon me reluctantly enough undertaken to break to you. Then rising, she
drew a chair near her own, and made me sit down by her, overwhelmed as I
was with tears of apprehension of what she had to say, and of gratitude
for her truly maternal goodness to me--sobs still my only language.

And drawing her chair still nearer to mine, she put her arms round my
neck, and my glowing cheek wet with my tears, close to her own: Let me
talk to you, my child. Since silence is your choice, hearken to me, and
be silent.

You know, my dear, what I every day forego, and undergo, for the sake of
peace. Your papa is a very good man, and means well; but he will not
be controuled; nor yet persuaded. You have sometimes seemed to pity me,
that I am obliged to give up every point. Poor man! his reputation the
less for it; mine the greater: yet would I not have this credit, if
I could help it, at so dear a rate to him and to myself. You are a
dutiful, a prudent, and a wise child, she was pleased to say, in hope,
no doubt, to make me so: you would not add, I am sure, to my trouble:
you would not wilfully break that peace which costs your mother so much
to preserve. Obedience is better than sacrifice. O my Clary Harlowe,
rejoice my heart, by telling me that I have apprehended too much!--I see
your concern! I see your perplexity! I see your conflict! [loosing
her arm, and rising, not willing I should see how much she herself
was affected]. I will leave you a moment.--Answer me not--[for I was
essaying to speak, and had, as soon as she took her dear cheek from
mine, dropt down on my knees, my hands clasped, and lifted up in
a supplicating manner]--I am not prepared for your irresistible
expostulation, she was pleased to say. I will leave you to recollection:
and I charge you, on my blessing, that all this my truly maternal
tenderness be not thrown away upon you.

And then she withdrew into the next apartment; wiping her eyes as she
went from me; as mine overflowed; my heart taking in the whole compass
of her meaning.

She soon returned, having recovered more steadiness.

Still on my knees, I had thrown my face across the chair she had sat in.

Look up to me, my Clary Harlowe--No sullenness, I hope!

No, indeed, my ever-to-be-revered Mamma.--And I arose. I bent my knee.

She raised me. No kneeling to me, but with knees of duty and compliance.
Your heart, not your knees, must bend. It is absolutely determined.
Prepare yourself therefore to receive your father, when he visits you
by-and-by, as he would wish to receive you. But on this one quarter of
an hour depends the peace of my future life, the satisfaction of all the
family, and your own security from a man of violence: and I charge you
besides, on my blessing, that you think of being Mrs. Solmes.

There went the dagger to my heart, and down I sunk: and when I
recovered, found myself in the arms of my Hannah, my sister's Betty
holding open my reluctantly-opened palm, my laces cut, my linen scented
with hartshorn; and my mother gone. Had I been less kindly treated, the
hated name still forborne to be mentioned, or mentioned with a little
more preparation and reserve, I had stood the horrid sound with less
visible emotion--But to be bid, on the blessing of a mother so dearly
beloved, so truly reverenced, to think of being MRS. SOLMES--what a
denunciation was that!

Shorey came in with a message (delivered in her solemn way): Your mamma,
Miss, is concerned for your disorder: she expects you down again in an
hour; and bid me say, that she then hopes every thing from your duty.

I made no reply; for what could I say? And leaning upon my Hannah's arm,
withdrew to my own apartment. There you will guess how the greatest part
of the hour was employed.

Within that time, my mother came up to me.

I love, she was pleased to say, to come into this apartment.--No
emotions, child! No flutters!--Am I not your mother?--Do not discompose
me by discomposing yourself! Do not occasion me uneasiness, when I
would give you nothing but pleasure. Come, my dear, we will go into your
closet.

She took my hand, led the way, and made me sit down by her: and after
she had inquired how I did, she began in a strain as if she supposed I
had made use of the intervening space to overcome all my objections.

She was pleased to tell me, that my father and she, in order to spare my
natural modesty, had taken the whole affair upon themselves--

Hear me out; and then speak.--He is not indeed every thing I wish him to
be: but he is a man of probity, and has no vices--

No vices, Madam--!

Hear me out, child.--You have not behaved much amiss to him: we have
seen with pleasure that you have not--

O Madam, must I not now speak!

I shall have done presently.--A young creature of your virtuous and
pious turn, she was pleased to say, cannot surely love a profligate: you
love your brother too well, to wish to marry one who had like to have
killed him, and who threatened your uncles, and defies us all. You have
had your own way six or seven times: we want to secure you against a man
so vile. Tell me (I have a right to know) whether you prefer this man
to all others?--Yet God forbid that I should know you do; for such
a declaration would make us all miserable. Yet tell me, are your
affections engaged to this man?

I knew not what the inference would be, if I said they were not.

You hesitate--You answer me not--You cannot answer me.--Rising--Never
more will I look upon you with an eye of favour--

O Madam, Madam! Kill me not with your displeasure--I would not, I need
not, hesitate one moment, did I not dread the inference, if I answer
you as you wish.--Yet be that inference what it will, your threatened
displeasure will make me speak. And I declare to you, that I know not my
own heart, if it not be absolutely free. And pray, let me ask my dearest
Mamma, in what has my conduct been faulty, that, like a giddy creature,
I must be forced to marry, to save me from--From what? Let me beseech
you, Madam, to be the guardian of my reputation! Let not your Clarissa
be precipitated into a state she wishes not to enter into with any man!
And this upon a supposition that otherwise she shall marry herself, and
disgrace her whole family.

Well then, Clary [passing over the force of my plea] if your heart be
free--

O my beloved Mamma, let the usual generosity of your dear heart operate
in my favour. Urge not upon me the inference that made me hesitate.

I won't be interrupted, Clary--You have seen in my behaviour to you,
on this occasion, a truly maternal tenderness; you have observed that
I have undertaken the task with some reluctance, because the man is not
every thing; and because I know you carry your notions of perfection in
a man too high--

Dearest Madam, this one time excuse me!--Is there then any danger that I
should be guilty of an imprudent thing for the man's sake you hint at?

Again interrupted!--Am I to be questioned, and argued with? You know
this won't do somewhere else. You know it won't. What reason then,
ungenerous girl, can you have for arguing with me thus, but because you
think from my indulgence to you, you may?

What can I say? What can I do? What must that cause be that will not
bear being argued upon?

Again! Clary Harlowe!

Dearest Madam, forgive me: it was always my pride and my pleasure to
obey you. But look upon that man--see but the disagreeableness of his
person--

Now, Clary, do I see whose person you have in your eye!--Now is Mr.
Solmes, I see, but comparatively disagreeable; disagreeable only as
another man has a much more specious person

But, Madam, are not his manners equally so?--Is not his person the true
representative of his mind?--That other man is not, shall not be, any
thing to me, release me but from this one man, whom my heart, unbidden,
resists.

Condition thus with your father. Will he bear, do you think, to be thus
dialogued with? Have I not conjured you, as you value my peace--What
is it that I do not give up?--This very task, because I apprehended you
would not be easily persuaded, is a task indeed upon me. And will you
give up nothing? Have you not refused as many as have been offered to
you? If you would not have us guess for whom, comply; for comply you
must, or be looked upon as in a state of defiance with your whole
family.

And saying this, she arose and went from me. But at the chamber-door
stopt; and turned back: I will not say below in what a disposition I
leave you. Consider of every thing. The matter is resolved upon. As you
value your father's blessing and mine, and the satisfaction of all the
family, resolve to comply. I will leave you for a few moments. I will
come up to you again. See that I find you as I wish to find you; and
since your heart is free, let your duty govern it.

In about half an hour, my mother returned. She found me in tears.
She took my hand: It is my part evermore, said she, to be of the
acknowledging side. I believe I have needlessly exposed myself to your
opposition, by the method I have taken with you. I first began as if I
expected a denial, and by my indulgence brought it upon myself.

Do not, my dearest Mamma! do not say so!

Were the occasion for this debate, proceeded she, to have risen from
myself; were it in my power to dispense with your compliance; you too
well know what you can do with me.

Would any body, my dear Miss Howe, wish to marry, who sees a wife of
such a temper, and blessed with such an understanding as my mother is
noted for, not only deprived of all power, but obliged to be even active
in bringing to bear a point of high importance, which she thinks ought
not to be insisted upon?

When I came to you a second time, proceeded she, knowing that your
opposition would avail you nothing, I refused to hear your reasons: and
in this I was wrong too, because a young creature who loves to reason,
and used to love to be convinced by reason, ought to have all her
objections heard: I now therefore, this third time, see you; and am
come resolved to hear all you have to say: and let me, my dear, by my
patience engage your gratitude; your generosity, I will call it, because
it is to you I speak, who used to have a mind wholly generous.--Let me,
if your heart be really free, let me see what it will induce you to do
to oblige me: and so as you permit your usual discretion to govern you,
I will hear all you have to say; but with this intimation, that say what
you will, it will be of no avail elsewhere.

What a dreadful saying is that! But could I engage your pity, Madam, it
would be somewhat.

You have as much of my pity as of my love. But what is person, Clary,
with one of your prudence, and your heart disengaged?

Should the eye be disgusted, when the heart is to be engaged?--O
Madam, who can think of marrying when the heart is shocked at the
first appearance, and where the disgust must be confirmed by every
conversation afterwards?

This, Clary, is owing to your prepossession. Let me not have cause
to regret that noble firmness of mind in so young a creature which I
thought your glory, and which was my boast in your character. In this
instance it would be obstinacy, and want of duty.--Have you not made
objections to several--

That was to their minds, to their principles, Madam.--But this man--

Is an honest man, Clary Harlowe. He has a good mind. He is a virtuous
man.

He an honest man? His a good mind, Madam? He a virtuous man?--

Nobody denies these qualities.

Can he be an honest man who offers terms that will rob all his own
relations of their just expectations?--Can his mind be good--

You, Clary Harlowe, for whose sake he offers so much, are the last
person who should make this observation.

Give me leave to say, Madam, that a person preferring happiness to
fortune, as I do; that want not even what I have, and can give up the
use of that, as an instance of duty--

No more, no more of your merits!--You know you will be a gainer by that
cheerful instance of your duty; not a loser. You know you have but
cast your bread upon the waters--so no more of that!--For it is not
understood as a merit by every body, I assure you; though I think it a
high one; and so did your father and uncles at the time--

At the time, Madam!--How unworthily do my brother and sister, who are
afraid that the favour I was so lately in--

I hear nothing against your brother and sister--What family feuds have I
in prospect, at a time when I hoped to have most comfort from you all!


God bless my brother and sister in all their worthy views! You shall
have no family feuds if I can prevent them. You yourself, Madam, shall
tell me what I shall bear from them, and I will bear it: but let my
actions, not their misrepresentations (as I am sure by the disgraceful
prohibitions I have met with has been the case) speak for me.

Just then, up came my father, with a sternness in his looks that made me
tremble.--He took two or three turns about my chamber, though pained by
his gout; and then said to my mother, who was silent as soon as she saw
him--

My dear, you are long absent.--Dinner is near ready. What you had to
say, lay in a very little compass. Surely, you have nothing to do but
to declare your will, and my will--But perhaps you may be talking of the
preparations--Let us have you soon down--Your daughter in your hand, if
worthy of the name.

And down he went, casting his eye upon me with a look so stern, that
I was unable to say one word to him, or even for a few minutes to my
mother.

Was not this very intimidating, my dear?

My mother, seeing my concern, seemed to pity me. She called me her good
child, and kissed me; and told me that my father should not know I had
made such opposition. He has kindly furnished us with an excuse for
being so long together, said she.--Come, my dear--dinner will be upon
table presently--Shall we go down?--And took my hand.

This made me start: What, Madam, go down to let it be supposed we were
talking of preparations!--O my beloved Mamma, command me not down upon
such a supposition.

You see, child, that to stay longer together, will be owning that you
are debating about an absolute duty; and that will not be borne. Did not
your father himself some days ago tell you, he would be obeyed? I will a
third time leave you. I must say something by way of excuse for you:
and that you desire not to go down to dinner--that your modesty on the
occasion--

O Madam! say not my modesty on such an occasion: for that will be to
give hope--

And design you not to give hope?--Perverse girl!--Rising and flinging
from me; take more time for consideration!--Since it is necessary, take
more time--and when I see you next, let me know what blame I have to
cast upon myself, or to bear from your father, for my indulgence to you.

She made, however, a little stop at the chamber-door; and seemed to
expect that I would have besought her to make the gentlest construction
for me; for, hesitating, she was pleased to say, I suppose you would not
have me make a report--

O Madam, interrupted I, whose favour can I hope for if I lose my
mamma's?

To have desired a favourable report, you know, my dear, would have been
qualifying upon a point that I was too much determined upon, to give
room for any of my friends to think I have the least hesitation about
it. And so my mother went down stairs.

I will deposit thus far; and, as I know you will not think me too minute
in the relation of particulars so very interesting to one you honour
with your love, proceed in the same way. As matters stand, I don't care
to have papers, so freely written, about me.

Pray let Robert call every day, if you can spare him, whether I have any
thing ready or not.

I should be glad you would not send him empty handed. What a generosity
will it be in you, to write as frequently from friendship, as I am
forced to do from misfortune! The letters being taken away will be an
assurance that you have them. As I shall write and deposit as I have
opportunity, the formality of super and sub-scription will be excused.
For I need not say how much I am

Your sincere and ever affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


My mother, on her return, which was as soon as she had dined, was
pleased to inform me, that she told my father, on his questioning her
about my cheerul compliance (for, it seems, the cheerful was all that
was doubted) that she was willing, on so material a point, to give
a child whom she had so much reason to love (as she condescended to
acknowledge were her words) liberty to say all that was in her heart to
say, that her compliance might be the freer: letting him know, that
when he came up, she was attending to my pleas; for that she found I had
rather not marry at all.

She told me, that to this my father angrily said, let her take
care--let her take care--that she give me not ground to suspect her of
a preference somewhere else. But, if it be to ease her heart, and not to
dispute my will, you may hear her out.

So, Clary, said my mother, I am returned in a temper accordingly: and I
hope you will not again, by your peremptoriness, shew me how I ought to
treat you.

Indeed, Madam, you did me justice to say, I have no inclination to marry
at all. I have not, I hope, made myself so very unuseful in my papa's
family, as--

No more of your merits, Clary! You have been a good child. You have
eased me of all the family cares: but do not now give more than ever
you relieved me from. You have been amply repaid in the reputation
your skill and management have given you: but now there is soon to be a
period to all those assistances from you. If you marry, there will be
a natural, and, if to please us, a desirable period; because your own
family will employ all your talents in that way: if you do not, there
will be a period likewise, but not a natural one--you understand me,
child.

I wept.

I have made inquiry already after a housekeeper. I would have had your
good Norton; but I suppose you will yourself wish to have the worthy
woman with you. If you desire it, that shall be agreed upon for you.

But, why, dearest Madam, why am I, the youngest, to be precipitated into
a state, that I am very far from wishing to enter into with any body?

You are going to question me, I suppose, why your sister is not thought
of for Mr. Solmes?

I hope, Madam, it will not displease you if I were.

I might refer you for an answer to your father.--Mr. Solmes has reasons
for preferring you--

And I have reasons, Madam, for disliking him. And why I am--

This quickness upon me, interrupted my mother, is not to be borne! I am
gone, and your father comes, if I can do no good with you.

O Madam, I would rather die, than--

She put her hand to my mouth--No peremptoriness, Clary Harlowe: once you
declare yourself inflexible, I have done.

I wept for vexation. This is all, all, my brother's doings--his grasping
views--

No reflections upon your brother: he has entirely the honour of the
family at heart.

I would no more dishonour my family, Madam, than my brother would.

I believe it: but I hope you will allow your father, and me, and your
uncles, to judge what will do it honour, what dishonour.

I then offered to live single; never to marry at all; or never but with
their full approbation.

If you mean to shew your duty, and your obedience, Clary, you must shew
it in our way, not in your own.

I hope, Madam, that I have not so behaved hitherto, as to render such a
trial of my obedience necessary.

Yes, Clary, I cannot but say that you have hitherto behaved extremely
well: but you have had no trials till now: and I hope, that now you are
called to one, you will not fail in it. Parents, proceeded she, when
children are young, are pleased with every thing they do. You have been
a good child upon the whole: but we have hitherto rather complied with
you, than you with us. Now that you are grown up to marriageable years,
is the test; especially as your grandfather has made you independent, as
we may say, in preference to those who had prior expectations upon that
estate.

Madam, my grandfather knew, and expressly mentioned in his will his
desire, that my father will more than make it up to my sister. I did
nothing but what I thought my duty to procure his favour. It was rather
a mark of his affection, than any advantage to me: For, do I either
seek or wish to be independent? Were I to be queen of the universe, that
dignity should not absolve me from my duty to you and to my father. I
would kneel for your blessings, were it in the presence of millions--so
that--

I am loth to interrupt you, Clary; though you could more than once break
in upon me. You are young and unbroken: but, with all this ostentation
of your duty, I desire you to shew a little more deference to me when I
am speaking.

I beg your pardon, dear Madam, and your patience with me on such an
occasion as this. If I did not speak with earnestness upon it, I should
be supposed to have only maidenly objections against a man I never can
endure.

Clary Harlowe--!

Dearest, dearest Madam, permit me to speak what I have to say, this
once--It is hard, it is very hard, to be forbidden to enter into
the cause of all these misunderstandings, because I must not speak
disrespectfully of one who supposes me in the way of his ambition, and
treats me like a slave--

Whither, whither, Clary--

My dearest Mamma!--My duty will not permit me so far to suppose my
father arbitrary, as to make a plea of that arbitrariness to you--

How now, Clary!--O girl!

Your patience, my dearest Mamma:--you were pleased to say, you would
hear me with patience.--PERSON in a man is nothing, because I am
supposed to be prudent: so my eye is to be disgusted, and my reason not
convinced--

Girl, girl!

Thus are my imputed good qualities to be made my punishment; and I am to
wedded to a monster--

[Astonishing!--Can this, Clarissa, be from you?

The man, Madam, person and mind, is a monster in my eye.]--And that
I may be induced to bear this treatment, I am to be complimented with
being indifferent to all men: yet, at other times, and to serve other
purposes, be thought prepossessed in favour of a man against whose moral
character lie just objections.--Confined, as if, like the giddiest of
creatures, I would run away with this man, and disgrace my whole family!
O my dearest Mamma! who can be patient under such treatment?

Now, Clary, I suppose you will allow me to speak. I think I have had
patience indeed with you.--Could I have thought--but I will put all upon
a short issue. Your mother, Clarissa, shall shew you an example of that
patience you so boldly claim from her, without having any yourself.

O my dear, how my mother's condescension distressed me at the
time!--Infinitely more distressed me, than rigour could have done. But
she knew, she was to be sure aware, that she was put upon a harsh, upon
an unreasonable service, let me say, or she would not, she could not,
have had so much patience with me.

Let me tell you then, proceeded she, that all lies in a small compass,
as your father said.--You have been hitherto, as you are pretty ready to
plead, a dutiful child. You have indeed had no cause to be otherwise. No
child was ever more favoured. Whether you will discredit all your past
behaviour; whether, at a time and upon an occasion, that the highest
instance of duty is expected from you (an instance that is to crown
all); and when you declare that your heart is free--you will give that
instance; or whether, having a view to the independence you may claim,
(for so, Clary, whatever be your motive, it will be judged,) and which
any man you favour, can assert for you against us all; or rather for
himself in spite of us--whether, I say, you will break with us all;
and stand in defiance of a jealous father, needlessly jealous, I will
venture to say, of the prerogatives of his sex, as to me, and still ten
times more jealous of the authority of a father;--this is now the point
with us. You know your father has made it a point; and did he ever give
up one he thought he had a right to carry?

Too true, thought I to myself! And now my brother has engaged my father,
his fine scheme will walk alone, without needing his leading-strings;
and it is become my father's will that I oppose; not my brother's
grasping views.

I was silent. To say the truth, I was just then sullenly silent. My
heart was too big. I thought it was hard to be thus given up by
my mother; and that she should make a will so uncontroulable as my
brother's, her will.--My mother, my dear, though I must not say so, was
not obliged to marry against her liking. My mother loved my father.

My silence availed me still less.

I see, my dear, said she, that you are convinced. Now, my good
child--now, my Clary, do I love you! It shall not be known, that you
have argued with me at all. All shall be imputed to that modesty which
has ever so much distinguished you. You shall have the full merit of
your resignation.

I wept.

She tenderly wiped the tears from my eyes, and kissed my cheek--Your
father expects you down with a cheerful countenance--but I will excuse
your going. All your scruples, you see, have met with an indulgence
truly maternal from me. I rejoice in the hope that you are convinced.
This indeed seems to be a proof of the truth of your agreeable
declaration, that your heart is free.

Did not this seem to border upon cruelty, my dear, in so indulgent a
mother?--It would be wicked [would it not] to suppose my mother capable
of art?--But she is put upon it, and obliged to take methods to which
her heart is naturally above stooping; and all intended for my good,
because she sees that no arguing will be admitted any where else!

I will go down, proceeded she, and excuse your attendance at afternoon
tea, as I did to dinner: for I know you will have some little
reluctances to subdue. I will allow you those; and also some little
natural shynesses--and so you shall not come down, if you chuse not to
come down. Only, my dear, do not disgrace my report when you come to
supper. And be sure behave as you used to do to your brother and sister;
for your behaviour to them will be one test of your cheerful obedience
to us. I advise as a friend, you see, rather than command as a
mother--So adieu, my love. And again she kissed me; and was going.

O my dear Mamma, said I, forgive me!--But surely you cannot believe, I
can ever think of having that man!

She was very angry, and seemed to be greatly disappointed. She
threatened to turn me over to my father and uncles:--she however bid
me (generously bid me) consider, what a handle I gave to my brother
and sister, if I thought they had views to serve by making my uncles
dissatisfied with me.

I, said she, in a milder accent, have early said all that I thought
could be said against the present proposal, on a supposition, that
you, who have refused several other (whom I own to be preferable as to
person) would not approve of it; and could I have succeeded, you,
Clary, had never heard of it. But if I could not, how can you expect
to prevail? My great ends in the task I have undertaken, are the
preservation of the family peace so likely to be overturned; to
reinstate you in the affections of your father and uncles: and to
preserve you from a man of violence.--Your father, you must needs think
will flame out upon your refusal to comply: your uncles are so

thoroughly convinced of the consistency of the measure with their
favourite views of aggrandizing the family, that they are as much
determined as your father: your aunt Hervey and your uncle Hervey are of
the same party. And it is hard, if a father and mother, and uncles, and
aunt, all conjoined, cannot be allowed to direct your choice--surely, my
dear girl, proceeded she [for I was silent all this time], it cannot be
that you are the more averse, because the family views will be promoted
by the match--this, I assure you, is what every body must think, if
you comply not. Nor, while the man, so obnoxious to us all, remains
unmarried, and buzzes about you, will the strongest wishes to live
single, be in the least regarded. And well you know, that were Mr.
Lovelace an angel, and your father had made it a point that you should
not have him, it would be in vain to dispute his will. As to the
prohibition laid upon you (much as I will own against my liking), that
is owing to the belief that you corresponded by Miss Howe's means with
that man; nor do I doubt that you did so.

I answered to every article, in such a manner, as I am sure would have
satisfied her, could she have been permitted to judge for herself; and I
then inveighed with bitterness against the disgraceful prohibitions laid
upon me.

They would serve to shew me, she was pleased to say, how much in earnest
my father was. They might be taken off, whenever I thought fit, and no
harm done, nor disgrace received. But if I were to be contumacious, I
might thank myself for all that would follow.

I sighed. I wept. I was silent.

Shall I, Clary, said she, shall I tell your father that these
prohibitions are as unnecessary as I hoped they would be? That you know
your duty, and will not offer to controvert his will? What say you, my
love?

O Madam, what can I say to questions so indulgently put? I do indeed
know my duty: no creature in the world is more willing to practise
it: but, pardon me, dearest Madam, if I say, that I must bear these
prohibitions, if I am to pay so dear to have them taken off.

Determined and perverse, my dear mamma called me: and after walking
twice or thrice in anger about the room, she turned to me: Your
heart free, Clarissa! How can you tell me your heart is free? Such
extraordinary prepossessions to a particular person must be owing to
extraordinary prepossessions in another's favour! Tell me, Clary, and
tell me truly--Do you not continue to correspond with Mr. Lovelace?

Dearest Madam, replied I, you know my motives: to prevent mischief, I
answered his letters. The reasons for our apprehensions of this sort are
not over.

I own to you, Clary, (although now I would not have it known,) that
I once thought a little qualifying among such violent spirits was not
amiss. I did not know but all things would come round again by the
mediation of Lord M. and his two sisters: but as they all three think
proper to resent for their nephew; and as their nephew thinks fit to
defy us all; and as terms are offered, on the other hand, that could
not be asked, which will very probably prevent your grandfather's estate
going out of the family, and may be a means to bring still greater into
it; I see not, that the continuance of your correspondence with him
either can or ought to be permitted. I therefore now forbid it to you,
as you value my favour.

Be pleased, Madam, only to advise me how to break it off with safety to
my brother and uncles; and it is all I wish for. Would to heaven, the
man so hated had not the pretence to make of having been too violently
treated, when he meant peace and reconciliation! It would always have
been in my own power to have broke with him. His reputed immoralities
would have given me a just pretence at any time to do so. But, Madam, as
my uncles and my brother will keep no measures; as he has heard what the
view is; and his regard for me from resenting their violent treatment
of him and his family; what can I do? Would you have me, Madam, make him
desperate?

The law will protect us, child! offended magistracy will assert itself--

But, Madam, may not some dreadful mischief first happen?--The law
asserts not itself, till it is offended.

You have made offers, Clary, if you might be obliged in the point in
question--Are you really in earnest, were you to be complied with, to
break off all correspondence with Mr. Lovelace?--Let me know this.

Indeed I am; and I will. You, Madam, shall see all the letters that
have passed between us. You shall see I have given him no encouragement
independent of my duty. And when you have seen them, you will be
better able to direct me how, on the condition I have offered, to break
entirely with him.

I take you at your word, Clarissa--Give me his letters; and the copies
of yours.

I am sure, Madam, you will keep the knowledge that I write, and what I
write--

No conditions with your mother--surely my prudence may be trusted to.

I begged her pardon; and besought her to take the key of the private
drawer in my escritoire, where they lay, that she herself might see that
I had no reserves to my mother.

She did; and took all his letters, and the copies of
mine.--Unconditioned with, she was pleased to say, they shall be yours
again, unseen by any body else.

I thanked her; and she withdrew to read them; saying, she would return
them, when she had.


***


You, my dear, have seen all the letters that passed between Mr. Lovelace
and me, till my last return from you. You have acknowledged, that he has
nothing to boast of from them. Three others I have received since, by
the private conveyance I told you of: the last I have not yet answered.

In these three, as in those you have seen, after having besought my
favour, and, in the most earnest manner, professed the ardour of his
passion for me; and set forth the indignities done him; the defiances
my brother throws out against him in all companies; the menaces, and
hostile appearance of my uncles wherever they go; and the methods they
take to defame him; he declares, 'That neither his own honour, nor
the honour of his family, (involved as that is in the undistinguishing
reflection cast upon him for an unhappy affair which he would have
shunned, but could not) permit him to bear these confirmed indignities:
that as my inclinations, if not favourable to him, cannot be, nor are,
to such a man as the newly-introduced Solmes, he is interested the more
to resent my brother's behaviour; who to every body avows his rancour
and malice; and glories in the probability he has, through the address
of this Solmes, of mortifying me, and avenging himself on him: that
it is impossible he should not think himself concerned to frustrate a
measure so directly levelled at him, had he not a still higher motive
for hoping to frustrate it: that I must forgive him, if he enter into
conference with Solmes upon it. He earnestly insists (upon what he has
so often proposed) that I will give him leave, in company with Lord
M. to wait upon my uncles, and even upon my father--and he promises
patience, if new provocations, absolutely beneath a man to bear, be not
given:' which by the way I am far from being able to engage for.

In my answer, I absolutely declare, as I tell him I have often done,
'That he is to expect no favour from me against the approbation of my
friends: that I am sure their consents for his visiting any of them
will never be obtained: that I will not be either so undutiful, or so
indiscreet, as to suffer my interests to be separated from the interests
of my family, for any man upon earth: that I do not think myself obliged
to him for the forbearance I desire one flaming spirit to have with
others: that in this desire I require nothing of him, but what prudence,
justice, and the laws of his country require: that if he has any
expectations of favour from me, on that account, he deceives himself:
that I have no inclination, as I have often told him, to change my
condition: that I cannot allow myself to correspond with him any longer
in this clandestine manner: it is mean, low, undutiful, I tell him; and
has a giddy appearance, which cannot be excused: that therefore he is
not to expect that I will continue it.

To this in his last, among other things, he replies, 'That if I am
actually determined to break off all correspondence with him, he must
conclude, that it is with a view to become the wife of a man, whom no
woman of honour and fortune can think tolerable. And in that case, I
must excuse him for saying, that he shall neither be able to bear the
thoughts of losing for ever a person in whom all his present and all his
future hopes are centred; nor support himself with patience under the
insolent triumphs of my brother upon it. But that nevertheless he will
not threaten either his own life, or that of any other man. He must take
his resolutions as such a dreaded event shall impel him at the time. If
he shall know that it will have my consent, he must endeavour to resign
to his destiny: but if it be brought about by compulsion, he shall not
be able to answer for the consequence.'

I will send you these letters for your perusal in a few days. I would
enclose them; but that it is possible something may happen, which may
make my mother require to re-peruse them. When you see them, you will
observe how he endeavours to hold me to this correspondence.


***


In about an hour my mother returned. Take your letters, Clary: I have
nothing, she was pleased to say, to tax your discretion with, as to the
wording of yours to him: you have even kept up a proper dignity, as
well as observed all the rules of decorum; and you have resented, as you
ought to resent, his menacing invectives. In a word, I see not, that he
can form the least expectations, from what you have written, that you
will encourage the passion he avows for you. But does he not avow his
passion? Have you the least doubt about what must be the issue of this
correspondence, if continued? And do you yourself think, when you know
the avowed hatred of one side, and he declared defiances of the other,
that this can be, that it ought to be a match?

By no means it can, Madam; you will be pleased to observed, that I have
said as much to him. But now, Madam, that the whole correspondence
is before you, I beg your commands what to do in a situation so very
disagreeable.

One thing I will tell you, Clary--but I charge you, as you would not
have me question the generosity of your spirit, to take no advantage
of it, either mentally or verbally; that I am so much pleased with the
offer of your keys to me, made in so cheerful and unreserved a manner,
and in the prudence you have shewn in your letters, that were it
practicable to bring every one, or your father only, into my opinion, I
should readily leave all the rest to your discretion, reserving only to
myself the direction or approbation of your future letters; and to see,
that you broke off the correspondence as soon as possible. But as it is
not, and as I know your father would have no patience with you, should
it be acknowledged that you correspond with Mr. Lovelace, or that you
have corresponded with him since the time he prohibited you to do so;
I forbid you to continue such a liberty--Yet, as the case is difficult,
let me ask you, What you yourself can propose? Your heart, you say, is
free. Your own, that you cannot think, as matters circumstanced, that
a match with a man so obnoxious as he now is to us all, is proper to
be thought of: What do you propose to do?--What, Clary, are your own
thoughts of the matter?

Without hesitation thus I answered--What I humbly propose is
this:--'That I will write to Mr. Lovelace (for I have not answered his
last) that he has nothing to do between my father and me: that I
neither ask his advice nor need it: but that since he thinks he has some
pretence for interfering, because of my brother's avowal of the interest
of Mr. Solmes in displeasure to him, I will assure him (without giving
him any reason to impute the assurance to be in the least favourable to
himself) that I will never be that man's.' And if, proceeded I, I
may never be permitted to give him this assurance; and Mr. Solmes, in
consequence of it, be discouraged from prosecuting his address; let Mr.
Lovelace be satisfied or dissatisfied, I will go no farther; nor write
another line to him; nor ever see him more, if I can avoid it: and I
shall have a good excuse for it, without bringing in any of my family.

Ah! my love!--But what shall we do about the terms Mr. Solmes offers?
Those are the inducements with every body. He has even given hopes to
your brother that he will make exchanges of estates; or, at least, that
he will purchase the northern one; for you know it must be entirely
consistent with the family-views, that we increase our interest in this
country. Your brother, in short, has given a plan that captivates us
all. And a family so rich in all its branches, and that has its views to
honour, must be pleased to see a very great probability of taking rank
one day among the principal in the kingdom.

And for the sake of these views, for the sake of this plan of my
brother's, am I, Madam, to be given in marriage to a man I can never
endure!--O my dear Mamma, save me, save me, if you can, from this heavy
evil.--I had rather be buried alive, indeed I had, than have that man!

She chid me for my vehemence; but was so good as to tell me, That she
would sound my uncle Harlowe, who was then below; and if he encouraged
her (or would engage to second her) she would venture to talk to my
father herself; and I should hear further in the morning.

She went down to tea, and kindly undertook to excuse my attendance at
supper.

But is it not a sad thing, I repeat, to be obliged to stand in
opposition to the will of such a mother? Why, as I often say to myself,
was such a man as this Solmes fixed upon? The only man in the world,
surely, that could offer so much, and deserve so little!

Little indeed does he deserve!--Why, my dear, the man has the most
indifferent of characters. Every mouth is opened against him for his
sordid ways--A foolish man, to be so base-minded!--When the difference
between the obtaining of a fame for generosity, and incurring the
censure of being a miser, will not, prudently managed, cost fifty pounds
a year.

What a name have you got, at a less expense? And what an opportunity had
he of obtaining credit at a very small one, succeeding such a wretched
creature as Sir Oliver, in fortunes so vast?--Yet has he so behaved,
that the common phrase is applied to him, That Sir Oliver will never be
dead while Mr. Solmes lives.

The world, as I have often thought, ill-natured as it is said to be, is
generally more just in characters (speaking by what it feels) than is
usually apprehended: and those who complain most of its censoriousness,
perhaps should look inwardly for the occasion oftener than they do.

My heart is a little at ease, on the hopes that my mother will be able
to procure favour for me, and a deliverance from this man; and so I
have leisure to moralize. But if I had not, I should not forbear to
intermingle occasionally these sorts of remarks, because you command
me never to omit them when they occur to my mind: and not to be able
to make them, even in a more affecting situation, when one sits down
to write, would shew one's self more engaged to self, and to one's own
concerns, than attentive to the wishes of a friend. If it be said, that
it is natural so to be, what makes that nature, on occasions where a
friend may be obliged, or reminded of a piece of instruction, which
(writing down) one's self may be the better for, but a fault; which it
would set a person above nature to subdue?




LETTER XVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. MAR. 4.


Would you not have thought something might have been obtained in my
favour, from an offer so reasonable, from an expedient so proper, as I
imagine, to put a tolerable end, as from myself, to a correspondence I
hardly know how otherwise, with safety to some of my family, to get rid
of?--But my brother's plan, (which my mother spoke of, and of which I
have in vain endeavoured to procure a copy, with a design to take it to
pieces, and expose it, as I question not there is room to do,) joined
with my father's impatience of contradiction, are irresistible.

I have not been in bed all night; nor am I in the least drowsy.
Expectation, and hope, and doubt, (an uneasy state!) kept me
sufficiently wakeful. I stept down at my usual time, that it might not
be known I had not been in bed; and gave directions in the family way.

About eight o'clock, Shorey came to me from my mother with orders to
attend her in her chamber.

My mother had been weeping, I saw by her eyes: but her aspect seemed to
be less tender, and less affectionate, than the day before; and this, as
soon as I entered into her presence, struck me with an awe, which gave a
great damp to my spirits.

Sit down, Clary Harlowe; I shall talk to you by-and-by: and continued
looking into a drawer among laces and linens, in a way neither busy nor
unbusy.

I believe it was a quarter of an hour before she spoke to me (my heart
throbbing with the suspense all the time); and then she asked me coldly,
What directions I had given for the day?

I shewed her the bill of fare for this day, and to-morrow, if, I said,
it pleased her to approve of it.

She made a small alteration in it; but with an air so cold and so
solemn, as added to my emotions.

Mr. Harlowe talks of dining out to-day, I think, at my brother
Antony's--

Mr. Harlowe!--Not my father!--Have I not then a father!--thought I.

Sit down when I bid you.

I sat down.

You look very sullen, Clary.

I hope not, Madam.

If children would always be children--parents--And there she stopt.

She then went to her toilette, and looked into the glass, and gave half
a sigh--the other half, as if she would not have sighed if she could
have helped it, she gently hem'd away.

I don't love to see the girl look so sullen.

Indeed, Madam, I am not sullen.--And I arose, and, turning from her,
drew out my handkerchief; for the tears ran down my cheeks.

I thought, by the glass before me, I saw the mother in her softened eye
cast towards me. But her words confirmed not the hoped-for tenderness.

One of the most provoking things in this world is, to have people cry
for what they can help!

I wish to heaven I could, Madam!--And I sobbed again.

Tears of penitence and sobs of perverseness are mighty well suited!--You
may go up to your chamber. I shall talk with you by-and-by.

I courtesied with reverence.

Mock me not with outward gestures of respect. The heart, Clary, is what
I want.

Indeed, Madam, you have it. It is not so much mine as my Mamma's!

Fine talking!--As somebody says, If words were to pass for duty,
Clarissa Harlowe would be the dutifulest child breathing.

God bless that somebody!--Be it whom it will, God bless that
somebody!--And I courtesied, and, pursuant to her last command, was
going.

She seemed struck; but was to be angry with me.

So turning from me, she spoke with quickness, Whither now, Clary
Harlowe?

You commanded me, Madam, to go to my chamber.

I see you are very ready to go out of my presence.--Is your compliance
the effect of sullenness, or obedience?--You are very ready to leave me.

I could hold no longer; but threw myself at her feet: O my dearest
Mamma! Let me know all I am to suffer! Let me know what I am to be!--I
will bear it, if I can bear it: but your displeasure I cannot bear!

Leave me, leave me, Clary Harlowe!--No kneeling!--Limbs so supple! Will
so stubborn!--Rise, I tell you.

I cannot rise! I will disobey my Mamma, when she bids me leave her
without being reconciled to me! No sullens, my Mamma: no perverseness:
but, worse than either: this is direct disobedience!--Yet tear not
yourself from me! [wrapping my arms about her as I kneeled; she
struggling to get from me; my face lifted up to hers, with eyes
running over, that spoke not my heart if they were not all humility and
reverence] You must not, must not, tear yourself from me! [for still
the dear lady struggled, and looked this way and that, all in a sweet
disorder, as if she knew not what to do].--I will neither rise, nor
leave you, nor let you go, till you say you are not angry with me.

O thou ever-moving child of my heart! [folding her dear arms about my
neck, as mine embraced her knees] Why was this task--But leave me!--You
have discomposed me beyond expression! Leave me, my dear!--I won't be
angry with you--if I can help it--if you'll be good.

I arose trembling, and, hardly knowing what I did, or how I stood or
walked, withdrew to my chamber. My Hannah followed me as soon as she
heard me quit my mother's presence, and with salts and spring-water just
kept me from fainting; and that was as much as she could do. It was near
two hours before I could so far recover myself as to take up my pen, to
write to you how unhappily my hopes have ended.

My mother went down to breakfast. I was not fit to appear: but if I
had been better, I suppose I should not have been sent for; since the
permission for my attending her down, was given by my father (when in
my chamber) only on condition that she found me worthy of the name of
daughter. That, I doubt, I shall never be in his opinion, if he be not
brought to change his mind as to this Mr. Solmes.




LETTER XIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [IN ANSWER TO LETTER XV.] SAT. MARCH
4, 12 O'CLOCK.


Hannah has just now brought me from the usual place your favour of
yesterday. The contents of it have made me very thoughtful; and you
will have an answer in my gravest style.--I to have that Mr. Solmes!--No
indeed!--I will sooner--But I will write first to those passages in your
letter which are less concerning, that I may touch upon this part with
more patience.

As to what you mention of my sister's value for Mr. Lovelace, I am not
very much surprised at it. She takes such officious pains, and it is so
much her subject, to have it thought that she never did, and never could
like him, that she gives but too much room to suspect that she does. She
never tells the story of their parting, and of her refusal of him, but
her colour rises, she looks with disdain upon me, and mingles anger with
the airs she gives herself:--anger as well as airs, demonstrating, that
she refused a man whom she thought worth accepting: Where else is the
reason either for anger or boast?--Poor Bella! She is to be pitied--she
cannot either like or dislike with temper! Would to heaven she had been
mistress of all her wishes!--Would to heaven she had!

As to what you say of my giving up to my father's controul the estate
devised me, my motives at the time, as you acknowledge, were not
blamable. Your advice to me on the subject was grounded, as I remember,
on your good opinion of me; believing that I should not make a bad use
of the power willed me. Neither you nor I, my dear, although you now
assume the air of a diviner, [pardon me] could have believed that would
have happened which has happened, as to my father's part particularly.
You were indeed jealous of my brother's views against me; or rather of
his predominant love of himself; but I did not think so hardly of my
brother and sister as you always did. You never loved them; and ill-will
has eyes ever open to the faulty side; as good-will or love is blind
even to real imperfections. I will briefly recollect my motives.

I found jealousies and uneasiness rising in every breast, where all
before was unity and love. The honoured testator was reflected upon: a
second childhood was attributed to him; and I was censured, as having
taken advantage of it. All young creatures, thought I, more or less,
covet independency; but those who wish most for it, are seldom the
fittest to be trusted either with the government of themselves, or with
power over others. This is certainly a very high and unusual devise to
so young a creature. We should not aim at all we have power to do. To
take all that good-nature, or indulgence, or good opinion confers,
shews a want of moderation, and a graspingness that is unworthy of that
indulgence; and are bad indications of the use that may be made of the
power bequeathed. It is true, thought I, that I have formed agreeable
schemes of making others as happy as myself, by the proper discharge of
the stewardship intrusted to me. [Are not all estates stewardships,
my dear?] But let me examine myself: Is not vanity, or secret love
of praise, a principal motive with me at the bottom?--Ought I not to
suspect my own heart? If I set up for myself, puffed up with every one's
good opinion, may I not be left to myself?--Every one's eyes are upon
the conduct, upon the visits, upon the visiters, of a young creature
of our sex, made independent: And are not such subjected, more than any
others, to the attempts of enterprisers and fortune-seekers?--And then,
left to myself, should I take a wrong step, though with ever so good an
intention, how many should I have to triumph over me, how few to pity
me!--The more of the one, and the fewer of the other, for having aimed
at excelling.

These were some of my reflections at the time: and I have no doubt, but
that in the same situation I should do the very same thing; and that
upon the maturest deliberation. Who can command or foresee events? To
act up to our best judgments at the time, is all we can do. If I have
erred, 'tis to worldly wisdom only that I have erred. If we suffer by an
act of duty, or even by an act of generosity, is it not pleasurable on
reflection, that the fault is in others, rather than in ourselves?--I
had much rather have reason to think others unkind, than that they
should have any to think me undutiful.

And so, my dear, I am sure had you.

And now for the most concerning part of your letter.

You think I must of necessity, as matters are circumstanced, be Solmes's
wife. I will not be very rash, my dear, in protesting to the contrary:
but I think it never can, and, what is still more, never ought to
be!--My temper, I know, is depended upon. But I have heretofore said,*
that I have something in me of my father's family, as well as of my
mother's. And have I any encouragement to follow too implicitly the
example which my mother sets of meekness, and resignedness to the wills
of others? Is she not for ever obliged (as she was pleased to hint to
me) to be of the forbearing side? In my mother's case, your observation
I must own is verified, that those who will bear much, shall have much
to bear.** What is it, as she says, that she has not sacrificed to
peace?--Yet, has she by her sacrifices always found the peace she has
deserved to find? Indeed, no!--I am afraid the very contrary. And often
and often have I had reason (on her account) to reflect, that we poor
mortals, by our over-solicitude to preserve undisturbed the qualities we
are constitutionally fond of, frequently lose the benefits we propose
to ourselves from them: since the designing and encroaching (finding out
what we most fear to forfeit) direct their batteries against these our
weaker places, and, making an artillery (if I may so phrase it) of our
hopes and fears, play upon us at their pleasure.


     * See Letter IX.

     ** See Letter X.


Steadiness of mind, (a quality which the ill-bred and censorious deny to
any of our sex) when we are absolutely convinced of being in the right
[otherwise it is not steadiness, but obstinacy] and when it is exerted
in material cases, is a quality, which, as my good Dr. Lewen was wont to
say, brings great credit to the possessor of it; at the same time that
it usually, when tried and known, raises such above the attempts of
the meanly machinating. He used therefore to inculcate upon me this
steadiness, upon laudable convictions. And why may I not think that I am
now put upon a proper exercise of it?

I said above, that I never can be, that I never ought to be, Mrs.
Solmes.--I repeat, that I ought not: for surely, my dear, I should not
give up to my brother's ambition the happiness of my future life. Surely
I ought not to be the instrument of depriving Mr. Solmes's relations of
their natural rights and reversionary prospects, for the sake of further
aggrandizing a family (although that I am of) which already lives
in great affluence and splendour; and which might be as justly
dissatisfied, were all that some of it aim at to be obtained, that they
were not princes, as now they are that they are not peers [For when ever
was an ambitious mind, as you observe in the case of avarice,* satisfied
by acquisition?]. The less, surely, ought I to give into these grasping
views of my brother, as I myself heartily despise the end aimed at; as
I wish not either to change my state, or better my fortunes; and as I
am fully persuaded, that happiness and riches are two things, and very
seldom meet together.


     * See Letter X.


Yet I dread, I exceedingly dread, the conflicts I know I must
encounter with. It is possible, that I may be more unhappy from the due
observation of the good doctor's general precept, than were I to
yield the point; since what I call steadiness is deemed stubbornness,
obstinacy, prepossession, by those who have a right to put what
interpretation they please upon my conduct.

So, my dear, were we perfect (which no one can be) we could not be
happy in this life, unless those with whom we have to deal (those more
especially who have any controul upon us) were governed by the same
principles. But then does not the good Doctor's conclusion recur,--That
we have nothing to do, but to chuse what is right; to be steady in the
pursuit of it; and to leave the issue to Providence?

This, if you approve of my motives, (and if you don't, pray inform me)
must be my aim in the present case.

But what then can I plead for a palliation to myself of my mother's
sufferings on my account? Perhaps this consideration will carry some
force with it--That her difficulties cannot last long; only till
this great struggle shall be one way or other determined--Whereas my
unhappiness, if I comply, will (from an aversion not to be overcome) be
for life. To which let me add, That as I have reason to think that the
present measures are not entered upon with her own natural liking, she
will have the less pain, should they want the success which I think in
my heart they ought to want.

I have run a great length in a very little time. The subject touched me
to the quick. My reflections upon it will give you reason to expect from
me a perhaps too steady behaviour in a new conference, which, I find, I
must have with my mother. My father and brother, as she was pleased
to tell me, dine at my uncle Antony's; and that, as I have reason to
believe, on purpose to give an opportunity for it.

Hannah informs me, that she heard my father high and angry with my
mother, at taking leave of her: I suppose for being to favourable to me;
for Hannah heard her say, as in tears, 'Indeed, Mr. Harlowe, you greatly
distress me!--The poor girl does not deserve--' Hannah heard no more,
but that he said, he would break somebody's heart--Mine, I suppose--Not
my mother's, I hope.

As only my sister dines with my mother, I thought I should have been
commanded down: but she sent me up a plate from her table. I continued
my writing. I could not touch a morsel. I ordered Hannah however to eat
of it, that I might not be thought sullen.

Before I conclude this, I will see whether any thing offers from either
of my private correspondencies, that will make it proper to add to it;
and will take a turn in the wood-yard and garden for that purpose.


***


I am stopped. Hannah shall deposit this. She was ordered by my mother
(who asked where I was) to tell me, that she would come up and talk with
me in my own closet.--She is coming! Adieu, my dear.




LETTER XX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. AFTERNOON.


The expected conference is over: but my difficulties are increased.
This, as my mother was pleased to tell me, being the last persuasory
effort that is to be attempted, I will be particular in the account of
it as my head and my heart will allow it to be.

I have made, said she, as she entered my room, a short as well as early
dinner, on purpose to confer with you: and I do assure you, that it will
be the last conference I shall either be permitted or inclined to hold
with you on the subject, if you should prove as refractory as it is
imagined you will prove by some, who are of opinion, that I have not
the weight with you which my indulgence deserves. But I hope you will
convince as well them as me of the contrary.

Your father both dines and sups at your uncle's, on purpose to give
us this opportunity; and, according to the report I shall make on his
return, (which I have promised shall be a very faithful one,) he will
take his measures with you.

I was offering to speak--Hear, Clarissa, what I have to tell you, said
she, before you speak, unless what you have to say will signify to me
your compliance--Say--Will it?--If it will, you may speak.

I was silent.

She looked with concern and anger upon me--No compliance, I find!--Such
a dutiful young creature hitherto!--Will you not, can you not, speak as
I would have you speak?--Then [rejecting me as it were with her hand]
continue silent.--I, no more than your father, will bear your avowed
contradiction.

She paused, with a look of expectation, as if she waited for my
consenting answer.

I was still silent; looking down; the tears in my eyes.

O thou determined girl!--But say--Speak out--Are you resolved to stand
in opposition to us all, in a point our hearts are set upon?

May I, Madam, be permitted to expostulate?--

To what purpose expostulate with me, Clarissa? Your father is
determined. Have I not told you there is no receding; that the honour as
well as the interest of the family is concerned? Be ingenuous: you used
to be so, even occasionally against yourself:--Who at the long run must
submit--all of us to you; or you to all of us?--If you intend to yield
at last if you find you cannot conquer, yield now, and with a grace--for
yield you must, or be none of our child.

I wept. I knew not what to say; or rather how to express what I had to
say.

Take notice, that there are flaws in your grandfather's will: not
a shilling of that estate will be yours, if you do not yield. Your
grandfather left it to you, as a reward of your duty to him and to
us--You will justly forfeit it, if--

Permit me, good Madam, to say, that, if it were unjustly bequeathed me,
I ought not to wish to have it. But I hope Mr. Solmes will be apprised
of these flaws.

This is very pertly said, Clarissa: but reflect, that the forfeiture of
that estate, through your opposition, will be attended with the total
loss of your father's favour: and then how destitute must you be; how
unable to support yourself; and how many benevolent designs and good
actions must you give up!

I must accommodate myself, Madam, in the latter case, to my
circumstance: much only is required where much is given. It becomes me
to be thankful for what I have had. I have reason to bless you, Madam,
and my good Mrs. Norton, for bringing me up to be satisfied with little;
with much less, I will venture to say, than my father's indulgence
annually confers upon me.--And then I thought of the old Roman and his
lentils.

What perverseness! said my mother.--But if you depend upon the favour of
either or both of your uncles, vain will be that dependence: they
will give you up, I do assure you, if your father does, and absolutely
renounce you.

I am sorry, Madam, that I have had so little merit as to have made no
deeper impressions of favour for me in their hearts: but I will love and
honour them as long as I live.

All this, Clarissa, makes your prepossession in a certain man's favour
the more evident. Indeed, your brother and sister cannot go any where,
but they hear of these prepossessions.

It is a great grief to me, Madam, to be made the subject of the public
talk: but I hope you will have the goodness to excuse me for observing,
that the authors of my disgrace within doors, the talkers of my
prepossession without, and the reporters of it from abroad, are
originally the same persons.

She severely chid me for this.

I received her rebukes in silence.

You are sullen, Clarissa: I see you are sullen.--And she walked about
the room in anger. Then turning to me--You can bear the imputation of
sullenness I see!--You have no concern to clear yourself of it. I was
afraid of telling you all I was enjoined to tell you, in case you were
to be unpersuadable: but I find that I had a greater opinion of
your delicacy, of your gentleness, than I needed to have--it cannot
discompose so steady, so inflexible a young creature, to be told, as I
now tell you, that the settlements are actually drawn; and that you will
be called down in a very few days to hear them read, and to sign them:
for it is impossible, if your heart be free, that you can make the least
objection to them; except it will be an objection with you, that they
are so much in your favour, and in the favour of all our family.

I was speechless, absolutely speechless. Although my heart was ready to
burst, yet could I neither weep nor speak.

I am sorry, said she, for your averseness to this match: [match she was
pleased to call it!] but there is no help. The honour and interest
of the family, as your aunt has told you, and as I have told you, are
concerned; and you must comply.

I was still speechless.

She folded the warm statue, as she was pleased to call me, in her arms;
and entreated me, for heaven's sake, to comply.

Speech and tears were lent me at the same time.--You have given me life,
Madam, said I, clasping my uplifted hands together, and falling on one
knee; a happy one, till now, has your goodness, and my papa's, made it!
O do not, do not, make all the remainder of it miserable!

Your father, replied she, is resolved not to see you, till he sees you
as obedient a child as you used to be. You have never been put to a test
till now, that deserved to be called a test. This is, this must be,
my last effort with you. Give me hope, my dear child: my peace is
concerned: I will compound with you but for hope: and yet your
father will not be satisfied without an implicit, and even a cheerful
obedience--Give me but hope, child!

To give you hope, my dearest, my most indulgent Mamma, is to give you
every thing. Can I be honest, if I give a hope that I cannot confirm?

She was very angry. She again called me perverse: she upbraided me with
regarding only my own prepossessions, and respecting not either her
peace of mind or my own duty:--'It is a grating thing, said she, for the
parents of a child, who delighted in her in all the time of her helpless
infancy, and throughout every stage of her childhood; and in every
part of her education to womanhood, because of the promises she gave of
proving the most grateful and dutiful of children; to find, just when
the time arrived which should crown their wishes, that child stand in
the way of her own happiness, and her parents' comfort,and, refusing an
excellent offer and noble settlements, give suspicions to her anxious
friends, that she would become the property of a vile rake and
libertine, who (be the occasion what it will) defies her family, and has
actually embrued his hands in her brother's blood.

'I have had a very hard time of it, said she, between your father and
you; for, seeing your dislike, I have more than once pleaded for you:
but all to no purpose. I am only treated as a too fond mother, who,
from motives of a blamable indulgence, encourage a child to stand in
opposition to a father's will. I am charged with dividing the family
into two parts; I and my youngest daughter standing against my husband,
his two brothers, my son, my eldest daughter, and my sister Hervey.
I have been told, that I must be convinced of the fitness as well
as advantage to the whole (your brother and Mr. Lovelace out of the
question) of carrying the contract with Mr. Solmes, on which so many
contracts depend, into execution.

'Your father's heart, I tell you once more, is in it: he has declared,
that he had rather have no daughter in you, than one he cannot dispose
of for your own good: especially if you have owned, that your heart is
free; and as the general good of his whole family is to be promoted
by your obedience. He has pleaded, poor man! that his frequent gouty
paroxysms (every fit more threatening than the former) give him no
extraordinary prospects, either of worldly happiness, or of long days:
and he hopes, that you, who have been supposed to have contributed
to the lengthening of your grandfather's life, will not, by your
disobedience, shorten your father's.'

This was a most affecting plea, my dear. I wept in silence upon it. I
could not speak to it. And my mother proceeded: 'What therefore can be
his motives, Clary Harlowe, in the earnest desire he has to see this
treaty perfected, but the welfare and aggrandizement of his family;
which already having fortunes to become the highest condition, cannot
but aspire to greater distinctions? However slight such views as these
may appear to you, Clary, you know, that they are not slight ones to any
other of the family: and your father will be his own judge of what
is and what is not likely to promote the good of his children. Your
abstractedness, child, (affectation of abstractedness, some call it,)
savours, let me tell you, of greater particularity, than we aim to
carry. Modesty and humility, therefore, will oblige you rather to
mistrust yourself of peculiarity, than censure views which all the world
pursues, as opportunity offers.'

I was still silent; and she proceeded--'It is owing to the good opinion,
Clary, which your father has of you, and of your prudence, duty, and
gratitude, that he engaged for your compliance, in your absence (before
you returned from Miss Howe); and that he built and finished contracts
upon it, which cannot be made void, or cancelled.'

But why then, thought I, did they receive me, on my return from Miss
Howe, with so much intimidating solemnity?--To be sure, my dear, this
argument, as well as the rest, was obtruded upon my mother.

She went on, 'Your father has declared, that your unexpected opposition,
[unexpected she was pleased to call it,] and Mr. Lovelace's continued
menaces and insults, more and more convince him, that a short day is
necessary in order to put an end to all that man's hopes, and to his own
apprehensions resulting from the disobedience of a child so favoured. He
has therefore actually ordered patterns of the richest silks to be sent
for from London--'

I started--I was out of breath--I gasped, at this frightful
precipitance--I was going to open with warmth against it. I knew whose
the happy expedient must be: female minds, I once heard my brother say,
that could but be brought to balance on the change of their state,
might easily be determined by the glare and splendour of the nuptial
preparations, and the pride of becoming the mistress of a family.--But
she was pleased to hurry on, that I might not have time to express
my disgusts at such a communication--to this effect: 'Your father
therefore, my Clary, cannot, either for your sake, or his own, labour
under a suspense so affecting to his repose. He has even thought fit to
acquaint me, on my pleading for you, that it becomes me, as I value my
own peace, [how harsh to such a wife!] and as I wish, that he does not
suspect that I secretly favour the address of a vile rake, (a character
which all the sex, he is pleased to say, virtuous and vicious, are but
too fond of!) to exert my authority over you: and that this I may the
less scrupulously do, as you have owned [the old string!] that your
heart is free.'

Unworthy reflection in my mother's case, surely, this of our sex's
valuing a libertine; since she made choice of my father in preference
to several suitors of equal fortune, because they were of inferior
reputation for morals!

'Your father, added she, at his going out, told me what he expected
from me, in case I found out that I had not the requisite influence upon
you--It was this--That I should directly separate myself from you, and
leave you singly to take the consequence of your double disobedience--I
therefore entreat you, my dear Clarissa, concluded she, and that in the
most earnest and condescending manner, to signify to your father, on his
return, your ready obedience; and this as well for my sake as your own.'

Affected by my mother's goodness to me, and by that part of her argument
which related to her own peace, and to the suspicions they had of her
secretly inclining to prefer the man so hated by them, to the man so
much my aversion, I could not but wish it were possible for me to obey,
I therefore paused, hesitated, considered, and was silent for some time.
I could see, that my mother hoped that the result of this hesitation
would be favourable to her arguments. But then recollecting, that all
was owing to the instigations of a brother and sister, wholly actuated
by selfish and envious views; that I had not deserved the treatment I
had of late met with; that my disgrace was already become the public
talk; that the man was Mr. Solmes; and that my aversion to him was too
generally known, to make my compliance either creditable to myself or
to them: that it would give my brother and sister a triumph over me,
and over Mr. Lovelace, which they would not fail to glory in; and which,
although it concerned me but little to regard on his account, yet might
be attended with fatal mischiefs--And then Mr. Solmes's
disagreeable person; his still more disagreeable manners; his low
understanding--Understanding! the glory of a man, so little to be
dispensed with in the head and director of a family, in order to
preserve to him that respect which a good wife (and that for the
justification of her own choice) should pay him herself, and wish every
body to pay him.--And as Mr. Solmes's inferiority in this respectable
faculty of the human mind [I must be allowed to say this to you, and no
great self assumption neither] would proclaim to all future, as well as
to all present observers, what must have been my mean inducement. All
these reflections crowding upon my remembrance; I would, Madam, said
I, folding my hands, with an earnestness in which my whole heart was
engaged, bear the cruelest tortures, bear loss of limb, and even of
life, to give you peace. But this man, every moment I would, at you
command, think of him with favour, is the more my aversion. You cannot,
indeed you cannot, think, how my whole soul resists him!--And to talk
of contracts concluded upon; of patterns; of a short day!--Save me,
save me, O my dearest Mamma, save your child, from this heavy, from this
insupportable evil--!

Never was there a countenance that expressed so significantly, as my
mother's did, an anguish, which she struggled to hide, under an anger
she was compelled to assume--till the latter overcoming the former, she
turned from me with an uplifted eye, and stamping--Strange perverseness!
were the only words I heard of a sentence that she angrily pronounced;
and was going. I then, half-frantically I believe, laid hold of her
gown--Have patience with me, dearest Madam! said I--Do not you renounce
me totally!--If you must separate yourself from your child, let it
not be with absolute reprobation on your own part!--My uncles may be
hard-hearted--my father may be immovable--I may suffer from my brother's
ambition, and from my sister's envy!--But let me not lose my Mamma's
love; at least, her pity.

She turned to me with benigner rays--You have my love! You have my pity!
But, O my dearest girl--I have not yours.

Indeed, indeed, Madam, you have: and all my reverence, all my gratitude,
you have!--But in this one point--Cannot I be this once obliged?--Will
no expedient be accepted? Have I not made a very fair proposal as to Mr.
Lovelace?

I wish, for both our sakes, my dear unpersuadable girl, that the
decision of this point lay with me. But why, when you know it does not,
why should you thus perplex and urge me?--To renounce Mr. Lovelace is
now but half what is aimed at. Nor will any body else believe you in
earnest in the offer, if I would. While you remain single, Mr. Lovelace
will have hopes--and you, in the opinion of others, inclinations.

Permit me, dearest Madam, to say, that your goodness to me, your
patience, your peace, weigh more with me, than all the rest put
together: for although I am to be treated by my brother, and, through
his instigations, by my father, as a slave in this point, and not as a
daughter, yet my mind is not that of a slave. You have not brought me up
to be mean.

So, Clary! you are already at defiance with your father! I have had too
much cause before to apprehend as much--What will this come to?--I, and
then my dear mamma sighed--I, am forced to put up with many humours--

That you are, my ever-honoured Mamma, is my grief. And can it be
thought, that this very consideration, and the apprehension of what may
result from a much worse-tempered man, (a man who has not half the sense
of my father,) has not made an impression upon me, to the disadvantage
of the married life? Yet 'tis something of an alleviation, if one must
bear undue controul, to bear it from a man of sense. My father, I
have heard you say, Madam, was for years a very good-humoured
gentleman--unobjectionable in person and manners--but the man proposed
to me--

Forbear reflecting upon your father: [Did I, my dear, in what I have
repeated, and I think they are the very words, reflect upon my father?]
it is not possible, I must say again, and again, were all men equally
indifferent to you, that you should be thus sturdy in your will. I am
tired out with your obstinacy--The most unpersuadable girl--You forget,
that I must separate myself from you, if you will not comply. You do not
remember that you father will take you up, where I leave you. Once
more, however, I will put it to you,--Are you determined to brave your
father's displeasure?--Are you determined to defy your uncles?--Do you
choose to break with us all, rather than encourage Mr. Solmes?--Rather
than give me hope?

Dreadful alternative--But is not my sincerity, is not the integrity of
my heart, concerned in the answer? May not my everlasting happiness
be the sacrifice? Will not the least shadow of the hope you just now
demanded from me, be driven into absolute and sudden certainty? Is it
not sought to ensnare, to entangle me in my own desire of obeying, if
I could give answers that might be construed into hope?--Forgive
me, Madam: bear with your child's boldness in such a cause as
this!--Settlements drawn!--Patterns sent for!--An early day!--Dear, dear
Madam, how can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's?

Ah, girl, never say your heart is free! You deceive yourself if you
think it is.

Thus to be driven [and I wrung my hands through impatience] by the
instigations of a designing, an ambitious brother, and by a sister,
that--

How often, Clary, must I forbid your unsisterly reflections?--Does not
your father, do not your uncles, does not every body, patronize
Mr. Solmes? And let me tell you, ungrateful girl, and unmovable as
ungrateful, let me repeatedly tell you, that it is evident to me, that
nothing but a love unworthy of your prudence can make you a creature
late so dutiful, now so sturdy. You may guess what your father's first
question on his return will be. He must know, that I can do nothing with
you. I have done my part. Seek me, if your mind change before he comes
back: you have yet a little more time, as he stays supper. I will no
more seek you, nor to you.--And away she flung.

What could I do but weep?

I am extremely affected on my mother's account--more, I must needs say,
than on my own. And indeed, all things considered, and especially, that
the measure she is engaged in, is (as I dare say it is) against her own
judgment, she deserves more compassion than myself.--Excellent woman!
What pity, that meekness and condescension should not be attended with
the due rewards of those charming graces!--Yet had she not let violent
spirits (as I have elsewhere observed with no small regret) find their
power over hers, it could not have been thus.

But here, run away with my pen, I suffer my mother to be angry with me
on her own account. She hinted to me, indeed, that I must seek her, if
my mind changed; which is a condition that amounts to a prohibition of
attending her: but, as she left me in displeasure, will it not have a
very obstinate appearance, and look like a kind of renunciation of her
mediation in my favour, if I go not down before my father returns, to
supplicate her pity, and her kind report to him?

I will attend her. I had rather all the world should be angry with me
than my mamma!

Mean time, to clear my hands from papers of such a nature, Hannah shall
deposit this. If two or three letters reach you together, they will but
express from one period to another, the anxieties and difficulties which
the mind of your unhappy but ever affectionate friend labours under.

CL. H.




LETTER XXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. NIGHT.


I have been down. I am to be unlucky in all I do, I think, be my
intentions ever so good. I have made matters worse instead of better: as
I shall now tell you.

I found my mother and sister together in my sister's parlour. My mother,
I fear, by the glow of her fine face, (and as the browner, sullener glow
in her sister's confirmed,) had been expressing herself with warmth,
against her unhappier child: perhaps giving such an account of what had
passed, as should clear herself, and convince Bella, and, through her,
my brother and uncles, of the sincere pains she had taken with me.

I entered like a dejected criminal; and besought the favour of a private
audience. My mother's return, both looks and words, gave but too much
reason for my above surmise.

You have, said she [looking at me with a sternness that never sits well
on her sweet features] rather a requesting than a conceding countenance,
Clarissa Harlowe: if I am mistaken, tell me so; and I will withdraw with
you wherever you will.--Yet whether so, or not, you may say what you
have to say before your sister.

My mother, I thought, might have withdrawn with me, as she knows that I
have not a friend in my sister.

I come down, Madam, said I, to beg of you to forgive me for any thing
you may have taken amiss in what passed above respecting your honoured
self; and that you will be pleased to use your endeavours to soften my
papa's displeasure against me, on his return.

Such aggravating looks; such lifting up of hands and eyes; such a
furrowed forehead, in my sister!

My mother was angry enough without all that; and asked me to what
purpose I came down, if I were still so intractable.

She had hardly spoken the words, when Shorey came in to tell her, that
Mr. Solmes was in the hall, and desired admittance.

Ugly creature! What, at the close of day, quite dark, brought him
hither?--But, on second thoughts, I believe it was contrived, that he
should be here at supper, to know the result of the conference between
my mother and me, and that my father, on his return, might find us
together.

I was hurrying away, but my mother commanded me (since I had come down
only, as she said, to mock her) not to stir; and at the same time see
if I could behave so to Mr. Solmes, as might encourage her to make the
favourable report to my father which I had besought her to make.

My sister triumphed. I was vexed to be so caught, and to have such an
angry and cutting rebuke given me, with an aspect much more like the
taunting sister than the indulgent mother, if I may presume to say so:
for she herself seemed to enjoy the surprise upon me.

The man stalked in. His usual walk is by pauses, as if (from the same
vacuity of thought which made Dryden's clown whistle) he was telling
his steps: and first paid his clumsy respects to my mother; then to my
sister; next to me, as if I was already his wife, and therefore to be
last in his notice; and sitting down by me, told us in general what
weather it was. Very cold he made it; but I was warm enough. Then
addressing himself to me: And how do you find it, Miss? was his
question; and would have taken my hand.

I withdrew it, I believe with disdain enough. My mother frowned. My
sister bit her lip.

I could not contain myself: I was never so bold in my life; for I went
on with my plea, as if Mr. Solmes had not been there.

My mother coloured, and looked at him, at my sister, and at me. My
sister's eyes were opener and bigger than ever I saw them before.

The man understood me. He hemmed, and removed from one chair to another.

I went on, supplicating for my mother's favourable report: Nothing but
invincible dislike, said I--

What would the girl be at, interrupted my mother? Why, Clary! Is this a
subject!--Is this!--Is this!--Is this a time--And again she looked upon
Mr. Solmes.

I am sorry, on reflection, that I put my mamma into so much
confusion--To be sure it was very saucy in me.

I beg pardon, Madam, said I. But my papa will soon return. And since
I am not permitted to withdraw, it is not necessary, I humbly presume,
that Mr. Solmes's presence should deprive me of this opportunity to
implore your favourable report; and at the same time, if he still visit
on my account [looking at him] to convince him, that it cannot possibly
be to any purpose--

Is the girl mad? said my mother, interrupting me.

My sister, with the affectation of a whisper to my mother--This is--This
is spite, Madam, [very spitefully she spoke the word,] because you
commanded her to stay.

I only looked at her, and turning to my mother, Permit me, Madam, said
I, to repeat my request. I have no brother, no sister!--If I ever lose
my mamma's favour, I am lost for ever!

Mr. Solmes removed to his first seat, and fell to gnawing the head of
his hazel; a carved head, almost as ugly as his own--I did not think the
man was so sensible.

My sister rose, with a face all over scarlet; and stepping to the table,
where lay a fan, she took it up, and, although Mr. Solmes had observed
that the weather was cold, fanned herself very violently.

My mother came to me, and angrily taking my hand, led me out of that
parlour into my own; which, you know, is next to it--Is not this
behaviour very bold, very provoking, think you, Clary?

I beg your pardon, Madam, if it has that appearance to you. But indeed,
my dear Mamma, there seem to be snares laying in wait for me. Too well
I know my brother's drift. With a good word he shall have my consent for
all he wishes to worm me out of--neither he, nor my sister, shall need
to take half this pains--

My mother was about to leave me in high displeasure.

I besought her to stay: One favour, but one favour, dearest Madam, said
I, give me leave to beg of you--

What would the girl?

I see how every thing is working about.--I never, never can think of Mr.
Solmes. My papa will be in tumults when he is told that I cannot. They
will judge of the tenderness of your heart to a poor child who seems
devoted by every one else, from the willingness you have already shewn
to hearken to my prayers. There will be endeavours used to confine me,
and keep me out of your presence, and out of the presence of every one
who used to love me [this, my dear Miss Howe, is threatened]. If this
be effected; if it be put out of my power to plead my own cause, and to
appeal to you, and to my uncle Harlowe, of whom only I have hope; then
will every ear be opened against me, and every tale encouraged--It
is, therefore, my humble request, that, added to the disgraceful
prohibitions I now suffer under, you will not, if you can help it, give
way to my being denied your ear.

Your listening Hannah has given you this intelligence, as she does many
others.

My Hannah, Madam, listens not--My Hannah--

No more in Hannah's behalf--Hannah is known to make mischief--Hannah
is known--But no more of that bold intermeddler--'Tis true your father
threatened to confine you to your chamber, if you complied not, in order
the more assuredly to deprive you of the opportunity of corresponding
with those who harden your heart against his will. He bid me tell you
so, when he went out, if I found you refractory. But I was loth to
deliver so harsh a declaration; being still in hope that you would come
down to us in a compliant temper. Hannah has overheard this, I suppose;
and has told you of it; as also, that he declared he would break your
heart, rather than you should break his. And I now assure you, that you
will be confined, and prohibited making teasing appeals to any of us:
and we shall see who is to submit, you to us, or every body to you.

Again I offered to clear Hannah, and to lay the latter part of the
intelligence to my sister's echo, Betty Barnes, who had boasted of it to
another servant: but I was again bid to be silent on that head. I
should soon find, my mother was pleased to say, that others could be as
determined as I was obstinate: and once for all would add, that since
she saw that I built upon her indulgence, and was indifferent about
involving her in contentions with my father, she would now assure me,
that she was as much determined against Mr. Lovelace, and for Mr. Solmes
and the family schemes, as any body; and would not refuse her consent to
any measures that should be thought necessary to reduce a stubborn child
to her duty.

I was ready to sink. She was so good as to lend me her arm to support
me.

And this, said I, is all I have to hope for from my Mamma?

It is. But, Clary, this one further opportunity I give you--Go in again
to Mr. Solmes, and behave discreetly to him; and let your father find
you together, upon civil terms at least.

My feet moved [of themselves, I think] farther from the parlour where he
was, and towards the stairs; and there I stopped and paused.

If, proceeded she, you are determined to stand in defiance of us
all--then indeed you may go up to your chamber (as you are ready to
do)--And God help you!

God help me, indeed! for I cannot give hope of what I cannot intend--But
let me have your prayers, my dear Mamma!--Those shall have mine, who
have brought me into all this distress.

I was moving to go up--

And will you go up, Clary?

I turned my face to her: my officious tears would needs plead for me: I
could not just then speak, and stood still.

Good girl, distress me not thus!--Dear, good girl, do not thus distress
me! holding out her hand; but standing still likewise.

What can I do, Madam?--What can I do?

Go in again, my child--Go in again, my dear child!--repeated she; and
let your father find you together.

What, Madam, to give him hope?--To give hope to Mr. Solmes?

Obstinate, perverse, undutiful Clarissa! with a rejecting hand, and
angry aspect; then take your own way, and go up!--But stir not down
again, I charge you, without leave, or till your father's pleasure be
known concerning you.

She flung away from me with high indignation: and I went up with a very
heavy heart; and feet as slow as my heart was heavy.


***


My father is come home, and my brother with him. Late as it is, they are
all shut up together. Not a door opens; not a soul stirs. Hannah, as she
moves up and down, is shunned as a person infected.


***


The angry assembly is broken up. My two uncles and my aunt Hervey are
sent for, it seems, to be here in the morning to breakfast. I shall
then, I suppose, know my doom. 'Tis past eleven, and I am ordered not to
go to bed.


TWELVE O'CLOCK.


This moment the keys of every thing are taken from me. It was proposed
to send for me down: but my father said, he could not bear to look upon
me.--Strange alteration in a few weeks!--Shorey was the messenger. The
tears stood in her eyes when she delivered her message.

You, my dear, are happy--May you always be so--and then I can never be
wholly miserable. Adieu, my beloved friend!

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 5.


Hannah has just brought me from the private place in the garden-wall, a
letter from Mr. Lovelace, deposited last night, signed also by Lord M.

He tells me in it, 'That Mr. Solmes makes it his boast, that he is to
be married in a few days to one of the shyest women in England: that my
brother explains his meaning: This shy creature, he says, is me; and
he assures every one, that his younger sister is very soon to be Mr.
Solmes's wife. He tells me of the patterns bespoken which my mother
mentioned to me.'

Not one thing escapes him that is done or said in this house.

'My sister, he says, reports the same things; and that with such
particular aggravations of insult upon him, that he cannot but be
extremely piqued, as well at the manner, as from the occasion; and
expresses himself with great violence upon it.

'He knows not, he says, what my relations' inducements can be to prefer
such a man as Solmes to him. If advantageous settlements be the motive,
Solmes shall not offer what he will refuse to comply with.

'As to his estate and family; the first cannot be excepted against: and
for the second, he will not disgrace himself by a comparison so odious.
He appeals to Lord M. for the regularity of his life and manners ever
since he has made his addresses to me, or had hope of my favour.'

I suppose he would have his Lordship's signing to this letter to be
taken as a voucher for him.

'He desires my leave (in company with my Lord), in a pacific manner,
to attend my father and uncles, in order to make proposals that must be
accepted, if they will see him, and hear what they are: and tells me,
that he will submit to any measures that I shall prescribe, in order to
bring about a reconciliation.'

He presumes to be very earnest with me, 'to give him a private meeting
some night, in my father's garden, attended by whom I please.'

Really, my dear, were you to see his letter, you would think I had given
him great encouragement, and that I am in direct treaty with him; or
that he is sure that my friends will drive me into a foreign protection;
for he has the boldness to offer, in my Lord's name, an asylum to me,
should I be tyrannically treated in Solmes's behalf.

I suppose it is the way of this sex to endeavour to entangle the
thoughtless of ours by bold supposals and offers, in hopes that we shall
be too complaisant or bashful to quarrel with them; and, if not checked,
to reckon upon our silence, as assents voluntarily given, or concessions
made in their favour.

There are other particulars in this letter which I ought to mention to
you: but I will take an opportunity to send you the letter itself, or a
copy of it.

For my own part, I am very uneasy to think how I have been drawn on one
hand, and driven on the other, into a clandestine, in short, into a mere
loverlike correspondence, which my heart condemns.

It is easy to see, if I do not break it off, that Mr. Lovelace's
advantages, by reason of my unhappy situation, will every day increase,
and I shall be more and more entangled. Yet if I do put an end to
it, without making it a condition of being freed from Mr. Solmes's
address--May I, my dear, is it best to continue it a little longer, in
order to extricate myself out of the other difficulty, by giving up all
thoughts of Mr. Lovelace?--Whose advice can I now ask but yours.

All my relations are met. They are at breakfast together. Mr. Solmes is
expected. I am excessively uneasy. I must lay down my pen.


***


They are all going to church together. Grievously disordered they appear
to be, as Hannah tells me. She believes something is resolved upon.


SUNDAY NOON.


What a cruel thing is suspense!--I will ask leave to go to church this
afternoon. I expect to be denied. But, if I do not ask, they may allege,
that my not going is owing to myself.


***


I desired to speak with Shorey. Shorey came. I directed her to carry to
my mother my request for permission to go to church this afternoon. What
think you was the return? Tell her, that she must direct herself to
her brother for any favour she has to ask.--So, my dear, I am to be
delivered up to my brother!

I was resolved, however, to ask of him this favour. Accordingly, when
they sent me up my solitary dinner, I gave the messenger a billet,
in which I made it my humble request through him to my father, to be
permitted to go to church this afternoon.

This was the contemptuous answer: 'Tell her, that her request will be
taken into consideration to-morrow.'

Patience will be the fittest return I can make to such an insult. But
this method will not do with me; indeed it will not! And yet it is but
the beginning, I suppose, of what I am to expect from my brother, now I
am delivered up to him.



On recollection, I thought it best to renew my request. I did. The
following is a copy of what I wrote, and what follows that, of the
answer sent me.


SIR,

I know not what to make of the answer brought to my request of being
permitted to go to church this afternoon. If you designed to shew your
pleasantry by it, I hope that will continue; and then my request will be
granted.

You know, that I never absented myself, when well, and at home, till the
two last Sundays; when I was advised not to go. My present situation is
such, that I never more wanted the benefit of the public prayers.

I will solemnly engage only to go thither, and back again.

I hope it cannot be thought that I would do otherwise.

My dejection of spirits will give a too just excuse on the score
of indisposition for avoiding visits. Nor will I, but by distant
civilities, return the compliments of any of my acquaintances. My
disgraces, if they are to have an end, need not be proclaimed to the
whole world. I ask this favour, therefore, for my reputation's sake,
that I may be able to hold up my head in the neighbourhood, if I live to
see an end of the unmerited severities which seem to be designed for

Your unhappy sister, CL. HARLOWE.



TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

For a girl to lay so much stress upon going to church, and yet resolve
to defy her parents, in an article of the greatest consequence to them,
and to the whole family, is an absurdity. You are recommended, Miss, to
the practice of your private devotions. May they be efficacious upon the
mind of one of the most pervicacious young creatures that ever was heard
of! The intention is, I tell you plainly, to mortify you into a sense
of your duty. The neighbours you are so solicitous to appear well with,
already know, that you defy that. So, Miss, if you have a real value for
your reputation, shew it as you ought. It is yet in your own power to
establish or impair it.

JA. HARLOWE.



Thus, my dear Miss Howe, has my brother got me into his snares; and I,
like a poor silly bird, the more I struggle, am the more entangled.




LETTER XXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY MORNING, MARCH 6.


They are resolved to break my heart. My poor Hannah is
discharged--disgracefully discharged!--Thus it was.

Within half an hour after I had sent the poor girl down for my
breakfast, that bold creature Betty Barnes, my sister's confidant and
servant, (if a favourite maid and confidant can be deemed a servant,)
came up.

What, Miss, will you please to have for breakfast?

I was surprised. What will I have for breakfast,
Betty!--How!--What!--How comes it!--Then I named Hannah. I could not
tell what to say.

Don't be surprised, Miss:--but you'll see Hannah no more in this house.

God forbid!--Is any harm come to Hannah?--What! What is the matter with
Hannah?

Why, Miss, the short and the long is this: Your papa and mamma think
Hannah has staid long enough in the house to do mischief; and so she
is ordered to troop [that was the confident creature's word]; and I am
directed to wait upon you in her stead.

I burst into tears. I have no service for you, Betty Barnes; none at
all. But where is Hannah? Cannot I speak with the poor girl? I owe her
half a year's wages. May I not see the honest creature, and pay her her
wages? I may never see her again perhaps; for they are resolved to break
my heart.

And they think you are resolved to break theirs: so tit for tat, Miss.

Impertinent I called her; and asked her, if it were upon such confident
terms that her service was to begin.

I was so very earnest to see the poor maid, that (to oblige me, as she
said) she went down with my request.

The worthy creature was as earnest to see me; and the favour was granted
in presence of Shorey and Betty.

I thanked her, when she came up, for her past service to me.

Her heart was ready to break. And she began to vindicate her fidelity
and love; and disclaimed any mischief she had ever made.

I told her, that those who occasioned her being turned out of my
service, made no question of her integrity: that her dismission was
intended for an indignity to me: that I was very sorry to be obliged to
part with her, and hoped she would meet with as good a service.

Never, never, wringing her hands, should she meet with a mistress
she loved so well. And the poor creature ran on in my praises, and in
professions of love to me.

We are all apt, you know, my dear, to praise our benefactors, because
they are our benefactors; as if every body did right or wrong, as they
obliged or disobliged us. But this good creature deserved to be kindly
treated; so I could have no merit in favouring one whom it would have
been ungrateful not to distinguish.

I gave her a little linen, some laces, and other odd things; and instead
of four pounds which were due to her, ten guineas: and said, if ever I
were again allowed to be my own mistress, I would think of her in the
first place.

Betty enviously whispered Shorey upon it.

Hannah told me, before their faces, having no other opportunity, that
she had been examined about letters to me, and from me: and that she
had given her pockets to Miss Harlowe, who looked into them, and put her
fingers in her stays, to satisfy herself that she had not any.

She gave me an account of the number of my pheasants and bantams; and I
said, they should be my own care twice or thrice a day.

We wept over each other at parting. The girl prayed for all the family.

To have so good a servant so disgracefully dismissed, is very cruel: and
I could not help saying that these methods might break my heart, but not
any other way answer the end of the authors of my disgraces.

Betty, with a very saucy fleer, said to Shorey, There would be a trial
of skill about that she fancied. But I took no notice of it. If this
wench thinks that I have robbed her young mistress of a lover, as you
say she has given out, she may believe that it is some degree of merit
in herself to be impertinent to me.

Thus have I been forced to part with my faithful Hannah. If you can
command the good creature to a place worthy of her, pray do for my sake.




LETTER XXIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY, NEAR 12 O'CLOCK.


The enclosed letter was just now delivered to me. My brother has carried
all his points.

I send you also the copy of my answer. No more at this time can I
write--!



MONDAY, MAR. 6.

MISS CLARY,


By command of your father and mother I write expressly to forbid you to
come into their presence, or into the garden when they are there: nor
when they are not there, but with Betty Banes to attend you; except by
particular license or command.

On their blessings, you are forbidden likewise to correspond with the
vile Lovelace; as it is well known you did by means of your sly Hannah.
Whence her sudden discharge. As was fit.

Neither are you to correspond with Miss Howe; who has given herself high
airs of late; and might possibly help on your correspondence with that
detested libertine. Nor, in short, with any body without leave.

You are not to enter into the presence of either of your uncles, without
their leave first obtained. It is a mercy to you, after such a behaviour
to your mother, that your father refuses to see you.

You are not to be seen in any apartment of the house you so lately
governed as you pleased, unless you are commanded down.

In short, you are strictly to confine yourself to your chamber, except
now and then, in Betty Barnes's sight (as aforesaid) you take a morning
or evening turn in the garden: and then you are to go directly, and
without stopping at any apartment in the way, up or down the back
stairs, that the sight of so perverse a young creature may not add to
the pain you have given every body.

The hourly threatenings of your fine fellow, as well as your own
unheard-of obstinacy, will account to you for all this. What a hand has
the best and most indulgent of mothers had with you, who so long pleaded
for you, and undertook for you; even when others, from the manner of
your setting out, despaired of moving you!--What must your perverseness
have been, that such a mother can give you up! She thinks it right so to
do: nor will take you to favour, unless you make the first steps, by a
compliance with your duty.

As for myself, whom perhaps you think hardly of [in very good company,
if you do, that is my sole consolation]; I have advised, that you may be
permitted to pursue your own inclinations, (some people need no greater
punishment than such a permission,) and not to have the house encumbered
by one who must give them the more pain for the necessity she has laid
them under of avoiding the sight of her, although in it.

If any thing I have written appear severe or harsh, it is still in your
power (but perhaps will not always be so) to remedy it; and that by a
single word.

Betty Barnes has orders to obey you in all points consistent with her
duty to those whom you owe it, as well as she.

JA. HARLOWE.



TO JAMES HARLOWE, JUNIOR, ESQ.

SIR,

I will only say, That you may congratulate yourself on having so far
succeeded in all your views, that you may report what you please of me,
and I can no more defend myself, than if I were dead. Yet one favour,
nevertheless, I will beg of you. It is this--That you will not occasion
more severities, more disgraces, that are necessary for carrying into
execution your further designs, whatever they be, against

Your unhappy sister, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 7.


By my last deposit, you will see how I am driven, and what a poor
prisoner I am.--No regard had to my reputation. The whole matter is now
before you. Can such measures be supposed to soften?--But surely they
can only mean to try and frighten me into my brother's views!--All my
hope is, to be able to weather this point till my cousin Morden comes
from Florence; and he is soon expected: yet, if they are determined upon
a short day, I doubt he will not be here in time enough to save me.

It is plain by my brother's letter, that my mother has not spared me, in
the report she was pleased to make of the conference between herself and
me: yet she was pleased to hint to me, that my brother had views which
she would have had me try to disappoint. But indeed she had engaged to
give a faithful account of what was to pass between herself and me: and
it was, doubtless, much more eligible to give up a daughter, than to
disoblige a husband, and every other person of the family.

They think they have done every thing by turning away my poor Hannah:
but as long as the liberty of the garden, and my poultry-visits, are
allowed me, they will be mistaken.

I asked Mrs. Betty, if she had any orders to watch or attend me; or
whether I was to ask her leave whenever I should be disposed to walk in
the garden, or to go feed my bantams?--Lord bless her! what could I mean
by such a question! Yet she owned, that she had heard, that I was not to
go into the garden, when my father, mother, or uncles were there.

However, as it behoved me to be assured on this head, I went down
directly, and staid an hour, without question or impediment; and yet a
good part of the time, I walked under and in sight, as I may say, of my
brother's study window, where both he and my sister happened to be.
And I am sure they saw me, by the loud mirth they affected, by way of
insult, as I suppose.

So this part of my restraint was doubtless a stretch of the authority
given him. The enforcing of that may perhaps come next. But I hope not.


TUESDAY NIGHT.


Since I wrote the above, I ventured to send a letter by Shorey to my
mother. I desired her to give it into her own hand, when nobody was by.

I shall enclose a copy of it. You will see that I would have it thought,
that now Hannah is gone, I have no way to correspond out of the house. I
am far from thinking all I do right. I am afraid this is a little piece
of art, that is not so. But this is an afterthought. The letter went
first.


HONOURED MADAM,

Having acknowledged to you, that I had received letters from Mr.
Lovelace full of resentment, and that I answered them purely to prevent
further mischief, and having shewn you copies of my answers, which you
did not disapprove of, although you thought fit, after you had read
them, to forbid me any further correspondence with him, I think it my
duty to acquaint you, that another letter from him has since come to my
hand, in which he is very earnest with me to permit him to wait on my
papa, or you, or my two uncles, in a pacific way, accompanied by Lord
M.: on which I beg your commands.

I own to you, Madam, that had not the prohibition been renewed, and had
not Hannah been so suddenly dismissed my service, I should have made
the less scruple to have written an answer, and to have commanded her
to convey it to him, with all speed, in order to dissuade him from these
visits, lest any thing should happen on the occasion that my heart aches
but to think of.

And here I cannot but express my grief, that I should have all the
punishment and all the blame, who, as I have reason to think, have
prevented great mischief, and have not been the occasion of any. For,
Madam, could I be supposed to govern the passions of either of the
gentlemen?--Over the one indeed I have had some little influence,
without giving him hitherto any reason to think he has fastened an
obligation upon me for it.--Over the other, Who, Madam, has any?--I am
grieved at heart, to be obliged to lay so great a blame at my brother's
door, although my reputation and my liberty are both to be sacrificed
to his resentment and ambition. May not, however, so deep a sufferer be
permitted to speak out?

This communication being as voluntarily made, as dutifully intended,
I humbly presume to hope, that I shall not be required to produce the
letter itself. I cannot either in honour or prudence do that, because of
the vehemence of his style; for having heard [not, I assure you, by my
means, or through Hannah's] of some part of the harsh treatment I have
met with; he thinks himself entitled to place it to his own account, by
reason of speeches thrown out by some of my relations, equally vehement.

If I do not answer him, he will be made desperate, and think himself
justified (thought I shall not think him so) in resenting the treatment
he complains of: if I do, and if, in compliment to me, he forbears to
resent what he thinks himself entitled to resent; be pleased, Madam, to
consider the obligation he will suppose he lays me under.

If I were as strongly prepossessed in his favour as is supposed, I
should not have wished this to be considered by you. And permit me, as
a still further proof that I am not prepossessed, to beg of you to
consider, Whether, upon the whole, the proposal I made, of declaring for
the single life (which I will religiously adhere to) is not the best way
to get rid of his pretensions with honour. To renounce him, and not be
allowed to aver, that I will never be the other man's, will make him
conclude (driven as I am driven) that I am determined in that other
man's favour.

If this has not its due weight, my brother's strange schemes must be
tried, and I will resign myself to my destiny with all the acquiescence
that shall be granted to my prayers. And so leaving the whole to your
own wisdom, and whether you choose to consult my papa and uncles upon
this humble application, or not; or whether I shall be allowed to write
an answer to Mr. Lovelace, or not [and if allowed to do so, I beg your
direction by whom to send it]; I remain,

Honoured Madam, Your unhappy, but ever dutiful daughter, CL. HARLOWE.


WEDNESDAY MORNING.


I have just received an answer to the enclosed letter. My mother, you
will observe, has ordered me to burn it: but, as you will have it in
your safekeeping, and nobody else will see it, her end will be equally
answered, as if it were burnt. It has neither date nor superscription.


CLARISSA,

Say not all the blame and all the punishment is yours. I am as much
blamed, and as much punished, as you are; yet am more innocent. When
your obstinacy is equal to any other person's passion, blame not your
brother. We judged right, that Hannah carried on your correspondencies.
Now she is gone, and you cannot write [we think you cannot] to Miss
Howe, nor she to you, without our knowledge, one cause of uneasiness and
jealousy is over.

I had no dislike of Hannah. I did not tell her so; because somebody was
within hearing when she desired to pay her duty to me at going. I gave
her a caution, in a raised voice, To take care, wherever she went to
live next, if there were any young ladies, how she made parties, and
assisted in clandestine correspondencies. But I slid two guineas into
her hand: nor was I angry to hear that you were still more bountiful to
her. So much for Hannah.

I don't know what to write, about your answering that man of violence.
What can you think of it, that such a family as ours, should have such
a rod held over it?--For my part, I have not owned that I know you have
corresponded. By your last boldness to me [an astonishing one it was,
to pursue before Mr. Solmes the subject I was forced to break from
above-stairs!] you may, as far as I know, plead, that you had my
countenance for your correspondence with him; and so add to the
uneasiness between your father and me. You were once my comfort,
Clarissa; you made all my hardships tolerable:--But now!--However,
nothing, it is plain, can move you; and I will say no more on that head:
for you are under your father's discipline now; and he will neither be
prescribed to, nor entreated.

I should have been glad to see the letter you tell me of, as I saw the
rest. You say, both honour and prudence forbid you to shew it to me.--O
Clarissa! what think you of receiving letters that honour and prudence
forbid you to shew to a mother!--But it is not for me to see it, if you
would choose to shew it me. I will not be in your secret. I will not
know that you did correspond. And, as to an answer, take your own
methods. But let him know it will be the last you will write. And, if
you do write, I won't see it: so seal it up (if you do) and give it to
Shorey; and she--Yet do not think I give you license to write.

We will be upon no conditions with him, nor will you be allowed to be
upon any. Your father and uncles would have no patience were he to come.
What have you to do to oblige him with your refusal of Mr. Solmes?--Will
not that refusal be to give him hope? And while he has any, can we be
easy or free from his insults? Were even your brother in fault, as that
fault cannot be conquered, is a sister to carry on a correspondence that
shall endanger her brother? But your father has given his sanction to
your brother's dislikes, your uncles', and every body's!--No matter to
whom owing.

As to the rest, you have by your obstinacy put it out of my power to do
any thing for you. Your father takes it upon himself to be answerable
for all consequences. You must not therefore apply to me for favour.
I shall endeavour to be only an observer: Happy, if I could be an
unconcerned one!--While I had power, you would not let me use it as I
would have used it. Your aunt has been forced to engage not to interfere
but by your father's direction. You'll have severe trials. If you have
any favour to hope for, it must be from the mediation of your uncles.
And yet, I believe, they are equally determined: for they make it a
principle, [alas! they never had children!] that that child, who in
marriage is not governed by her parents, is to be given up as a lost
creature!

I charge you, let not this letter be found. Burn it. There is too much
of the mother in it, to a daughter so unaccountably obstinate.

Write not another letter to me. I can do nothing for you. But you can do
every thing for yourself.


***


Now, my dear, to proceed with my melancholy narrative.

After this letter, you will believe, that I could have very little
hopes, that an application directly to my father would stand me in any
stead: but I thought it became me to write, were it but to acquit myself
to myself, that I have left nothing unattempted that has the least
likelihood to restore me to his favour. Accordingly I wrote to the
following effect:


I presume not, I say, to argue with my Papa; I only beg his mercy and
indulgence in this one point, on which depends my present, and perhaps
my future, happiness; and beseech him not to reprobate his child for an
aversion which it is not in her power to conquer. I beg, that I may not
be sacrificed to projects, and remote contingencies. I complain of the
disgraces I suffer in this banishment from his presence, and in being
confined to my chamber. In every thing but this one point, I promise
implicit duty and resignation to his will. I repeat my offers of a
single life; and appeal to him, whether I have ever given him cause to
doubt my word. I beg to be admitted to his, and to my mamma's, presence,
and that my conduct may be under their own eye: and this with the more
earnestness, as I have too much reason to believe that snares are laid
for me; and tauntings and revilings used on purpose to make a handle of
my words against me, when I am not permitted to speak in my own defence.
I conclude with hoping, that my brother's instigations may not rob an
unhappy child of her father.


***


This is the answer, sent without superscription, and unsealed, although
by Betty Barnes, who delivered it with an air, as if she knew the
contents.


WEDNESDAY.

I write, perverse girl; but with all the indignation that your
disobedience deserves. To desire to be forgiven a fault you own, and
yet resolve to persevere in, is a boldness, no more to be equaled,
than passed over. It is my authority you defy. Your reflections upon a
brother, that is an honour to us all, deserve my utmost resentment. I
see how light all relationship sits upon you. The cause I guess at,
too. I cannot bear the reflections that naturally arise from this
consideration. Your behaviour to your too-indulgent and too-fond
mother----But, I have no patience--Continue banished from my presence,
undutiful as you are, till you know how to conform to my will.
Ingrateful creature! Your letter but upbraid me for my past indulgence.
Write no more to me, till you can distinguish better; and till you are
convinced of your duty to

A JUSTLY INCENSED FATHER.


***


This angry letter was accompanied by one from my mother, unsealed, and
unsuperscribed also. Those who take so much pains to confederate every
one against me, I make no doubt, obliged her to bear her testimony
against the poor girl.

My mother's letter being a repetition of some of the severe things that
passed between herself and me, of which I have already informed you, I
shall not need to give you the contents--only thus far, that she also
praises my brother, and blames me for my freedoms with him.




LETTER XXVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY MORN., MARCH 9.


I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace, although I had not answered his
former.

This man, somehow or other, knows every thing that passes in our family.
My confinement; Hanna's dismission; and more of the resentments and
resolutions of my father, uncles, and brother, than I can possibly know,
and almost as soon as the things happen, which he tells me of. He cannot
come at these intelligencies fairly.

He is excessively uneasy upon what he hears; and his expressions, both
of love to me, and resentment to them, are very fervent. He solicits me,
'To engage my honour to him never to have Mr. Solmes.'

I think I may fairly promise him that I will not.

He begs, 'That I will not think he is endeavouring to make to himself
a merit at any man's expense, since he hopes to obtain my favour on the
foot of his own; nor that he seeks to intimidate me into a consideration
for him. But declares, that the treatment he meets with from my family
is of such a nature, that he is perpetually reproached for not resenting
it; and that as well by Lord M. and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, as by
all his other friends: and if he must have no hope from me, he cannot
answer for what his despair will make him do.'

Indeed, he says, 'his relations, the ladies particularly, advise him to
have recourse to a legal remedy: But how, he asks, can a man of honour
go to law for verbal abuses given by people entitled to wear swords?'

You see, my dear, that my mother seems as apprehensive of mischief as
myself; and has indirectly offered to let Shorey carry my answer to the
letter he sent me before.

He is full of the favours of the ladies of his family to me: to whom,
nevertheless, I am personally a stranger; except, that I once saw Miss
Patty Montague at Mrs. Knolly's.

It is natural, I believe, for a person to be the more desirous of making
new friends, in proportion as she loses the favour of old ones. Yet had
I rather appear amiable in the eyes of my own relations, and in your
eyes, than in those of all the world besides--but these four ladies of
his family have such excellent characters, that one cannot but wish to
be thought well of by them. Cannot there be a way to find out, by Mrs.
Fortescue's means, or by Mr. Hickman, who has some knowledge of Lord M.
[covertly, however,] what their opinions are of the present situation of
things in our family; and of the little likelihood there is, that ever
the alliance once approved of by them, can take effect?

I cannot, for my own part, think so well of myself, as to imagine, that
they can wish their kinsman to persevere in his views with regard to me,
through such contempts and discouragements.--Not that it would concern
me, should they advise him to the contrary. By my Lord's signing Mr.
Lovelace's former letter; by Mr. Lovelace's assurances of the continued
favour of all his relations; and by the report of others; I seem still
to stand high in their favour. But, methinks, I should be glad to have
this confirmed to me, as from themselves, by the lips of an indifferent
person; and the rather, because of their fortunes and family; and take
it amiss (as they have reason) to be included by ours in the contempt
thrown upon their kinsman.

Curiosity at present is all my motive: nor will there ever, I hope, be a
stronger, notwithstanding your questionable throbs--even were the merits
of Mr. Lovelace much greater than they are.


***


I have answered his letters. If he takes me at my word, I shall need to
be less solicitous for the opinions of his relations in my favour: and
yet one would be glad to be well thought of by the worthy.

This is the substance of my letter:

'I express my surprise at his knowing (and so early) all that passes
here.'

I assure him, 'That were there not such a man in the world as himself, I
would not have Mr. Solmes.'

I tell him, 'That to return, as I understand he does, defiances for
defiances, to my relations, is far from being a proof with me, either of
his politeness, or of the consideration he pretends to have for me.

'That the moment I hear he visits any of my friends without their
consent, I will make a resolution never to see him more, if I can help
it.'

I apprize him, 'That I am connived at in sending this letter (although
no one has seen the contents) provided it shall be the last I will ever
write to him: that I had more than once told him, that the single life
was my choice; and this before Mr. Solmes was introduced as a visitor
in our family: that Mr. Wyerley, and other gentlemen, knew it to be my
choice, before himself was acquainted with any of us: that I had never
been induced to receive a line from him on the subject, but that I
thought he had not acted ungenerously by my brother; and yet had not
been so handsomely treated by my friends, as he might have expected:
but that had he even my friends on his side, I should have very great
objections to him, were I to get over my choice of a single life, so
really preferable to me as it is; and that I should have declared as
much to him, had I not regarded him as more than a common visiter. On
all these accounts, I desire, that the one more letter, which I will
allow him to deposit in the usual place, may be the very last; and that
only, to acquaint me with his acquiescence that it shall be so; at least
till happier times.'

This last I put in that he may not be quite desperate. But, if he take
me at my word, I shall be rid of one of my tormentors.

I have promised to lay before you all his letters, and my answers: I
repeat that promise: and am the less solicitous, for that reason, to
amplify upon the contents of either. But I cannot too often express my
vexation, to be driven to such streights and difficulties, here at
home, as oblige me to answer letters, (from a man I had not absolutely
intended to encourage, and to whom I had really great objections,)
filled as his are with such warm protestations, and written to me with a
spirit of expectation.

For, my dear, you never knew so bold a supposer. As commentators find
beauties in an author, to which the author perhaps was a stranger; so he
sometimes compliments me in high strains of gratitude for favours, and
for a consideration, which I never designed him; insomuch that I am
frequently under a necessity of explaining away the attributed goodness
to him, which, if I shewed, I should have the less opinion of myself.

In short, my dear, like a restiff horse, (as I have heard described by
sportsmen,) he pains one's hands, and half disjoints one's arms, to rein
him in. And, when you see his letters, you must form no judgment upon
them, till you have read my answers. If you do, you will indeed think
you have cause to attribute self-deceit, and throbs, and glows, to your
friend: and yet, at other times, the contradictory nature complains,
that I shew him as little favour, and my friends as much inveteracy,
as if, in the rencontre betwixt my brother and him, he had been the
aggressor; and as if the catastrophe had been as fatal, as it might have
been.

If he has a design by this conduct (sometimes complaining of my shyness,
at others exalting in my imaginary favours) to induce me at one time to
acquiesce with his compliments; at another to be more complaisant
for his complaints; and if the contradiction be not the effect of his
inattention and giddiness; I shall think him as deep and as artful (too
probably, as practised) a creature, as ever lived; and were I to be sure
of it, should hate him, if possible, worse than I do Solmes.

But enough for the present of a creature so very various.




LETTER XXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 9.


I have not patience with any of the people you are with. I know not what
to advise you to do. How do you know that you are not punishable
for being the cause, though to your own loss, that the will of your
grandfather is not complied with?--Wills are sacred things, child. You
see, that they, even they, think so, who imagine they suffer by a will,
through the distinction paid you in it.

I allow of all your noble reasonings for what you did at the time: But,
since such a charming, such a generous instance of filial duty is to go
thus unrewarded, why should you not resume?

Your grandfather knew the family-failing. He knew what a noble spirit
you had to do good. He himself, perhaps, [excuse me, my dear,] had done
too little in his life-time; and therefore he put it in your power to
make up for the defects of the whole family. Were it to me, I would
resume it. Indeed I would.

You will say, you cannot do it, while you are with them. I don't know
that. Do you think they can use you worse than they do? And is it not
your right? And do they not make use of your own generosity to oppress
you? Your uncle Harlowe is one trustee; your cousin Morden is the other:
insist upon your right to your uncle; and write to your cousin Morden
about it. This, I dare say, will make them alter their behaviour to you.

Your insolent brother--what has he to do to controul you?--Were it me [I
wish it were for one month, and no more] I'd shew him the difference. I
would be in my own mansion, pursuing my charming schemes, and making all
around me happy. I would set up my own chariot. I would visit them when
they deserved it. But when my brother and sister gave themselves airs,
I would let them know, that I was their sister, and not their servant:
and, if that did not do, I would shut my gates against them; and bid
them go and be company for each other.

It must be confessed, however, that this brother and sister of yours,
judging as such narrow spirits will ever judge, have some reason for
treating you as they do. It must have long been a mortification to
them (set disappointed love on her side, and avarice on his, out of the
question) to be so much eclipsed by a younger sister. Such a sun in a
family, where there are none but faint twinklers, how could they bear
it! Why, my dear, they must look upon you as a prodigy among them: and
prodigies, you know, though they obtain our admiration, never attract
our love. The distance between you and them is immense. Their eyes ache
to look up at you. What shades does your full day of merit cast
upon them! Can you wonder, then, that they should embrace the first
opportunity that offered, to endeavour to bring you down to their level?

Depend upon it, my dear, you will have more of it, and more still, as
you bear it.

As to this odious Solmes, I wonder not at your aversion to him. It is
needless to say any thing to you, who have so sincere any antipathy to
him, to strengthen your dislike: Yet, who can resist her own talents?
One of mine, as I have heretofore said, is to give an ugly likeness.
Shall I indulge it?--I will. And the rather, as, in doing so, you
will have my opinion in justification of your aversion to him, and
in approbation of a steadiness that I ever admired, and must for ever
approve of, in your temper.

'I was twice in this wretch's company. At one of the times your Lovelace
was there. I need not mention to you, who have such a pretty curiosity,
(though at present, only a curiosity, you know,) the unspeakable
difference.

'Lovelace entertained the company in his lively gay way, and made
every body laugh at one of his stories. It was before this creature was
thought of for you. Solmes laughed too. It was, however, his laugh: for
his first three years, at least, I imagine, must have been one continual
fit of crying; and his muscles have never yet been able to recover a
risible tone. His very smile [you never saw him smile, I believe; never
at least gave him cause to smile] is so little natural to his features,
that it appears to him as hideous as the grin of a man in malice.

'I took great notice of him, as I do of all the noble lords of the
creation, in their peculiarities; and was disgusted, nay, shocked at
him, even then. I was glad, I remember, on that particular occasion,
to see his strange features recovering their natural gloominess; though
they did this but slowly, as if the muscles which contributed to his
distortions, had turned upon rusty springs.

'What a dreadful thing must even the love of such a husband be! For my
part, were I his wife! (But what have I done to myself, to make such a
supposition?) I should never have comfort but in his absence, or when
I was quarreling with him. A splenetic woman, who must have somebody to
find fault with, might indeed be brought to endure such a wretch:
the sight of him would always furnish out the occasion, and all her
servants, for that reason, and for that only, would have cause to blame
their master. But how grievous and apprehensive a thing it must be for
his wife, had she the least degree of delicacy, to catch herself in
having done something to oblige him?

'So much for his person. As to the other half of him, he is said to be
an insinuating, creeping mortal to any body he hopes to be a gainer by:
an insolent, overbearing one, where he has no such views: And is not
this the genuine spirit of meanness? He is reported to be spiteful and
malicious, even to the whole family of any single person who has once
disobliged him; and to his own relations most of all. I am told, that
they are none of them such wretches as himself. This may be one reason
why he is for disinheriting them.

'My Kitty, from one of his domestics, tells me, that his tenants hate
him: and that he never had a servant who spoke well of him. Vilely
suspicious of their wronging him (probably from the badness of his own
heart) he is always changing.

'His pockets, they say, are continually crammed with keys: so that, when
he would treat a guest, (a friend he has not out of your family), he is
half as long puzzling which is which, as his niggardly treat might be
concluded in. And if it be wine, he always fetches it himself. Nor has
he much trouble in doing so; for he has very few visiters--only those,
whom business or necessity brings: for a gentleman who can help it,
would rather be benighted, than put up at his house.'

Yet this is the man they have found out (for considerations as sordid as
those he is governed by) for a husband, that is to say, for a lord and
master, for Miss Clarissa Harlowe!

But, perhaps, he may not be quite so miserable as he is represented.
Characters extremely good, or extremely bad, are seldom justly given.
Favour for a person will exalt the one, as disfavour will sink the
other. But your uncle Antony has told my mother, who objected to his
covetousness, that it was intended to tie him up, as he called it, to
your own terms; which would be with a hempen, rather than a matrimonial,
cord, I dare say. But, is not this a plain indication, that even his
own recommenders think him a mean creature; and that he must be articled
with--perhaps for necessaries? But enough, and too much, of such a
wretch as this!--You must not have him, my dear,--that I am clear
in--though not so clear, how you will be able to avoid it, except you
assert the independence to which your estate gives you a title.


***


Here my mother broke in upon me. She wanted to see what I had written. I
was silly enough to read Solmes's character to her.

She owned, that the man was not the most desirable of men; and that he
had not the happiest appearance: But what, said she, is person in a man?
And I was chidden for setting you against complying with your father's
will. Then followed a lecture on the preference to be given in favour of
a man who took care to discharge all his obligations to the world, and
to keep all together, in opposition to a spendthrift or profligate. A
fruitful subject you know, whether any particular person be meant by it,
or not.

Why will these wise parents, by saying too much against the persons they
dislike, put one upon defending them? Lovelace is not a spendthrift;
owes not obligations to the world; though, I doubt not, profligate
enough. Then, putting one upon doing such but common justice, we
must needs be prepossessed, truly!--And so perhaps we are put upon
curiosities first, that is to say, how such a one or his friends may
think of one: and then, but too probably, comes in a distinguishing
preference, or something that looks exceedingly like it.

My mother charged me at last, to write that side over again.--But
excuse me, my good Mamma! I would not have the character lost upon any
consideration; since my vein ran freely into it: and I never wrote to
please myself, but I pleased you. A very good reason why--we have but
one mind between us--only, that sometimes you are a little too grave,
methinks; I, no doubt, a little too flippant in your opinion.

This difference in our tempers, however, is probably the reason that we
love one another so well, that in the words of Norris, no third love can
come in betwixt. Since each, in the other's eye, having something amiss,
and each loving the other well enough to bear being told of it (and the
rather perhaps as neither wishes to mend it); this takes off a good deal
from that rivalry which might encourage a little (if not a great deal)
of that latent spleen, which in time might rise into envy, and that into
ill-will. So, my dear, if this be the case, let each keep her fault, and
much good may do her with it: and what an hero or heroine must he or
she be, who can conquer a constitutional fault? Let it be avarice, as in
some I dare not name: let it be gravity, as in my best friend: or let it
be flippancy, as in--I need not say whom.

It is proper to acquaint you, that I was obliged to comply with my
mother's curiosity, [my mother has her share, her full share, of
curiosity, my dear,] and to let her see here-and-there some passages in
your letters--

I am broken in upon--but I will tell you by-and-by what passed between
my mother and me on this occasion--and the rather, as she had her GIRL,
her favourite HICKMAN, and your LOVELACE, all at once in her eye, in her
part of the conversation.

Thus it was.

'I cannot but think, Nancy, said she, after all, that there is a little
hardship in Miss Harlowe's case: and yet (as her mother says) it is
a grating thing to have a child, who was always noted for her duty
in smaller points, to stand in opposition to her parents' will in the
greater; yea, in the greatest of all. And now, to middle the matter
between both, it is pity, that the man they favour has not that sort of
merit which a person of a mind so delicate as that of Miss Harlowe might
reasonably expect in a husband.--But then, this man is surely preferable
to a libertine: to a libertine too, who has had a duel with her own
brother; fathers and mothers must think so, were it not for that
circumstance--and it is strange if they do not know best.'

And so they must, thought I, from their experience, if no little dirty
views give them also that prepossession in one man's favour, which they
are so apt to censure their daughters for having in another's--and
if, as I may add in your case, they have no creeping, old, musty uncle
Antonys to strengthen their prepossessions, as he does my mother's.
Poor, creeping, positive soul, what has such an old bachelor as he to
do, to prate about the duties of children to parents; unless he had a
notion that parents owe some to their children? But your mother, by her
indolent meekness, let me call it, has spoiled all the three brothers.

'But you see, child, proceeded my mother, what a different behaviour
MINE is to YOU. I recommend to you one of the soberest, yet politest,
men in England--'

I think little of my mother's politest, my dear. She judges of honest
Hickman for her daughter, as she would have done, I suppose, twenty
years ago, for herself.

'Of a good family, continued my mother; a fine, clear, and improving
estate [a prime consideration with my mother, as well as with some other
folks, whom you know]: and I beg and I pray you to encourage him: at
least not to use him the worse, for his being so obsequious to you.'

Yes, indeed! To use him kindly, that he may treat me familiarly--but
distance to the men-wretches is best--I say.

'Yet all will hardly prevail upon you to do as I would have you. What
would you say, were I to treat you as Miss Harlowe's father and mother
treat her?

'What would I say, Madam!--That's easily answered. I would say nothing.
Can you think such usage, and to such a young lady, is to be borne?

'Come, come, Nancy, be not so hasty: you have heard but one side; and
that there is more to be said is plain, by your reading to me but parts
of her letters. They are her parents. They must know best. Miss Harlowe,
as fine a child as she is, must have done something, must have said
something, (you know how they loved her,) to make them treat her thus.

'But if she should be blameless, Madam, how does your own supposition
condemn them?'

Then came up Solmes's great estate; his good management of it--'A little
too NEAR indeed,' was the word!--[O how money-lovers, thought I, will
palliate! Yet my mother is a princess in spirit to this Solmes!] 'What
strange effects, added she, have prepossession and love upon young
ladies!'

I don't know how it is, my dear; but people take high delight in finding
out folks in love. Curiosity begets curiosity. I believe that's the
thing.

She proceeded to praise Mr. Lovelace's person, and his qualifications
natural and acquired. But then she would judge as mothers will judge,
and as daughters are very loth to judge: but could say nothing in answer
to your offer of living single; and breaking with him--if--if--[three or
four if's she made of one good one, if] that could be depended on.

But still obedience without reserve, reason what I will, is the burden
of my mother's song: and this, for my sake, as well as for yours.

I must needs say, that I think duty to parents is a very meritorious
excellence. But I bless God I have not your trials. We can all be good
when we have no temptation nor provocation to the contrary: but few
young persons (who can help themselves too as you can) would bear what
you bear.

I will now mention all that is upon my mind, in relation to the
behaviour of your father and uncles, and the rest of them, because
I would not offend you: but I have now a higher opinion of my own
sagacity, than ever I had, in that I could never cordially love any one
of your family but yourself. I am not born to like them. But it is my
duty to be sincere to my friend: and this will excuse her Anna Howe to
Miss Clarissa Harlowe.

I ought indeed to have excepted your mother; a lady to be reverenced:
and now to be pitied. What must have been her treatment, to be thus
subjugated, as I may call it? Little did the good old viscount think,
when he married his darling, his only daughter, to so well-appearing a
gentleman, and to her own liking too, that she would have been so much
kept down. Another would call your father a tyrant, if I must not: all
the world that know him, do call him so; and if you love your mother,
you should not be very angry at the world for taking that liberty.

Yet, after all, I cannot help thinking, that she is the less to be
pitied, as she may be said (be the gout, or what will, the occasion
of his moroseness) to have long behaved unworthy of her birth and fine
qualities, in yielding so much as she yields to encroaching spirits
[you may confine the reflection to your brother, if it will pain you
to extend it]; and this for the sake of preserving a temporary peace to
herself; which was the less worth endeavouring to preserve, as it always
produced a strength in the will of others, which subjected her to an
arbitrariness that of course grew, and became established, upon her
patience.--And now to give up the most deserving of her children
(against her judgment) a sacrifice to the ambition and selfishness of
the least deserving!--But I fly from this subject--having I fear, said
too much to be forgiven--and yet much less than is in my heart to say
upon the over-meek subject.

Mr. Hickman is expected from London this evening. I have desired him to
inquire after Lovelace's life and conversation in town. If he has not
inquired, I shall be very angry with him. Don't expect a very good
account of either. He is certainly an intriguing wretch, and full of
inventions.

Upon my word, I most heartily despise that sex! I wish they would let
our fathers and mothers alone; teasing them to tease us with their
golden promises, and protestations and settlements, and the rest
of their ostentatious nonsense. How charmingly might you and I live
together, and despise them all!--But to be cajoled, wire-drawn,
and ensnared, like silly birds, into a state of bondage, or vile
subordination; to be courted as princesses for a few weeks, in order to
be treated as slaves for the rest of our lives. Indeed, my dear, as you
say of Solmes, I cannot endure them!--But for your relations [friends no
more will I call them, unworthy as they are even of the other name!]
to take such a wretch's price as that; and to the cutting off of all
reversions from his own family:--How must a mind but commonly just
resist such a measure!

Mr. Hickman shall sound Lord M. upon the subject you recommend. But
beforehand, I can tell you what he and what his sisters will say, when
they are sounded. Who would not be proud of such a relation as Miss
Clarissa Harlowe?--Mrs. Fortescue told me, that they are all your very
great admirers.

If I have not been clear enough in my advice about what you shall do,
let me say, that I can give it in one word: it is only by re-urging you
to RESUME. If you do, all the rest will follow.

We are told here, that Mrs. Norton, as well as your aunt Hervey, has
given her opinion on the implicit side of the question. If she can
think, that the part she has had in your education, and your own
admirable talents and acquirements, are to be thrown away upon such a
worthless creature as Solmes, I could heartily quarrel with her. You may
think I say this to lessen your regard for the good woman. And perhaps
not wholly without cause, if you do. For, to own the truth, methinks,
I don't love her so well as I should do, did you love her so apparently
less, that I could be out of doubt, that you love me better.

Your mother tells you, 'That you will have great trials: that you are
under your father's discipline.'--The word is enough for me to despise
them who give occasion for its use.--'That it is out of her power to
help you!' And again: 'That if you have any favour to hope for, it must
be by the mediation of your uncles.' I suppose you will write to the
oddities, since you are forbid to see them. But can it be, that such a
lady, such a sister, such a wife, such a mother, has no influence in her
own family? Who, indeed, as you say, if this be so, would marry, that
can live single? My choler is again beginning to rise. RESUME, my dear:
and that is all I will give myself time to say further, lest I offend
you when I cannot serve you--only this, that I am

Your truly affectionate friend and servant, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, MARCH 10.


You will permit me, my dear, to touch upon a few passages in your last
letter, that affect me sensibly.

In the first place, you must allow me to say, low as I am in spirits,
that I am very angry with you, for your reflections on my relations,
particularly on my father and mother, and on the memory of my
grandfather. Nor, my dear, does your own mother always escape the keen
edge of your vivacity. One cannot one's self forbear to write or speak
freely of those we love and honour, when grief from imagined hard
treatment wrings the heart: but it goes against one to hear any body
else take the same liberties. Then you have so very strong a manner of
expression where you take a distaste, that when passion has subdued,
and I come (upon reflection) to see by your severity what I have given
occasion for, I cannot help condemning myself.

But least of all can I bear that you should reflect upon my mother.
What, my dear, if her meekness should not be rewarded? Is the want of
reward, or the want even of a grateful acknowledgement, a reason for us
to dispense with what we think our duty? They were my father's lively
spirits that first made him an interest in her gentle bosom. They were
the same spirits turned inward, as I have heretofore observed,* that
made him so impatient when the cruel malady seized him. He always loved
my mother: And would not LOVE and PITY excusably, nay laudably, make a
good wife (who was an hourly witness of his pangs, when labouring under
a paroxysm, and his paroxysms becoming more and more frequent, as well
as more and more severe) give up her own will, her own likings,
to oblige a husband, thus afflicted, whose love for her was
unquestionable?--And if so, was it not too natural [human nature is not
perfect, my dear] that the husband thus humoured by the wife, should be
unable to bear controul from any body else, much less contradiction from
his children?


     * See Letter V.


If then you would avoid my highest displeasure, you must spare my
mother: and, surely, you will allow me, with her, to pity, as well as to
love and honour my father.

I have no friend but you to whom I can appeal, to whom I dare complain.
Unhappily circumstanced as I am, it is but too probable that I shall
complain, because it is but too probably that I shall have more and more
cause given me for complaint. But be it your part, if I do, to sooth my
angry passions, and to soften my resentments; and this the rather, as
you know what an influence your advice has upon me; and as you must
also know, that the freedoms you take with my friends, can have no other
tendency, but to weaken the sense of my duty to them, without answering
any good end to myself.

I cannot help owning, however, that I am pleased to have you join with
me in opinion of the contempt which Mr. Solmes deserves from me. But
yet, permit me to say, that he is not quite so horrible a creature as
you make him: as to his person, I mean; for with regard to his mind,
by all I have heard, you have done him but justice: but you have such
a talent at an ugly likeness, and such a vivacity, that they sometimes
carry you out of verisimilitude. In short, my dear, I have known you, in
more instances than one, sit down resolved to write all that wit, rather
than strict justice, could suggest upon the given occasion. Perhaps it
may be thought, that I should say the less on this particular subject,
because your dislike of him arises from love to me: But should it not be
our aim to judge of ourselves, and of every thing that affects us, as
we may reasonably imagine other people would judge of us and of our
actions?

As to the advice you give, to resume my estate, I am determined not to
litigate with my father, let what will be the consequence to myself.
I may give you, at another time, a more particular answer to your
reasonings on this subject: but, at present, will only observe, that
it is in my opinion, that Lovelace himself would hardly think me worth
addressing, were he to know this would be my resolution. These men, my
dear, with all their flatteries, look forward to the PERMANENT. Indeed,
it is fit they should. For love must be a very foolish thing to look
back upon, when it has brought persons born to affluence into indigence,
and laid a generous mind under obligation and dependence.

You very ingeniously account for the love we bear to one another, from
the difference in our tempers. I own, I should not have thought of that.
There may possibly be something in it: but whether there be or not,
whenever I am cool, and give myself time to reflect, I will love you the
better for the correction you give, be as severe as you will upon me.
Spare me not, therefore, my dear friend, whenever you think me in the
least faulty. I love your agreeable raillery: you know I always did:
nor, however over-serious you think me, did I ever think you flippant,
as you harshly call it. One of the first conditions of our mutual
friendship was, each should say or write to the other whatever was upon
her mind, without any offence to be taken: a condition, that is indeed
indispensable in friendship.

I knew your mother would be for implicit obedience in a child. I am
sorry my case is so circumstanced, that I cannot comply. It would be
my duty to do so, if I could. You are indeed very happy, that you have
nothing but your own agreeable, yet whimsical, humours to contend with,
in the choice she invites you to make of Mr. Hickman. How happy I should
be, to be treated with so much lenity!--I should blush to have my mother
say, that she begged and prayed me, and all in vain, to encourage a man
so unexceptionable as Mr. Hickman.

Indeed, my beloved Miss Howe, I am ashamed to have your mother say, with
ME in her view, 'What strange effects have prepossession and love upon
young creatures of our sex!' This touches me the more sensibly, because
you yourself, my dear, are so ready to persuade me into it.

I should be very blamable to endeavour to hide any the least bias
upon my mind, from you: and I cannot but say--that this man--this
Lovelace--is a man that might be liked well enough, if he bore such
a character as Mr. Hickman bears; and even if there were hopes of
reclaiming him. And further still I will acknowledge, that I believe it
possible that one might be driven, by violent measures, step by step, as
it were, into something that might be called--I don't know what to
call it--a conditional kind of liking, or so. But as to the word
LOVE--justifiable and charming as it is in some cases, (that is to say,
in all the relative, in all the social, and, what is still beyond both,
in all our superior duties, in which it may be properly called divine;)
it has, methinks, in the narrow, circumscribed, selfish, peculiar sense,
in which you apply it to me, (the man too so little to be approved of
for his morals, if all that report says of him be true,) no pretty sound
with it. Treat me as freely as you will in all other respects, I will
love you, as I have said, the better for your friendly freedom. But,
methinks, I could be glad that you would not let this imputation pass so
glibly from your pen, or your lips, as attributable to one of your own
sex, whether I be the person or not: since the other must have a double
triumph, when a person of your delicacy (armed with such contempts of
them all, as you would have one think) can give up a friend, with an
exultation over her weakness, as a silly, love-sick creature.

I could make some other observations upon the contents of your last two
letters; but my mind is not free enough at present. The occasion for the
above stuck with me; and I could not help taking the earliest notice of
them.

Having written to the end of my second sheet, I will close this letter,
and in my next, acquaint you with all that has happened here since my
last.




LETTER XXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SATURDAY, MARCH 11.


I have had such taunting messages, and such repeated avowals of ill
offices, brought me from my brother and sister, if I do no comply with
their wills, (delivered, too, with provoking sauciness by Betty Barnes,)
that I have thought it proper, before I entered upon my intended address
to my uncles, in pursuance of the hint given me in my mother's letter,
to expostulate a little with them. But I have done it in such a manner,
as will give you (if you please to take it as you have done some parts
of my former letters) great advantage over me. In short, you will have
more cause than ever, to declare me far gone in love, if my reasons for
the change of my style in these letters, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, do
not engage your more favourable opinion.--For I have thought proper to
give them their own way: and, since they will have it, that I have a
preferable regard for Mr. Lovelace, I give them cause rather to confirm
their opinion than doubt it.

These are my reasons in brief, for the alteration of my style.

In the first place, they have grounded their principal argument for my
compliance with their will, upon my acknowledgement that my heart is
free; and so, supposing I give up no preferable person, my opposition
has the look of downright obstinacy in their eyes; and they argue,
that at worst, my aversion to Solmes is an aversion that may be easily
surmounted, and ought to be surmounted in duty to my father, and for the
promotion of family views.

Next, although they build upon this argument in order to silence me,
they seem not to believe me, but treat me as disgracefully, as if I
were in love with one of my father's footmen: so that my conditional
willingness to give up Mr. Lovelace has procured me no favour.

In the next place, I cannot but think, that my brother's antipathy
to Mr. Lovelace is far from being well grounded: the man's inordinate
passion for the sex is the crime that is always rung in my ears: and a
very great one it is: But, does my brother recriminate upon him thus
in love to me?--No--his whole behaviour shews me, that that is not
his principal motive, and that he thinks me rather in his way than
otherwise.

It is then the call of justice, as I may say, to speak a little in
favour of a man, who, although provoked by my brother, did not do
him all the mischief he could have done him, and which my brother had
endeavoured to do him. It might not be amiss therefore, I thought, to
alarm them a little with apprehension, that the methods they are taking
with me are the very reverse of those they should take to answer the end
they design by them. And after all, what is the compliment I make Mr.
Lovelace, if I allow it to be thought that I do really prefer him to
such a man as him they terrify me with? Then, my Miss Howe [concluded I]
accuses me of a tameness which subject me to insults from my brother: I
will keep that dear friend in my eye; and for all these considerations,
try what a little of her spirit will do--sit it ever so awkwardly upon
me.

In this way of thinking, I wrote to my brother and sister. This is my
letter to him.



TREATED as I am, and, in a great measure, if not wholly, by your
instigations, Brother, you must permit me to expostulate with you upon
the occasion. It is not my intention to displease you in what I am going
to write: and yet I must deal freely with you: the occasion calls for
it.

And permit me, in the first place, to remind you, that I am your sister;
and not your servant; and that, therefore, the bitter revilings and
passionate language brought me from you, upon an occasion in which you
have no reason to prescribe to me, are neither worthy of my character to
bear, nor of yours to offer.

Put the case, that I were to marry the man you dislike: and that he were
not to make a polite or tender husband, Is that a reason for you to be
an unpolite and disobliging brother?--Why must you, Sir, anticipate my
misfortunes, were such a case to happen?--Let me tell you plainly,
that the man who could treat me as a wife, worse than you of late have
treated me as a sister, must be a barbarous man indeed.

Ask yourself, I pray you, Sir, if you would thus have treated your
sister Bella, had she thought fit to receive the addresses of the man so
much hated by you?--If not, let me caution you, my Brother, not to take
your measures by what you think will be borne, but rather by what ought
to be offered.

How would you take it, if you had a brother, who, in a like case, were
to act by you, as you do by me?--You cannot but remember what a laconic
answer you gave even to my father, who recommended to you Miss Nelly
D'Oily--You did not like her, were your words: and that was thought
sufficient.

You must needs think, that I cannot but know to whom to attribute my
disgraces, when I recollect my father's indulgence to me, permitting
me to decline several offers; and to whom, that a common cause is
endeavoured to be made, in favour of a man whose person and manners
are more exceptional than those of any of the gentlemen I have been
permitted to refuse.

I offer not to compare the two men together: nor is there indeed the
least comparison to be made between them. All the difference to
the one's disadvantage, if I did, is but one point--of the greatest
importance, indeed--But to whom of most importance?--To myself, surely,
were I to encourage his application: of the least to you. Nevertheless,
if you do not, by your strange politics, unite that man and me as joint
sufferers in one cause, you shall find me as much resolved to renounce
him, as I am to refuse the other. I have made an overture to this
purpose: I hope you will not give me reason to confirm my apprehensions,
that it will be owing to you if it be not accepted.

It is a sad thing to have it to say, without being conscious of ever
having given you cause of offence, that I have in you a brother, but not
a friend.

Perhaps you will not condescend to enter into the reasons of your
late and present conduct with a foolish sister. But if politeness, if
civility, be not due to that character, and to my sex, justice is.

Let me take the liberty further to observe, that the principal end of
a young man's education at the university, is, to learn him to reason
justly, and to subdue the violence of his passions. I hope, Brother,
that you will not give room for any body who knows us both, to conclude,
that the toilette has taught the one more of the latter doctrine, than
the university has taught the other. I am truly sorry to have cause
to say, that I have heard it often remarked, that your uncontrouled
passions are not a credit to your liberal education.

I hope, Sir, that you will excuse the freedom I have taken with you: you
have given me too much reason for it, and you have taken much greater
with me, without reason:--so, if you are offended, ought to look at the
cause, and not at the effect:--then examining yourself, that cause will
cease, and there will not be any where a more accomplished gentleman
than my brother.

Sisterly affection, I do assure you, Sir, (unkindly as you have used
me,) and not the pertness which of late you have been so apt to impute
to me, is my motive in this hint. Let me invoke your returning kindness,
my only brother! And give me cause, I beseech you, to call you my
compassionating friend. For I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate sister, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


***


This is my brother's answer.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

I KNOW there will be no end of your impertinent scribble, if I don't
write to you. I write therefore: but, without entering into argument
with such a conceited and pert preacher and questioner, it is, to forbid
you to plague me with your quaint nonsense. I know not what wit in a
woman is good for, but to make her overvalue herself, and despise every
other person. Yours, Miss Pert, has set you above your duty, and above
being taught or prescribed to, either by parents, or any body else. But
go on, Miss: your mortification will be the greater; that's all, child.
It shall, I assure you, if I can make it so, so long as you prefer that
villainous Lovelace, (who is justly hated by all your family) to every
body. We see by your letter now (what we too justly suspected before),
most evidently we see, the hold he has got of your forward heart. But
the stronger the hold, the greater must be the force (and you shall have
enough of that) to tear such a miscreant from it. In me, notwithstanding
your saucy lecturing, and your saucy reflections before, you are sure of
a friend, as well as of a brother, if it be not your own fault. But if
you will still think of such a wretch as that Lovelace, never expect
either friend or brother in

JA. HARLOWE.


***


I will now give you a copy of my letter to my sister; with her answer.


IN what, my dear Sister, have I offended you, that instead of
endeavouring to soften my father's anger against me, (as I am sure I
should have done for you, had my unhappy case been yours,) you should,
in so hard-hearted a manner, join to aggravate not only his displeasure,
but my mother's against me. Make but my case your own, my dear Bella;
and suppose you were commanded to marry Mr. Lovelace, (to whom you
are believed to have such an antipathy,) would you not think it a very
grievous injunction?--Yet cannot your dislike to Mr. Lovelace be greater
than mine is to Mr. Solmes. Nor are love and hatred voluntary passions.

My brother may perhaps think it a proof of a manly spirit, to shew
himself an utter stranger to the gentle passions. We have both heard him
boast, that he never loved with distinction: and, having predominating
passions, and checked in his first attempt, perhaps he never will. It
is the less wonder, then, raw from the college, so lately himself the
tutored, that he should set up for a tutor, a prescriber to our
gentler sex, whose tastes and manners are differently formed: for what,
according to his account, are colleges, but classes of tyrants, from
the upper students over the lower, and from them to the tutor?--That he,
with such masculine passions should endeavour to controul and bear down
an unhappy sister, in a case where his antipathy, and, give me leave
to say, his ambition [once you would have allowed the latter to be his
fault] can be gratified by so doing, may not be quite so much to be
wondered at--but that a sister should give up the cause of a sister, and
join with him to set her father and mother against her, in a case that
might have been her own--indeed, my Bella, this is not pretty in you.

There was a time that Mr. Lovelace was thought reclaimable, and when it
was far from being deemed a censurable view to hope to bring back to the
paths of virtue and honour, a man of his sense and understanding. I am
far from wishing to make the experiment: but nevertheless will say, that
if I have not a regard for him, the disgraceful methods taken to compel
me to receive the addresses of such a man as Mr. Solmes are enough to
induce it.

Do you, my Sister, for one moment, lay aside all prejudice, and compare
the two men in their births, their educations, their persons, their
understandings, their manners, their air, and their whole deportments;
and in their fortunes too, taking in reversions; and then judge of both;
yet, as I have frequently offered, I will live single with all my heart,
if that will do.

I cannot thus live in displeasure and disgrace. I would, if I could,
oblige all my friends. But will it be just, will it be honest, to marry
a man I cannot endure? If I have not been used to oppose the will of
my father, but have always delighted to oblige and obey, judge of the
strength of my antipathy, by the painful opposition I am obliged to
make, and cannot help it.

Pity then, my dearest Bella, my sister, my friend, my companion, my
adviser, as you used to be when I was happy, and plead for

Your ever-affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.


***


TO MISS CLARY HARLOWE

Let it be pretty or not pretty, in your wise opinion, I shall speak my
mind, I will assure you, both of you and your conduct in relation
to this detested Lovelace. You are a fond foolish girl with all your
wisdom. Your letter shews that enough in twenty places. And as to your
cant of living single, nobody will believe you. This is one of your
fetches to avoid complying with your duty, and the will of the most
indulgent parents in the world, as yours have been to you, I am
sure--though now they see themselves finely requited for it.

We all, indeed, once thought your temper soft and amiable: but why was
it? You never were contradicted before: you had always your own way. But
no sooner do you meet with opposition in your wishes to throw yourself
away upon a vile rake, but you shew what you are. You cannot love Mr.
Solmes! that's the pretence; but Sister, Sister, let me tell you, that
is because Lovelace has got into your fond heart:--a wretch hated,
justly hated, by us all; and who has dipped his hands in the blood of
your brother: yet him you would make our relation, would you?

I have no patience with you, but for putting the case of my liking such
a vile wretch as him. As to the encouragement you pretend he received
formerly from all our family, it was before we knew him to be so vile:
and the proofs that had such force upon us, ought to have had some upon
you:--and would, had you not been a foolish forward girl; as on this
occasion every body sees you are.

O how you run out in favour of the wretch!--His birth, his
education, his person, his understanding, his manners, his air, his
fortune--reversions too taken in to augment the surfeiting catalogue!
What a fond string of lovesick praises is here! And yet you would live
single--Yes, I warrant!--when so many imaginary perfections dance before
your dazzled eye!--But no more--I only desire, that you will not, while
you seem to have such an opinion of your wit, think every one else a
fool; and that you can at pleasure, by your whining flourishes, make us
all dance after your lead.

Write as often as you will, this shall be the last answer or notice you
shall have upon this subject from

ARABELLA HARLOWE.


***


I had in readiness a letter for each of my uncles; and meeting in the
garden a servant of my uncle Harlowe, I gave him to deliver according to
their respective directions. If I am to form a judgment by the answers I
have received from my brother and sister, as above, I must not, I
doubt, expect any good from those letters. But when I have tried every
expedient, I shall have the less to blame myself for, if any thing
unhappy should fall out. I will send you copies of both, when I shall
see what notice they will be thought worthy of, if of any.




LETTER XXX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY NIGHT, MARCH 12.


This man, this Lovelace, gives me great uneasiness. He is extremely bold
and rash. He was this afternoon at our church--in hopes to see me, I
suppose: and yet, if he had such hopes, his usual intelligence must have
failed him.

Shorey was at church; and a principal part of her observation was upon
his haughty and proud behaviour when he turned round in the pew where he
sat to our family-pew. My father and both my uncles were there; so were
my mother and sister. My brother happily was not.--They all came home in
disorder. Nor did the congregation mind any body but him; it being his
first appearance there since the unhappy rencounter.

What did the man come for, if he intended to look challenge and
defiance, as Shorey says he did, and as others, it seems, thought he
did, as well as she? Did he come for my sake; and, by behaving in such
a manner to those present of my family, imagine he was doing me either
service or pleasure?--He knows how they hate him: nor will he take
pains, would pains do, to obviate their hatred.

You and I, my dear, have often taken notice of his pride; and you have
rallied him upon it; and instead of exculpating himself, he has owned
it: and by owning it he has thought he has done enough.

For my own part, I thought pride in his case an improper subject for
raillery.--People of birth and fortune to be proud, is so needless,
so mean a vice!--If they deserve respect, they will have it, without
requiring it. In other words, for persons to endeavour to gain respect
by a haughty behaviour, is to give a proof that they mistrust their own
merit: To make confession that they know that their actions will not
attract it.--Distinction or quality may be prided in by those to whom
distinction or quality is a new thing. And then the reflection and
contempt which such bring upon themselves by it, is a counter-balance.

Such added advantages, too, as this man has in his person and mien:
learned also, as they say he is: Such a man to be haughty, to be
imperious!--The lines of his own face at the same time condemning
him--how wholly inexcusable!--Proud of what? Not of doing well: the only
justifiable pride.--Proud of exterior advantages!--Must not one be led
by such a stop-short pride, as I may call it, in him or her who has it,
to mistrust the interior? Some people may indeed be afraid, that if
they did not assume, they would be trampled upon. A very narrow fear,
however, since they trample upon themselves, who can fear this. But this
man must be secure that humility would be an ornament to him.

He has talents indeed: but those talents and his personal advantages
have been snares to him. It is plain they have. And this shews, that,
weighed in an equal balance, he would be found greatly wanting.

Had my friends confided as they did at first, in that discretion which
they do not accuse me of being defective in, I dare say I should have
found him out: and then should have been as resolute to dismiss him, as
I was to dismiss others, and as I am never to have Mr. Solmes. O that
they did but know my heart!--It shall sooner burst, than voluntarily,
uncompelled, undriven, dictate a measure that shall cast a slur either
upon them, or upon my sex.

Excuse me, my dear friend, for these grave soliloquies, as I may call
them. How have I run from reflection to reflection!--But the occasion is
recent--They are all in commotion below upon it.

Shorey says, that Mr. Lovelace watched my mother's eye, and bowed to
her: and she returned the compliment. He always admired my mother. She
would not, I believe, have hated him, had she not been bid to hate him:
and had it not been for the rencounter between him and her only son.

Dr. Lewen was at church; and observing, as every one else did, the
disorder into which Mr. Lovelace's appearance* had put all our family,
was so good as to engage him in conversation, when the service was over,
till they were all gone to their coaches.


     * See Letter XXXI, for Mr. Lovelace's account of his
     behaviour and intentions in his appearance at church.


My uncles had my letters in the morning. They, as well as my father,
are more and more incensed against me, it seems. Their answers, if
they vouchsafe to answer me, will demonstrate, I doubt not, the
unseasonableness of this rash man's presence at our church.

They are angry also, as I understand, with my mother, for returning
his compliment. What an enemy is hatred, even to the common forms of
civility! which, however, more distinguish the payer of a compliment,
than the receiver. But they all see, they say, that there is but one way
to put an end to his insults. So I shall suffer: And in what will the
rash man have benefited himself, or mended his prospects?

I am extremely apprehensive that this worse than ghost-like appearance
of his, bodes some still bolder step. If he come hither (and very
desirous he is of my leave to come) I am afraid there will be murder. To
avoid that, if there were no other way, I would most willingly be buried
alive.

They are all in consultation--upon my letters, I suppose--so they were
in the morning; which occasioned my uncles to be at our church. I will
send you the copies of those letters, as I promised in my last, when
I see whether I can give you their answers with them. This letter is
all--I cannot tell what--the effect of apprehension and displeasure
at the man who has occasioned my apprehensions. Six lines would have
contained all that is in it to the purpose of my story.

CL. H.




LETTER XXXI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. MONDAY, MARCH 13.


In vain dost thou* and thy compeers press me to go to town, while I am
in such an uncertainty as I am in at present with this proud beauty.
All the ground I have hitherto gained with her is entirely owing to her
concern for the safety of people whom I have reason to hate.

     *These gentlemen affected what they called the Roman style
     (to wit, the thee and the thou) in their letters: and it was
     an agreed rule with them, to take in good part whatever
     freedoms they treated each other with, if the passages were
     written in that style.

Write then, thou biddest me, if I will not come. That, indeed, I can do;
and as well without a subject, as with one. And what follows shall be a
proof of it.

The lady's malevolent brother has now, as I told thee at M. Hall,
introduced another man; the most unpromising in his person and
qualities, the most formidable in his offers, that has yet appeared.

This man has by his proposals captivated every soul of the
Harlowes--Soul! did I say--There is not a soul among them but my
charmer's: and she, withstanding them all, is actually confined, and
otherwise maltreated by a father the most gloomy and positive; at the
instigation of a brother the most arrogant and selfish. But thou knowest
their characters; and I will not therefore sully my paper with them.

But is it not a confounded thing to be in love with one, who is the
daughter, the sister, the niece, of a family, I must eternally despise?
And, the devil of it, that love increasing with her--what shall I call
it?--'Tis not scorn:--'Tis not pride:--'Tis not the insolence of an
adored beauty:--But 'tis to virtue, it seems, that my difficulties are
owin; and I pay for not being a sly sinner, an hypocrite; for being
regardless of my reputation; for permittin slander to open its mouth
against me. But is it necessary for such a one as I, who have been used
to carry all before me, upon my own terms--I, who never inspired a fear,
that had not a discernibly-predominant mixture of love in it, to be a
hypocrite?--Well says the poet:

 He who seems virtuous does but act a part;
 And shews not his own nature, but his art.

Well, but it seems I must practise for this art, if it would succeed
with this truly-admirable creature; but why practise for it?--Cannot
I indeed reform?--I have but one vice;--Have I, Jack?--Thou knowest my
heart, if any man living does. As far as I know it myself, thou knowest
it. But 'tis a cursed deceiver; for it has many a time imposed upon its
master--Master, did I say? That I am not now; nor have I been from the
moment I beheld this angel of a woman. Prepared indeed as I was by her
character before I saw her: For what a mind must that be, which,
though not virtuous itself, admires not virtue in another?--My visit
to Arabella, owing to a mistake of the sister, into which, as thou hast
heard me say, I was led by the blundering uncle; who was to introduce
me (but lately come from abroad) to the divinity, as I thought; but,
instead of her, carried me to a mere mortal. And much difficulty had I,
so fond and forward my lady! to get off without forfeiting all with a
family I intended should give me a goddess.

I have boasted that I was once in love before:--and indeed I thought
I was. It was in my early manhood--with that quality jilt, whose
infidelity I have vowed to revenge upon as many of the sex as shall come
into my power. I believe, in different climes, I have already
sacrificed an hecatomb to my Nemesis, in pursuance of this vow. But upon
recollecting what I was then, and comparing it with what I find myself
now, I cannot say that I was ever in love before.

What was it then, dost thou ask me, since the disappointment had such
effects upon me, when I found myself jilted, that I was hardly kept in
my senses?--Why, I'll grant thee what, as near as I can remember; for
it was a great while ago:--It was--Egad, Jack, I can hardly tell what
it was--but a vehement aspiration after a novelty, I think. Those
confounded poets, with their terrenely-celestial descriptions, did as
much with me as the lady: they fired my imagination, and set me upon
a desire to become a goddess-maker. I must needs try my new-fledged
pinions in sonnet, elogy, and madrigal. I must have a Cynthia, a Stella,
a Sacharissa, as well as the best of them: darts and flames, and the
devil knows what, must I give to my cupid. I must create beauty, and
place it where nobody else could find it: and many a time have I been at
a loss for a subject, when my new-created goddess has been kinder than
it was proper for my plaintive sonnet that she should be.

Then I found I had a vanity of another sort in my passion: I found
myself well received among the women in general; and I thought it a
pretty lady-like tyranny [I was then very young, and very vain!] to
single out some one of the sex, to make half a score jealous. And I can
tell thee, it had its effect: for many an eye have I made to sparkle
with rival indignation: many a cheek glow; and even many a fan have I
caused to be snapped at a sister-beauty; accompanied with a reflection
perhaps at being seen alone with a wild young fellow who could not be in
private with both at once.

In short, Jack, it was more pride than love, as I now find it, that put
me upon making such a confounded rout about losing that noble varletess.
I thought she loved me at least as well as I believed I loved her:
nay, I had the vanity to suppose she could not help it. My friends were
pleased with my choice. They wanted me to be shackled: for early did
they doubt my morals, as to the sex. They saw, that the dancing, the
singing, the musical ladies were all fond of my company: For who [I am
in a humour to be vain, I think!]--for who danced, who sung, who touched
the string, whatever the instrument, with a better grace than thy
friend?

I have no notion of playing the hypocrite so egregiously, as to pretend
to be blind to qualifications which every one sees and acknowledges.
Such praise-begetting hypocrisy! Such affectedly disclaimed attributes!
Such contemptible praise-traps!--But yet, shall my vanity extend only
to personals, such as the gracefulness of dress, my debonnaire, and my
assurance?--Self-taught, self-acquired, these!--For my parts, I value
not myself upon them. Thou wilt say, I have no cause.--Perhaps not. But
if I had any thing valuable as to intellectuals, those are not my own;
and to be proud of what a man is answerable for the abuse of, and has
no merit in the right use of, is to strut, like the jay, in borrowed
plumage.

But to return to my fair jilt. I could not bear, that a woman, who was
the first that had bound me in silken fetters [they were not iron ones,
like those I now wear] should prefer a coronet to me: and when the bird
was flown, I set more value upon it, that when I had it safe in my cage,
and could visit in when I pleased.

But now am I indeed in love. I can think of nothing, of nobody, but
the divine Clarissa Harlowe--Harlowe!--How that hated word sticks in my
throat--But I shall give her for it the name of Love.*


* Lovelace.


 CLARISSA! O there's music in the name,
 That, soft'ning me to infant tenderness,
 Makes my heart spring like the first leaps of life!

But couldst thou have believed that I, who think it possible for me
to favour as much as I can be favoured; that I, who for this charming
creature think of foregoing the life of honour for the life of shackles;
could adopt these over-tender lines of Otway?

I checked myself, and leaving the first three lines of the following of
Dryden to the family of whiners, find the workings of the passion in my
stormy soul better expressed by the three last:

 Love various minds does variously inspire:
 He stirs in gentle natures gentle fires;
 Like that of incense on the alter laid.

 But raging flames tempestuous souls invade:
 A fire which ev'ry windy passion blows;
 With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.

And with REVENGE it shall glow!--For, dost thou think, that if it were
not from the hope, that this stupid family are all combined to do my
work for me, I would bear their insults?--Is it possible to imagine,
that I would be braved as I am braved, threatened as I am threatened, by
those who are afraid to see me; and by this brutal brother, too, to
whom I gave a life; [a life, indeed, not worth my taking!] had I not
a greater pride in knowing that by means of his very spy upon me, I am
playing him off as I please; cooling or inflaming his violent passions
as may best suit my purposes; permitting so much to be revealed of my
life and actions, and intentions, as may give him such a confidence in
his double-faced agent, as shall enable me to dance his employer upon my
own wires?

This it is that makes my pride mount above my resentment. By this
engine, whose springs I am continually oiling, I play them all off.
The busy old tarpaulin uncle I make but my ambassador to Queen Anabella
Howe, to engage her (for example-sake to her princessly daughter) to
join in their cause, and to assert an authority they are resolved, right
or wrong, (or I could do nothing,) to maintain.

And what my motive, dost thou ask? No less than this, That my beloved
shall find no protection out of my family; for, if I know hers, fly she
must, or have the man she hates. This, therefore, if I take my measures
right, and my familiar fail me not, will secure her mine, in spite of
them all; in spite of her own inflexible heart: mine, without condition;
without reformation-promises; without the necessity of a siege of years,
perhaps; and to be even then, after wearing the guise of merit-doubting
hypocrisy, at an uncertainty, upon a probation unapproved of. Then shall
I have all the rascals and rascalesses of the family come creeping to
me: I prescribing to them; and bringing that sordidly imperious brother
to kneel at the footstool of my throne.

All my fear arises from the little hold I have in the heart of this
charming frost-piece: such a constant glow upon her lovely features:
eyes so sparkling: limbs so divinely turned: health so florid: youth so
blooming: air so animated--to have an heart so impenetrable: and I, the
hitherto successful Lovelace, the addresser--How can it be? Yet there
are people, and I have talked with some of them, who remember that
she was born. Her nurse Norton boasts of her maternal offices in her
earliest infancy; and in her education gradatim. So there is full proof,
that she came not from above all at once an angel! How then can she be
so impenetrable?

But here's her mistake; nor will she be cured of it--She takes the man
she calls her father [her mother had been faultless, had she not been
her father's wife]; she takes the men she calls her uncles; the fellow
she calls her brother; and the poor contemptible she calls her sister;
to be her father, to be her uncles, her brother, her sister; and that,
as such, she owes to some of them reverence, to others respect, let them
treat her ever so cruelly!--Sordid ties!--Mere cradle prejudices!--For
had they not been imposed upon her by Nature, when she was in a perverse
humour, or could she have chosen her relations, would any of these have
been among them?

How my heart rises at her preference of them to me, when she is
convinced of their injustice to me! Convinced, that the alliance would
do honour to them all--herself excepted; to whom every one owes honour;
and from whom the most princely family might receive it. But how much
more will my heart rise with indignation against her, if I find she
hesitates but one moment (however persecuted) about preferring me to the
man she avowedly hates! But she cannot surely be so mean as to purchase
her peace with them at so dear a rate. She cannot give a sanction to
projects formed in malice, and founded in a selfishness (and that at her
own expense) which she has spirit enough to despise in others; and ought
to disavow, that we may not think her a Harlowe.

By this incoherent ramble thou wilt gather, that I am not likely to come
up in haste; since I must endeavour first to obtain some assurance from
the beloved of my soul, that I shall not be sacrificed to such a wretch
as Solmes! Woe be to the fair one, if ever she be driven into my
power (for I despair of a voluntary impulse in my favour) and I find a
difficulty in obtaining this security.

That her indifference to me is not owing to the superior liking she has
for any other, is what rivets my chains. But take care, fair one; take
care, O thou most exalted of female minds, and loveliest of persons, how
thou debasest thyself by encouraging such a competition as thy sordid
relations have set on foot in mere malice to me!--Thou wilt say I rave.
And so I do:

 Perdition catch my soul, but I do love her.

Else, could I hear the perpetual revilings of her implacable
family?--Else, could I basely creep about--not her proud father's
house--but his paddock and garden walls?--Yet (a quarter of a mile
distance between us) not hoping to behold the least glimpse of her
shadow?--Else, should I think myself repaid, amply repaid, if the
fourth, fifth, or sixth midnight stroll, through unfrequented paths, and
over briery enclosures, affords me a few cold lines; the even expected
purport only to let me know, that she values the most worthless person
of her very worthless family, more than she values me; and that she
would not write at all, but to induce me to bear insults, which unman
me to bear?--My lodging in the intermediate way at a wretched alehouse;
disguised like an inmate of it: accommodations equally vile, as those
I met with in my Westphalian journey. 'Tis well, that the necessity for
all this arise not from scorn and tyranny! but is first imposed upon
herself!

But was ever hero in romance (fighting with giants and dragons excepted)
called upon to harder trials?--Fortune and family, and reversionary
grandeur on my side! Such a wretched fellow my competitor!--Must I not
be deplorably in love, that can go through these difficulties, encounter
these contempts?--By my soul, I am half ashamed of myself: I, who am
perjured too, by priority of obligation, if I am faithful to any woman
in the world?

And yet, why say I, I am half ashamed?--Is it not a glory to love her
whom every one who sees her either loves, or reveres, or both? Dryden
says,

 The cause of love can never be assign'd:
 'Tis in no face;--but in the lover's mind.
--And Cowley thus addresses beauty as a mere imaginary:

 Beauty! thou wild fantastic ape,
 Who dost in ev'ry country change thy shape:
 Here black; there brown; here tawny; and there white!
 Thou flatt'rer, who comply'st with ev'ry sight!
 Who hast no certain what, nor where.

But both these, had they been her contemporaries, and known her, would
have confessed themselves mistaken: and, taking together person, mind,
and behaviour, would have acknowledged the justice of the universal
voice in her favour.

 --Full many a lady
 I've ey'd with best regard; and many a time
 Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
 Brought my too-diligent ear.  For sev'ral virtues
 Have I liked several women.  Never any
 With so full a soul, but some defect in her
 Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd,
 And put it to the foil.  But SHE!--O SHE!
 So perfect and so peerless is created,
 Of ev'ry creature's best.

 SHAKESP.

Thou art curious to know, if I have not started a new game? If it
be possible for so universal a lover to be confined so long to one
object?--Thou knowest nothing of this charming creature, that thou canst
put such questions to me; or thinkest thou knowest me better than
thou dost. All that's excellent in her sex is this lady!--Until by
MATRIMONIAL or EQUAL intimacies, I have found her less than angel, it is
impossible to think of any other. Then there are so many stimulatives
to such a spirit as mine in this affair, besides love: such a field of
stratagem and contrivance, which thou knowest to be the delight of my
heart. Then the rewarding end of all!--To carry off such a girl as this,
in spite of all her watchful and implacable friends; and in spite of a
prudence and reserve that I never met with in any of the sex;--what a
triumph!--What a triumph over the whole sex!--And then such a revenge to
gratify; which is only at present politically reined in, eventually to
break forth with greater fury--Is it possible, thinkest thou, that there
can be room for a thought that is not of her, and devoted to her?


***


By the devices I have this moment received, I have reason to think, that
I shall have occasion for thee here. Hold thyself in readiness to come
down upon the first summons.

Let Belton, and Mowbray, and Tourville, likewise prepare themselves. I
have a great mind to contrive a method to send James Harlowe to travel
for improvement. Never was there a booby 'squire that more wanted it.
Contrive it, did I say? I have already contrived it; could I but put
it in execution without being suspected to have a hand in it. This I am
resolved upon; if I have not his sister, I will have him.

But be this as it may, there is a present likelihood of room for
glorious mischief. A confederacy had been for some time formed against
me; but the uncles and the nephew are now to be double-servanted
[single-servanted they were before]; and those servants are to be
double armed when they attend their masters abroad. This indicates their
resolute enmity to me, and as resolute favour to Solmes.

The reinforced orders for this hostile apparatus are owing it seems to a
visit I made yesterday to their church.--A good place I thought to begin
a reconciliation in; supposing the heads of the family to be christians,
and that they meant something by their prayers. My hopes were to have
an invitation (or, at least, to gain a pretence) to accompany home the
gloomy sire; and so get an opportunity to see my goddess: for I believed
they durst not but be civil to me, at least. But they were filled with
terror it seems at my entrance; a terror they could not get over. I saw
it indeed in their countenances; and that they all expected something
extraordinary to follow.--And so it should have done, had I been more
sure than I am of their daughter's favour. Yet not a hair of any of
their stupid heads do I intend to hurt.

You shall all have your directions in writing, if there be occasion. But
after all, I dare say there will be no need but to shew your faces in my
company.

Such faces never could four men shew--Mowbray's so fierce and so
fighting: Belton's so pert and so pimply: Tourville's so fair and
so foppish: thine so rough and so resolute: and I your leader!--What
hearts, although meditating hostility, must those be which we shall not
appall?--Each man occasionally attended by a servant or two, long ago
chosen for qualities resembling those of his master.

Thus, Jack, as thou desirest, have I written.--Written upon something;
upon nothing; upon REVENGE, which I love; upon LOVE, which I hate,
heartily hate, because 'tis my master: and upon the devil knows what
besides: for looking back, I am amazed at the length of it. Thou mayest
read it: I would not for a king's ransom. But so as I do but write, thou
sayest thou wilt be pleased.

Be pleased then. I command thee to be pleased: if not for the writer's
or written sake, for thy word's sake. And so in the royal style (for am
I not likely to be thy king and thy emperor in the great affair before
us?) I bid thee very heartily

Farewell.




LETTER XXXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 14.


I now send you copies of my letters to my uncles: with their answers. Be
pleased to return the latter by the first deposit. I leave them for you
to make remarks upon. I shall make none.


TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. SAT. MARCH 11.

Allow me, my honoured second Papa, as in my happy days you taught me
to call you, to implore your interest with my Papa, to engage him to
dispense with a command, which, if insisted upon, will deprive me of my
free-will, and make me miserable for my whole life.

For my whole life! let me repeat: Is that a small point, my dear Uncle,
to give up? Am not I to live with the man? Is any body else? Shall I not
therefore be allowed to judge for myself, whether I can, or cannot, live
happily with him?

Should it be ever so unhappily, will it be prudence to complain or
appeal? If it were, to whom could I appeal with effect against a
husband? And would not the invincible and avowed dislike I have for him
at setting out, seem to justify any ill usage from him, in that state,
were I to be ever so observant of him? And if I were to be at all
observant of him, it must be from fear, not love.

Once more, let me repeat, That this is not a small point to give up:
and that it is for life. Why, I pray you, good Sir, should I be made
miserable for life? Why should I be deprived of all comfort, but that
which the hope that it would be a very short one, would afford me?

Marriage is a very solemn engagement, enough to make a young creature's
heart ache, with the best prospects, when she thinks seriously of
it!--To be given up to a strange man; to be engrafted into a strange
family; to give up her very name, as a mark of her becoming his absolute
and dependent property; to be obliged to prefer this strange man to
father, mother--to every body:--and his humours to all her own--or to
contend, perhaps, in breach of avowed duty, for every innocent
instance of free-will. To go no where; to make acquaintance; to give up
acquaintance; to renounce even the strictest friendships, perhaps;
all at his pleasure, whether she thinks it reasonable to do so or not.
Surely, Sir, a young creature ought not to be obliged to make all these
sacrifices but for such a man as she can love. If she be, how sad must
be the case! How miserable the life, if it can be called life!

I wish I could obey you all. What a pleasure would it be to me, if I
could!--Marry first, and love will come after, was said by one of my
dearest friends! But this is a shocking assertion. A thousand thing may
happen to make that state but barely tolerable, where it is entered into
with mutual affections: What must it then be, where the husband can have
no confidence in the love of his wife: but has reason rather to question
it, from the preference he himself believes she would have given to
somebody else, had she had her own option? What doubts, what jealousies,
what want of tenderness, what unfavourable prepossessions, will there
be, in a matrimony thus circumstanced! How will every look, every
action, even the most innocent, be liable to misconstruction!--While,
on the other hand, an indifference, a carelessness to oblige, may take
place; and fear only can constrain even an appearance of what ought to
be the effect of undisguised love!

Think seriously of these things, dear, good Sir, and represent them to
my father in that strong light which the subject will bear; but in which
my sex, and my tender years and inexperience, will not permit me to
paint it; and use your powerful interest, that your poor niece may not
be consigned to a misery so durable.

I offered to engage not to marry at all, if that condition may be
accepted. What a disgrace is it to me to be thus sequestered from
company, thus banished my papa's and mamma's presence; thus slighted and
deserted by you, Sir, and my other kind uncle! And to be hindered from
attending at that public worship, which, were I out of the way of my
duty, would be most likely to reduce me into the right path again!--Is
this the way, Sir; can this be thought to be the way to be taken with
a free and open spirit? May not this strange method rather harden than
convince? I cannot bear to live in disgrace thus. The very servants so
lately permitted to be under my own direction, hardly daring to speak to
me; my own servant discarded with high marks of undeserved suspicion and
displeasure, and my sister's maid set over me.

The matter may be too far pushed.--Indeed it may.--And then, perhaps,
every one will be sorry for their parts in it.

May I be permitted to mention an expedient?--'If I am to be
watched, banished, and confined; suppose, Sir, it were to be at your
house?'--Then the neighbouring gentry will the less wonder, that the
person of whom they used to think so favourably, appear not at church
here; and that she received not their visits.

I hope there can be no objection to this. You used to love to have
me with you, Sir, when all went happily with me: And will you not now
permit me, in my troubles, the favour of your house, till all this
displeasure is overblown?--Upon my word, Sir, I will not stir out of
doors, if you require the contrary of me: nor will I see any body, but
whom you will allow me to see; provided Mr. Solmes be not brought to
persecute me there.

Procure, then, this favour for me; if you cannot procure the still
greater, that of a happy reconciliation (which nevertheless I presume to
hope for, if you will be so good as to plead for me); and you will then
add to those favours and to that indulgence, which have bound me, and
will for ever bind me to be

Your dutiful and obliged niece, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


THE ANSWER


SUNDAY NIGHT.

MY DEAR NIECE,

It grieves me to be forced to deny you any thing you ask. Yet it must be
so; for unless you can bring your mind to oblige us in this one point,
in which our promises and honour were engaged before we believed there
could be so sturdy an opposition, you must never expect to be what you
have been to us all.

In short, Niece, we are in an embattled phalanx. Your reading makes you
a stranger to nothing but what you should be most acquainted with. So
you will see by that expression, that we are not to be pierced by your
persuasions, and invincible persistence. We have agreed all to be
moved, or none; and not to comply without one another. So you know your
destiny; and have nothing to do but to yield to it.

Let me tell you, the virtue of obedience lies not in obliging when you
can be obliged again. But give up an inclination, and there is some
merit in that.

As to your expedient; you shall not come to my house, Miss Clary; though
this is a prayer I little thought I ever should have denied you: for
were you to keep your word as to seeing nobody but whom we please, yet
can you write to somebody else, and receive letters from him. This we
too well know you can, and have done--more is the shame and the pity!

You offer to live single, Miss--we wished you married: but because you
may not have the man your heart is set upon, why, truly, you will have
nobody we shall recommend: and as we know, that somehow or other you
correspond with him, or at least did as long as you could; and as he
defies us all, and would not dare to do so, if he were not sure of you
in spite of us all, (which is not a little vexatious to us, you must
think,) we are resolved to frustrate him, and triumph over him, rather
than that he should triumph over us: that's one word for all. So expect
not any advocateship from me: I will not plead for you; and that's
enough. From

Your displeased uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.

P.S. For the rest I refer to my brother Antony.


***


TO ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQ. SATURDAY, MARCH 11.

HONOURED SIR,

As you have thought fit to favour Mr. Solmes with your particular
recommendation, and was very earnest in his behalf, ranking him (as
you told me, upon introducing him to me) among your select friends; and
expecting my regards to him accordingly; I beg your patience, while
I offer a few things, out of many that I could offer, to your serious
consideration, on occasion of his address to me, if I am to use that
word.

I am charged with prepossession in another person's favour. You will be
pleased, Sir, to remember, that till my brother returned from Scotland,
that other person was not absolutely discouraged, nor was I forbid to
receive his visits. I believe it will not be pretended, that in birth,
education, or personal endowments, a comparison can be made between the
two. And only let me ask you, Sir, if the one would have been thought of
for me, had he not made such offers, as, upon my word, I think, I ought
not in justice to accept of, nor he to propose: offers, which if he had
not made, I dare say, my papa would not have required them of him.

But the one, it seems, has many faults:--Is the other faultless?--The
principal thing objected to Mr. Lovelace (and a very inexcusable one) is
that he is immoral in his loves--Is not the other in his hatreds?--Nay,
as I may say, in his loves too (the object only differing) if the love
of money be the root of all evil.

But, Sir, if I am prepossessed, what has Mr. Solmes to hope for?--Why
should he persevere? What must I think of the man who would wish me to
be his wife against my inclination?--And is it not a very harsh thing
for my friends to desire to see me married to one I cannot love, when
they will not be persuaded but that there is one whom I do love?

Treated as I am, now is the time for me to speak out or never.--Let
me review what it is Mr. Solmes depends upon on this occasion. Does he
believe, that the disgrace which I supper on his account, will give
him a merit with me? Does he think to win my esteem, through my uncles'
sternness to me; by my brother's contemptuous usage; by my sister's
unkindness; by being denied to visit, or be visited; and to correspond
with my chosen friend, although a person of unexceptionable honour and
prudence, and of my own sex; my servant to be torn from me, and another
servant set over me; to be confined, like a prisoner, to narrow and
disgraceful limits, in order avowedly to mortify me, and to break my
spirit; to be turned out of that family-management which I loved, and
had the greater pleasure in it, because it was an ease, as I thought, to
my mamma, and what my sister chose not; and yet, though time hangs heavy
upon my hands, to be so put out of my course, that I have as little
inclination as liberty to pursue any of my choice delights?--Are these
steps necessary to reduce me to a level so low, as to make me a fit wife
for this man?--Yet these are all he can have to trust to. And if
his reliance is on these measures, I would have him to know, that
he mistakes meekness and gentleness of disposition for servility and
baseness of heart.

I beseech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent of his mind and my
mind be considered: What are his qualities, by which he would hope to
win my esteem?--Dear, dear Sir, if I am to be compelled, let it be in
favour of a man that can read and write--that can teach me something:
For what a husband must that man make, who can do nothing but command;
and needs himself the instruction he should be qualified to give?

I may be conceited, Sir; I may be vain of my little reading; of my
writing; as of late I have more than once been told I am. But, Sir, the
more unequal the proposed match, if so: the better opinion I have of
myself, the worse I must have of him; and the more unfit are we for each
other.

Indeed, Sir, I must say, I thought my friends had put a higher value
upon me. My brother pretended once, that it was owing to such value,
that Mr. Lovelace's address was prohibited.--Can this be; and such a man
as Mr. Solmes be intended for me?

As to his proposed settlements, I hope I shall not incur your great
displeasure, if I say, what all who know me have reason to think (and
some have upbraided me for), that I despise those motives. Dear, dear
Sir, what are settlements to one who has as much of her own as she
wishes for?--Who has more in her own power, as a single person, than
it is probable she would be permitted to have at her disposal, as a
wife?--Whose expenses and ambition are moderate; and who, if she had
superfluities, would rather dispense them to the necessitous, than lay
them by her useless? If then such narrow motives have so little weight
with me for my own benefit, shall the remote and uncertain view of
family-aggrandizements, and that in the person of my brother and his
descendents, be thought sufficient to influence me?

Has the behaviour of that brother to me of late, or his consideration
for the family (which had so little weight with him, that he could
choose to hazard a life so justly precious as an only son's, rather than
not ratify passions which he is above attempting to subdue, and, give me
leave to say, has been too much indulged in, either with regard to his
own good, or the peace of any body related to him;) Has his behaviour, I
say, deserved of me in particular, that I should make a sacrifice of my
temporal (and, who knows? of my eternal) happiness, to promote a plan
formed upon chimerical, at least upon unlikely, contingencies; as I will
undertake to demonstrate, if I may be permitted to examine it?

I am afraid you will condemn my warmth: But does not the occasion
require it? To the want of a greater degree of earnestness in my
opposition, it seems, it is owing, that such advances have been made,
as have been made. Then, dear Sir, allow something, I beseech you, for a
spirit raised and embittered by disgraces, which (knowing my own heart)
I am confident to say, are unmerited.

But why have I said so much, in answer to the supposed charge of
prepossession, when I have declared to my mamma, as now, Sir, I do
to you, that if it be not insisted upon that I shall marry any other
person, particularly this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into any engagements
never to have the other, nor any man else, without their consents; that
is to say, without the consents of my father and my mother, and of you
my uncle, and my elder uncle, and my cousin Morden, as he is one of the
trustees for my grandfather's bounty to me?--As to my brother indeed, I
cannot say, that his treatment of me has been of late so brotherly,
as to entitle him to more than civility from me: and for this, give me
leave to add, he would be very much my debtor.

If I have not been explicit enough in declaring my dislike to Mr. Solmes
(that the prepossession which is charged upon me may not be supposed to
influence me against him) I do absolutely declare, That were there no
such man as Mr. Lovelace in the world, I would not have Mr. Solmes.
It is necessary, in some one of my letters to my dear friends, that I
should write so clearly as to put this matter out of all doubt: and to
whom can I better address myself with an explicitness that can admit
of no mistake, than to that uncle who professes the highest regard for
plain-dealing and sincerity?

Let me, for these reasons, be still more particular in some of my
exceptions to him.

Mr. Solmes appears to me (to all the world, indeed) to have a very
narrow mind, and no great capacity: he is coarse and indelicate; as
rough in his manners as in his person: he is not only narrow, but
covetous: being possessed of great wealth, he enjoys it not; nor has the
spirit to communicate to a distress of any kind. Does not his own sister
live unhappily, for want of a little of his superfluities? And suffers
not he his aged uncle, the brother of his own mother, to owe to
the generosity of strangers the poor subsistence he picks up from
half-a-dozen families?--You know, Sir, my open, free, communicative
temper: how unhappy must I be, circumscribed in his narrow, selfish
circle! out of which being with-held by this diabolical parsimony, he
dare no more stir, than a conjurer out of his; nor would let me.

Such a man, as this, love!--Yes, perhaps he may, my grandfather's
estate; which he has told several persons (and could not resist hinting
the same thing tome, with that sort of pleasure which a low mind takes,
when it intimates its own interest as a sufficient motive for it to
expect another's favour) lies so extremely convenient for him, that it
would double the value of a considerable part of his own. That estate,
and an alliance which would do credit to his obscurity and narrowness,
they make him think he can love, and induce him to believe he does: but
at most, he is but a second-place love. Riches were, are, and always
will be, his predominant passion. His were left him by a miser, on this
very account: and I must be obliged to forego all the choice delights
of my life, and be as mean as he, or else be quite unhappy. Pardon, Sir,
this severity of expression--one is apt to say more than one would of
a person one dislikes, when more is said in his favour than he can
possibly deserve; and when he is urged to my acceptance with so much
vehemence, that there is no choice left me.

Whether these things be perfectly so, or not, while I think they are,
it is impossible I should ever look upon Mr. Solmes in the light he is
offered to me. Nay, were he to be proved ten times better than I have
represented him, and sincerely think him; yet would he be still ten
times more disagreeable to me than any other man I know in the world.
Let me therefore beseech you, Sir, to become an advocate for your niece,
that she may not be made a victim to a man so highly disgustful to her.

You and my other uncle can do a great deal for me, if you please, with
my papa. Be persuaded, Sir, that I am not governed by obstinacy in this
case; but by aversion; an aversion I cannot overcome: for, if I have but
endeavoured to reason with myself, (out of regard to the duty I owe
to my father's will,) my heart has recoiled, and I have been averse to
myself, for offering but to argue with myself, in behalf of a man who,
in the light he appears to me, has no one merit; and who, knowing this
aversion, could not persevere as he does, if he had the spirit of a man.

If, Sir, you can think of the contents of this letter reasonable, I
beseech you to support them with your interest. If not--I shall be most
unhappy!--Nevertheless, it is but just in me so to write, as that Mr.
Solmes may know what he has to trust to.

Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious letter; and suffer it to have weight
with you; and you will for ever oblige

Your dutiful and affectionate niece,

CL. HARLOWE.


***


MR. ANTONY HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE

NIECE CLARY,

You had better not write to us, or to any of us. To me, particularly,
you had better never to have set pen to paper, on the subject whereon
you have written. He that is first in his own cause, saith the wise man,
seemeth just: but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. And so, in
this respect, I will be your neighbour: for I will search your heart to
the bottom; that is to say, if your letter be written from your heart.
Yet do I know what a task I have undertaken, because of the knack you
are noted for at writing. But in defence of a father's authority, in
behalf of the good, and honour, and prosperity of the family one comes
of, what a hard thing it would be, if one could not beat down all the
arguments a rebel child (how loth I am to write down that word of Miss
Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her obstinacy!

In the first place, don't you declare (and that contrary to your
declarations to your mother, remember that, girl!) that you prefer the
man we all hate, and who hates us as bad!--Then what a character have
you given of a worthy man! I wonder you dare write so freely of one we
all respect--but possibly it may be for that very reason.

How you begin your letter!--Because I value Mr. Solmes as my friend, you
treat him the worse--That's the plain dunstable of the matter, Miss!--I
am not such a fool but I can see that.--And so a noted whoremonger is
to be chosen before a man who is a money-lover!--Let me tell you, Niece,
this little becomes so nice a one as you have been always reckoned. Who,
think you, does more injustice, a prodigal man or a saving man?--The one
saves his own money; the other spends other people's. But your favourite
is a sinner in grain, and upon record.

The devil's in your sex! God forgive me for saying so--the nicest of
them will prefer a vile rake and wh---- I suppose I must not repeat the
word:--the word will offend, when the vicious denominated by that word
will be chosen!--I had not been a bachelor to this time, if I had not
seen such a mass of contradictions in you all.--Such gnat-strainers and
camel-swallowers, as venerable Holy Writ has it.

What names will perverseness call things by!--A prudent man, who intends
to be just to every body, is a covetous man!--While a vile, profligate
rake is christened with the appellation of a gallant man; and a polite
man, I'll warrant you!

It is my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have so much regard for you
as he professes, but for two reasons. And what are these?--Why, out of
spite to all of us--one of them. The other, because of your independent
fortune. I wish your good grandfather had not left what he did so much
in your own power, as I may say. But little did he imagine his beloved
grand-daughter would have turned upon all her friends as she has done!

What has Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you are prepossessed! Hey-day!
Is this you, cousin Clary!--Has he then nothing to hope for from your
father's, and mother's, and our recommendations?--No, nothing at all, it
seems!--O brave!--I should think that this, with a dutiful child, as we
took you to be, was enough. Depending on this your duty, we proceeded:
and now there is no help for it: for we will not be balked: neither
shall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that.

If your estate is convenient for him, what then? Does that (pert cousin)
make it out that he does not love you? He had need to expect some good
with you, that has so little good to hope for from you; mind that. But
pray, is not this estate our estate, as we may say? Have we not all an
interest in it, and a prior right, if right were to have taken place?
And was it not more than a good old man's dotage, God rest his soul!
that gave it you before us all?--Well then, ought we not to have a
choice who shall have it in marriage with you? and would you have the
conscience to wish us to let a vile fellow, who hates us all, run away
with it?--You bid me weigh what you write: do you weigh this, Girl: and
it will appear we have more to say for ourselves than you was aware of.

As to your hard treatment, as you call it, thank yourself for that. It
may be over when you will: so I reckon nothing upon that. You was not
banished and confined till all entreaty and fair speeches were tried
with you: mind that. And Mr. Solmes can't help your obstinacy: let that
be observed too.

As to being visited, and visiting; you never was fond of either: so
that's a grievance put into the scale to make weight.--As to disgrace,
that's as bad to us as to you: so fine a young creature! So much as we
used to brag of you too!--And besides, this is all in your power, as the
rest.

But your heart recoils, when you would persuade yourself to obey your
parent--Finely described, is it not!--Too truly described, I own, as you
go on. I know that you may love him if you will. I had a good mind to
bid you hate him; then, perhaps, you would like him the better: for I
have always found a most horrid romantic perverseness in your sex.--To
do and to love what you should not, is meat, drink, and vesture, to you
all.

I am absolutely of your brother's mind, That reading and writing, though
not too much for the wits of you young girls, are too much for your
judgments.--You say, you may be conceited, Cousin; you may be vain!--And
so you are, to despise this gentleman as you do. He can read and write
as well as most gentlemen, I can tell you that. Who told you Mr. Solmes
cannot read and write? But you must have a husband who can learn
you something!--I wish you knew but your duty as well as you do your
talents--that, Niece, you have of late days to learn; and Mr. Solmes
will therefore find something to instruct you in. I will not shew him
this letter of yours, though you seem to desire it, lest it should
provoke him to be too severe a schoolmaster, when you are his'n.

But now I think of it, suppose you are the reader at your pen than
he--You will make the more useful wife to him; won't you? For who so
good an economist as you?--And you may keep all of his accounts,
and save yourselves a steward.--And, let me tell you, this is a fine
advantage in a family: for those stewards are often sad dogs, and creep
into a man's estate before he knows where he is; and not seldom is he
forced to pay them interest for his own money.

I know not why a good wife should be above these things. It is better
than lying a-bed half the day, and junketing and card-playing all the
night, and making yourselves wholly useless to every good purpose in
your own families, as is now the fashion among ye. The duce take you all
that do so, say I!--Only that, thank my stars, I am a bachelor.

Then this is a province you are admirably versed in: you grieve that
it is taken from you here, you know. So here, Miss, with Mr. Solmes you
will have something to keep account of, for the sake of you and your
children: with the other, perhaps you will have an account to keep,
too--but an account of what will go over the left shoulder; only of what
he squanders, what he borrows, and what he owes, and never will pay.
Come, come, Cousin, you know nothing of the world; a man's a man; and
you may have many partners in a handsome man, and costly ones too, who
may lavish away all you save. Mr. Solmes therefore for my money, and I
hope for yours.

But Mr. Solmes is a coarse man. He is not delicate enough for your
niceness; because I suppose he dresses not like a fop and a coxcomb, and
because he lays not himself out in complimental nonsense, the poison of
female minds. He is a man of sense, that I can tell you. No man
talks more to the purpose to us: but you fly him so, that he has no
opportunity given him, to express it to you: and a man who loves, if he
have ever so much sense, looks a fool; especially when he is despised,
and treated as you treated him the last time he was in your company.

As to his sister; she threw herself away (as you want to do) against his
full warning: for he told her what she had to trust to, if she married
where she did marry. And he was as good as his word; and so an honest
man ought: offences against warning ought to be smarted for. Take care
this be not your case: mind that.

His uncle deserves no favour from him; for he would have circumvented
Mr. Solmes, and got Sir Oliver to leave to himself the estate he had
always designed for him his nephew, and brought him up in the hope of
it. Too ready forgiveness does but encourage offences: that's your good
father's maxim: and there would not be so many headstrong daughters as
there are, if this maxim were kept in mind.--Punishments are of service
to offenders; rewards should be only to the meriting: and I think the
former are to be dealt out rigourously, in willful cases.

As to his love; he shews it but too much for your deservings, as they
have been of late; let me tell you that: and this is his misfortune; and
may in time perhaps be yours.

As to his parsimony, which you wickedly call diabolical, [a very free
word in your mouth, let me tell ye], little reason have you of all
people for this, on whom he proposes, of his own accord, to settle all
he has in the world: a proof, let him love riches as he will, that he
loves you better. But that you may be without excuse on this score,
we will tie him up to your own terms, and oblige him by the
marriage-articles to allow you a very handsome quarterly sum to do what
you please with. And this has been told you before; and I have said it
to Mrs. Howe (that good and worthy lady) before her proud daughter, that
you might hear of it again.

To contradict the charge of prepossession to Lovelace, you offer never
to have him without our consents: and what is this saying, but that you
will hope on for our consents, and to wheedle and tire us out? Then he
will always be in expectation while you are single: and we are to live
on at this rate (are we?) vexed by you, and continually watchful about
you; and as continually exposed to his insolence and threats. Remember
last Sunday, Girl!--What might have happened, had your brother and he
met?--Moreover, you cannot do with such a spirit as his, as you can with
worthy Mr. Solmes: the one you make tremble; the other will make
you quake: mind that--and you will not be able to help yourself. And
remember, that if there should be any misunderstanding between one of
them and you, we should all interpose; and with effect, no doubt: but
with the other, it would be self-do, self-have; and who would either
care or dare to put in a word for you? Nor let the supposition of
matrimonial differences frighten you: honey-moon lasts not now-a-days
above a fortnight; and Dunmow flitch, as I have been informed, was never
claimed; though some say once it was. Marriage is a queer state, Child,
whether paired by the parties or by their friends. Out of three brothers
of us, you know, there was but one had courage to marry. And why was it,
do you think? We were wise by other people's experience.

Don't despise money so much: you may come to know the value of it: that
is a piece of instruction that you are to learn; and which, according to
your own notions, Mr. Solmes will be able to teach you.

I do indeed condemn your warmth. I will not allow for disgraces you
bring upon yourself. If I thought them unmerited, I would be your
advocate. But it was always my notion, that children should not dispute
their parents' authority. When your grandfather left his estate to you,
though his three sons, and a grandson, and your elder sister, were in
being, we all acquiesced: and why? Because it was our father's doing. Do
you imitate that example: if you will not, those who set it you have the
more reason to hold you inexcusable: mind that, Cousin.

You mention your brother too scornfully: and, in your letter to him, are
very disrespectful; and so indeed you are to your sister, in the letter
you wrote to her. Your brother, Madam, is your brother; and third older
than yourself, and a man: and pray be so good as not to forget what is
due to a brother, who (next to us three brothers) is the head of the
family, and on whom the name depends--as upon your dutiful compliance
laid down for the honour of the family you are come of. And pray now let
me ask you, If the honour of that will not be an honour to you?--If you
don't think so, the more unworthy you. You shall see the plan, if you
promise not to be prejudiced against it right or wrong. If you are not
besotted to that man, I am sure you will like it. If you are, were Mr.
Solmes an angel, it would signify nothing: for the devil is love, and
love is the devil, when it gets into any of your heads. Many examples
have I seen of that.

If there were no such man as Lovelace in the world, you would not have
Mr. Solmes.--You would not, Miss!--Very pretty, truly!--We see how your
spirit is embittered indeed.--Wonder not, since it is come to your will
not's, that those who have authority over you, say, You shall have the
other. And I am one: mind that. And if it behoves YOU to speak out,
Miss, it behoves US not to speak in. What's sauce for the goose is sauce
for the gander: take that in your thought too.

I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmes has the spirit of a man, and a
gentleman. I would admonish you therefore not to provoke it. He pities
you as much as he loves you. He says, he will convince you of his love
by deeds, since he is not permitted by you to express it by words. And
all his dependence is upon your generosity hereafter. We hope he may
depend upon that: we encourage him to think he may. And this heartens
him up. So that you may lay his constancy at your parents' and your
uncles' doors; and this will be another mark of your duty, you know.

You must be sensible, that you reflect upon your parents, and all of
us, when you tell me you cannot in justice accept of the settlements
proposed to you. This reflection we should have wondered at from you
once; but now we don't.

There are many other very censurable passages in this free letter of
yours; but we must place them to the account of your embittered spirit.
I am glad you mentioned that word, because we should have been at a
loss what to have called it.--I should much rather nevertheless have had
reason to give it a better name.

I love you dearly still, Miss. I think you, though my niece, one of the
finest young gentlewomen I ever saw. But, upon my conscience, I think
you ought to obey your parents, and oblige me and my brother John:
for you know very well, that we have nothing but your good at heart:
consistently indeed with the good and honour of all of us. What must we
think of any one of it, who would not promote the good of the whole?
and who would set one part of it against another?--Which God forbid, say
I!--You see I am for the good of all. What shall I get by it, let things
go as they will? Do I want any thing of any body for my own sake?--Does
my brother John?--Well, then, Cousin Clary, what would you be at, as I
may say?

O but you can't love Mr. Solmes!--But, I say, you know not what you
can do. You encourage yourself in your dislike. You permit your heart
(little did I think it was such a froward one) to recoil. Take it to
task, Niece; drive it on as fast as it recoils, [we do so in all our
sea-fights, and land-fights too, by our sailors and soldiers, or we
should not conquer]; and we are all sure you will overcome it. And why?
Because you ought. So we think, whatever you think: and whose thoughts
are to be preferred? You may be wittier than we; but, if you were wiser,
we have lived some of us, let me tell you, to very little purpose,
thirty or forty years longer than you.

I have written as long a letter as yours. I may not write in so lively,
or so polite a style as my Niece: but I think I have all the argument
on my side: and you will vastly oblige me, if you will shew me, by your
compliance with all our desires, that you think so too. If you do not,
you must not expect an advocate, or even a friend, in me, dearly as I
love you. For then I shall be sorry to be called

Your uncle, ANT. HARLOWE.

TUESDAY, TWO IN THE MORNING. POSTSCRIPT.

You must send me no more letters: but a compliable one you may send.
But I need not have forbid you; for I am sure this, by fair argument,
is unanswerable--I know it is. I have written day and night, I may say,
ever since Sunday morning, only church-time, or the like of that: but
this is the last, I can tell you, from

ANT. H.




LETTER XXXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY, MARCH 16.


Having met with such bad success in my application to my relations, I
have taken a step that will surprise you. It is no other than writing
a letter to Mr. Solmes himself. I sent it, and have his answer. He had
certainly help in it. For I have seen a letter of his, and indifferently
worded, as poorly spelt. Yet the superscription is of his dictating,
I dare say, for he is a formal wretch. With these, I shall enclose one
from my brother to me, on occasion of mine to Mr. Solmes. I did think
that it was possible to discourage the man from proceeding; and if I
could have done that, it would have answered all my wishes. It was worth
the trial. But you'll see nothing will do. My brother has taken his
measures too securely.


TO ROGER SOLMES, ESQ. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 15.

SIR,

You will wonder to receive a letter from me; and more still at the
uncommon subject of it. But the necessity of the case will justify me,
at least in my own apprehension; and I shall therefore make no other
apology for it.

When you first came acquainted with our family, you found the writer of
this one of the happiest creatures in the world; beloved by the best
and most indulgent of parents; and rejoicing in the kind favour of two
affectionate uncles, and in the esteem of every one.

But how is this scene now changed!--You was pleased to cast a favourable
eye upon me. You addressed yourself to my friends: your proposals were
approved of by them--approved of without consulting me; as if my choice
and happiness were of the least signification. Those who had a right to
all reasonable obedience from me, insisted upon it without reserve.
I had not the felicity to think as they did; almost the first time my
sentiments differed from theirs. I besought them to indulge me in a
point so important to my future happiness: but, alas, in vain! And then
(for I thought it was but honest) I told you my mind; and even that
my affections were engaged. But, to my mortification and surprise, you
persisted, and still persist.

The consequence of all is too grievous for me to repeat: you, who have
such free access to the rest of the family, know it too well--too well
you know it, either for the credit of your own generosity, or for my
reputation. I am used, on your account, as I never before was used, and
never before was thought to deserve to be used; and this was the hard,
the impossible, condition of their returning favour, that I must prefer
a man to all others, that of all others I cannot prefer.

Thus distressed, and made unhappy, and all to your sake, and through
your cruel perseverance, I write, Sir, to demand of you the peace of
mind you have robbed me of: to demand of you the love of so many dear
friends, of which you have deprived me; and, if you have the generosity
that should distinguish a man, and a gentleman, to adjure you not to
continue an address that has been attended with such cruel effects to
the creature you profess to esteem.

If you really value me, as my friends would make me believe, and as you
have declared you do, must it not be a mean and selfish value? A value
that can have no merit with the unhappy object of it, because it is
attended with effects so grievous to her? It must be for your own sake
only, not for mine. And even in this point you must be mistaken: For,
would a prudent man wish to marry one who has not a heart to give? Who
cannot esteem him? Who therefore must prove a bad wife!--And how cruel
would it be to make a poor creature a bad wife, whose pride it would be
to make a good one!

If I am capable of judging, our tempers and inclinations are vastly
different. Any other of my sex will make you happier than I can. The
treatment I meet with, and the obstinacy, as it is called, with which I
support myself under it, ought to convince you of this; were I not able
to give so good a reason for this my supposed perverseness, as that I
cannot consent to marry a man whom I cannot value.

But if, Sir, you have not so much generosity in your value for me, as
to desist for my own sake, let me conjure you, by the regard due to
yourself, and to your own future happiness, to discontinue your suit,
and place your affections on a worthier object: for why should you make
me miserable, and yourself not happy? By this means you will do all that
is now in your power to restore to me the affection of my friends; and,
if that can be, it will leave me in as happy a state as you found me
in. You need only to say, that you see there are no HOPES, as you will
perhaps complaisantly call it, of succeeding with me [and indeed, Sir,
there cannot be a greater truth]; and that you will therefore no more
think of me, but turn your thoughts another way.

Your compliance with this request will lay me under the highest
obligation to your generosity, and make me ever

Your well-wisher, and humble servant, CLARISSA HARLOWE.



TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE These most humbly present.

DEAREST MISS,

Your letter has had a very contrary effect upon me, to what you seem to
have expected from it. It has doubly convinced me of the excellency of
your mind, and of the honour of your disposition. Call it selfish, or
what you please, I must persist in my suit; and happy shall I be, if by
patience and perseverance, and a steady and unalterable devoir, I may at
last overcome the difficulty laid in my way.

As your good parents, your uncles, and other friends, are absolutely
determined you shall never have Mr. Lovelace, if they can help it; and
as I presume no other person is in the way, I will contentedly wait the
issue of this matter. And forgive me, dearest Miss, but a person should
sooner persuade me to give up to him my estate, as an instance of my
generosity, because he could not be happy without it, than I would a
much more valuable treasure, to promote the felicity of another, and
make his way easier to circumvent myself.

Pardon me, dear Miss; but I must persevere, though I am sorry you suffer
on my account, as you are pleased to think; for I never before saw the
woman I could love: and while there is any hope, and that you remain
undisposed of to some happier man, I must and will be

Your faithful and obsequious admirer, ROGER SOLMES.

MARCH 16.


***


MR. JAMES HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE MARCH 16.

What a fine whim you took into your head, to write a letter to Mr.
Solmes, to persuade him to give up his pretensions to you!--Of all the
pretty romantic flights you have delighted in, this was certainly one
of the most extraordinary. But to say nothing of what fires us all with
indignation against you (your owning your prepossession in a villain's
favour, and your impertinence to me, and your sister, and your uncles;
one of which has given it you home, child), how can you lay at Mr.
Solmes's door the usage you so bitterly complain of?--You know, little
fool as you are, that it is your fondness for Lovelace that has brought
upon you all these things; and which would have happened, whether Mr.
Solmes had honoured you with his addresses or not.

As you must needs know this to be true, consider, pretty witty Miss, if
your fond, love-sick heart can let you consider, what a fine figure all
your expostulations with us, and charges upon Mr. Solmes, make!--With
what propriety do you demand of him to restore to you your former
happiness (as you call it, and merely call it; for if you thought our
favour so, you would restore it to yourself), since it is yet in your
own power to do so? Therefore, Miss Pert, none of your pathetics, except
in the right place. Depend upon it, whether you have Mr. Solmes, or not,
you shall never have your heart's delight, the vile rake Lovelace, if
our parents, if our uncles, if I, can hinder it. No! you fallen angel,
you shall not give your father and mother such a son, nor me such a
brother, in giving yourself that profligate wretch for a husband. And so
set your heart at rest, and lay aside all thoughts of him, if ever you
expect forgiveness, reconciliation, or a kind opinion, from any of your
family; but especially from him, who, at present, styles himself

Your brother, JAMES HARLOWE.

P.S. I know your knack at letter-writing. If you send me an answer
for this, I will return it unopened; for I will not argue with your
perverseness in so plain a case--Only once for all, I was willing to put
you right as to Mr. Solmes; whom I think to blame to trouble his head
about you.




LETTER XXXIV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. FRIDAY, MARCH 17.


I receive, with great pleasure, the early and cheerful assurances of
your loyalty and love. And let our principal and most trusty friends
named in my last know that I do.

I would have thee, Jack, come down, as soon as thou canst. I believe I
shall not want the others so soon. Yet they may come down to Lord M.'s.
I will be there, if not to receive them, to satisfy my lord, that there
is no new mischief in hand, which will require his second intervention.

For thyself, thou must be constantly with me: not for my security: the
family dare do nothing but bully: they bark only at a distance: but
for my entertainment: that thou mayest, from the Latin and the English
classics, keep my lovesick soul from drooping.

Thou hadst best come to me here, in thy old corporal's coat: thy servant
out of livery; and to be upon a familiar footing with me, as a distant
relation, to be provided for by thy interest above--I mean not in
Heaven, thou mayest be sure. Thou wilt find me at a little alehouse,
they call it an inn; the White Hart, most terribly wounded, (but by
the weather only,) the sign: in a sorry village, within five miles from
Harlowe-place. Every body knows Harlowe-place, for, like Versailles, it
is sprung up from a dunghill, within every elderly person's remembrance.
Every poor body, particularly, knows it: but that only for a few years
past, since a certain angel has appeared there among the sons and
daughters of men.

The people here at the Hart are poor, but honest; and have gotten it
into their heads, that I am a man of quality in disguise; and there is
no reining-in their officious respect. Here is a pretty little
smirking daughter, seventeen six days ago. I call her my Rose-bud. Her
grandmother (for there is no mother), a good neat old woman, as ever
filled a wicker chair in a chimney-corner, has besought me to be
merciful to her.

This is the right way with me. Many and many a pretty rogue had I
spared, whom I did not spare, had my power been acknowledged, and my
mercy in time implored. But the debellare superbos should be my motto,
were I to have a new one.

This simple chit (for there is a simplicity in her thou wouldst be
highly pleased with: all humble; all officious; all innocent--I love her
for her humility, her officiousness, and even for her innocence) will be
pretty amusement to thee; while I combat with the weather, and dodge and
creep about the walls and purlieus of Harlowe-place. Thou wilt see in
her mind, all that her superiors have been taught to conceal, in order
to render themselves less natural, and of consequence less pleasing.

But I charge thee, that thou do not (what I would not permit myself to
do for the world--I charge thee, that thou do not) crop my Rose-bud. She
is the only flower of fragrance, that has blown in this vicinage for ten
years past, or will for ten years to come: for I have looked backward
to the have-been's, and forward to the will-be's; having but too much
leisure upon my hands in my present waiting.

I never was so honest for so long together since my matriculation. It
behoves me so to be--some way or other, my recess at this little inn may
be found out; and it will then be thought that my Rose-bud has attracted
me. A report in my favour, from simplicities so amiable, may establish
me; for the grandmother's relation to my Rose-bud may be sworn to: and
the father is an honest, poor man; has no joy, but in his Rose-bud.--O
Jack! spare thou, therefore, (for I shall leave thee often alone with
her, spare thou) my Rose-bud!--Let the rule I never departed from, but
it cost me a long regret, be observed to my Rose-bud!--never to ruin a
poor girl, whose simplicity and innocence were all she had to trust to;
and whose fortunes were too low to save her from the rude contempts of
worse minds than her own, and from an indigence extreme: such a one will
only pine in secret; and at last, perhaps, in order to refuge herself
from slanderous tongues and virulence, be induced to tempt some
guilty stream, or seek her end in the knee-encircling garter, that
peradventure, was the first attempt of abandoned love.--No defiances
will my Rose-bud breathe; no self-dependent, thee-doubting watchfulness
(indirectly challenging thy inventive machinations to do their worst)
will she assume. Unsuspicious of her danger, the lamb's throat will
hardly shun thy knife!--O be not thou the butcher of my lambkin!

The less thou be so, for the reason I am going to give thee--The gentle
heart is touched by love: her soft bosom heaves with a passion she
has not yet found a name for. I once caught her eye following a young
carpenter, a widow neighbour's son, living [to speak in her dialect] at
the little white house over the way. A gentle youth he also seems to be,
about three years older than herself: playmates from infancy, till
his eighteenth and her fifteenth year furnished a reason for a greater
distance in shew, while their hearts gave a better for their being
nearer than ever--for I soon perceived the love reciprocal. A scrape and
a bow at first seeing his pretty mistress; turning often to salute her
following eye; and, when a winding lane was to deprive him of her sight,
his whole body turned round, his hat more reverently doffed than before.
This answered (for, unseen, I was behind her) by a low courtesy, and
a sigh, that Johnny was too far off to hear!--Happy whelp! said I to
myself.--I withdrew; and in tript my Rose-bud, as if satisfied with the
dumb shew, and wishing nothing beyond it.

I have examined the little heart. She has made me her confidant. She
owns, she could love Johnny Barton very well: and Johnny Barton has told
her, he could love her better than any maiden he ever saw--but, alas!
it must not be thought of. Why not be thought of!--She don't know!--And
then she sighed: But Johnny has an aunt, who will give him an hundred
pounds, when his time is out; and her father cannot give her but a few
things, or so, to set her out with: and though Johnny's mother says, she
knows not where Johnny would have a prettier, or notabler wife, yet--And
then she sighed again--What signifies talking?--I would not have Johnny
be unhappy and poor for me!--For what good would that do me, you know,
Sir!

What would I give [by my soul, my angel will indeed reform me, if her
friends' implacable folly ruin us not both!--What would I give] to have
so innocent and so good a heart, as either my Rose-bud's, or Johnny's!

I have a confounded mischievous one--by nature too, I think!--A good
motion now-and-then rises from it: but it dies away presently--a love
of intrigue--an invention for mischief--a triumph in subduing--fortune
encouraging and supporting--and a constitution--What signifies
palliating? But I believe I had been a rogue, had I been a plough-boy.

But the devil's in this sex! Eternal misguiders. Who, that has once
trespassed with them, ever recovered his virtue? And yet where there is
not virtue, which nevertheless we freelivers are continually plotting
to destroy, what is there even in the ultimate of our wishes with
them?--Preparation and expectation are in a manner every thing:
reflection indeed may be something, if the mind be hardened above
feeling the guilt of a past trespass: but the fruition, what is there in
that? And yet that being the end, nature will not be satisfied without
it.

See what grave reflections an innocent subject will produce! It gives
me some pleasure to think, that it is not out of my power to reform:
but then, Jack, I am afraid I must keep better company than I do at
present--for we certainly harden one another. But be not cast down, my
boy; there will be time enough to give the whole fraternity warning to
choose another leader: and I fancy thou wilt be the man.

Mean time, as I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very
capital enormity, to do some good by way of atonement; and as I believe
I am a pretty deal indebted on that score, I intend, before I leave
these parts (successfully shall I leave them I hope, or I shall be
tempted to double the mischief by way of revenge, though not to my
Rose-bud any) to join an hundred pounds to Johnny's aunt's hundred
pounds, to make one innocent couple happy.--I repeat therefore, and for
half a dozen more therefores, spare thou my Rose-bud.

An interruption--another letter anon; and both shall go together.




LETTER XXXV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


I have found out by my watchful spy almost as many of my charmer's
motions, as those of the rest of her relations. It delights me to think
how the rascal is caressed by the uncles and nephew; and let into their
secrets; yet it proceeds all the time by my line of direction. I have
charged him, however, on forfeiture of his present weekly stipend, and
my future favour, to take care, that neither my beloved, nor any of
the family suspect him: I have told him that he may indeed watch her
egresses and regresses; but that only keep off other servants from her
paths; yet not to be seen by her himself.

The dear creature has tempted him, he told them, with a bribe [which she
never offered] to convey a letter [which she never wrote] to Miss Howe;
he believes, with one enclosed (perhaps to me): but he declined it: and
he begged they would take notice of it to her. This brought him a stingy
shilling; great applause; and an injunction followed it to all the
servants, for the strictest look-out, lest she should contrive some way
to send it--and, above an hour after, an order was given him to throw
himself in her way; and (expressing his concern for denying her request)
to tender his service to her, and to bring them her letter: which it
will be proper for him to report that she has refused to give him.

Now seest thou not, how many good ends this contrivance answers?

In the first place, the lady is secured by it, against her own
knowledge, in the liberty allowed her of taking her private walks in the
garden: for this attempt has confirmed them in their belief, that now
they have turned off her maid, she has no way to send a letter out of
the house: if she had, she would not have run the risque of tempting
a fellow who had not been in her secret--so that she can prosecute
unsuspectedly her correspondence with me and Miss Howe.

In the next place, it will perhaps afford me an opportunity of a private
interview with her, which I am meditating, let her take it as she will;
having found out by my spy (who can keep off every body else) that
she goes every morning and evening to a wood-house remote from the
dwelling-house, under pretence of visiting and feeding a set of
bantam-poultry, which were produced from a breed that was her
grandfather's, and of which for that reason she is very fond; as also of
some other curious fowls brought from the same place. I have an account
of all her motions here. And as she has owned to me in one of her
letters that she corresponds privately with Miss Howe, I presume it is
by this way.

The interview I am meditating, will produce her consent, I hope, to
other favours of the like kind: for, should she not choose the place
in which I am expecting to see her, I can attend her any where in the
rambling Dutch-taste garden, whenever she will permit me that honour:
for my implement, high Joseph Leman, has procured me the opportunity of
getting two keys made to the garden-door (one of which I have given him
for reasons good); which door opens to the haunted coppice, as tradition
has made the servants think it; a man having been found hanging in it
about twenty years ago: and Joseph, upon proper notice, will leave it
unbolted.

But I was obliged previously to give him my honour, that no mischief
should happen to any of my adversaries, from this liberty: for the
fellow tells me, that he loves all his masters: and, only that he knows
I am a man of honour; and that my alliance will do credit to the family;
and after prejudices are overcome, every body will think so; or he would
not for the world act the part he does.

There never was a rogue, who had not a salvo to himself for being
so.--What a praise to honesty, that every man pretends to it, even at
the instant that he knows he is pursuing the methods that will perhaps
prove him a knave to the whole world, as well as to his own conscience!

But what this stupid family can mean, to make all this necessary, I
cannot imagine. My REVENGE and my LOVE are uppermost by turns. If
the latter succeed not, the gratifying of the former will be my only
consolation: and, by all that's good, they shall feel it; although for
it I become an exile from my native country for ever.

I will throw myself into my charmer's presence. I have twice already
attempted it in vain. I shall then see what I may depend upon from her
favour. If I thought I had no prospect of that, I should be tempted to
carry her off. That would be a rape worthy of Jupiter!

But all gentle shall be my movements: all respectful, even to reverence,
my address to her--her hand shall be the only witness to the pressure
of my lip--my trembling lip: I know it will tremble, if I do not bid
it tremble. As soft my sighs, as the sighs of my gentle Rose-bud. By my
humility will I invite her confidence: the loneliness of the place shall
give me no advantage: to dissipate her fears, and engage her reliance
upon my honour for the future, shall be my whole endeavour: but
little will I complain of, not at all will I threaten, those who are
continually threatening me: but yet with a view to act the part of
Dryden's lion; to secure my love, or to let loose my vengeance upon my
hunters.

 What tho' his mighty soul his grief contains?
 He meditates revenge who least complains:
 And like a lion slumb'ring in his way,
 Or sleep dissembling, while he waits his prey,
 His fearless foes within his distance draws,
 Constrains his roaring, and contracts his paws:
 Till at the last, his time for fury found,
 He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground:
 The prostrate vulgar passes o'er, and spares,
 But, with a lordly rage, his hunter tears.




LETTER XXXVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SATURDAY, MARCH 18.


I have been frighted out of my wits--still am in a manner out of
breath--thus occasioned--I went down, under the usual pretence, in
hopes to find something from you. Concerned at my disappointment, I was
returning from the wood-house, when I heard a rustling as of somebody
behind a stack of wood. I was extremely surprised: but still more, to
behold a man coming from behind the furthermost stack. Oh! thought I, at
that moment, the sin of a prohibited correspondence!

In the same point of time that I saw him, he besought me not to be
frighted: and, still nearer approaching me, threw open a horseman's
coat: And who should it be but Mr. Lovelace!--I could not scream out
(yet attempted to scream, the moment I saw a man; and again, when I saw
who it was); for I had no voice: and had I not caught hold of a prop
which supported the old roof, I should have sunk.

I had hitherto, as you know, kept him at a distance: And now, as I
recovered myself, judge of my first emotions, when I recollected his
character from every mouth of my family; his enterprising temper; and
found myself alone with him, in a place so near a bye-lane, and so
remote from the house.

But his respectful behaviour soon dissipated these fears, and gave me
others; lest we should be seen together, and information of it given to
my brother: the consequences of which, I could readily think, would be,
if not further mischief, an imputed assignation, a stricter confinement,
a forfeited correspondence with you, my beloved friend, and a pretence
for the most violent compulsion: and neither the one set of reflections,
nor the other, acquitted him to me for his bold intrusion.

As soon therefore as I could speak, I expressed with the greatest warmth
my displeasure; and told him, that he cared not how much he exposed me
to the resentment of all my friends, provided he could gratify his own
impetuous humour. I then commanded him to leave the place that moment;
and was hurrying from him, when he threw himself in the way at my feet,
beseeching my stay for one moment; declaring, that he suffered himself
to be guilty of this rashness, as I thought it, to avoid one much
greater:--for, in short, he could not bear the hourly insults he
received from my family, with the thoughts of having so little interest
in my favour, that he could not promise himself that his patience and
forbearance would be attended with any other issue than to lose me for
ever, and be triumphed over and insulted upon it.

This man, you know, has very ready knees. You have said, that he ought,
in small points, frequently to offend, on purpose to shew what an
address he is master of.

He ran on, expressing his apprehensions that a temper so gentle and
obliging, as he said mine was, to every body but him, (and a dutifulness
so exemplary inclined me to do my part to others, whether they did
theirs or not by me,) would be wrought upon in favour of a man set up in
part to be revenged upon myself, for my grandfather's envied distinction
of me; and in part to be revenged upon him, for having given life to
one, who would have taken his; and now sought to deprive him of hopes
dearer to him than life.

I told him, he might be assured, that the severity and ill-usage I
met with would be far from effecting the proposed end: that although I
could, with great sincerity, declare for a single life (which had always
been my choice); and particularly, that if ever I married, if they would
not insist upon the man I had an aversion to, it should not be with the
man they disliked--

He interrupted me here: He hoped I would forgive him for it; but
he could not help expressing his great concern, that, after so many
instances of his passionate and obsequious devotion--

And pray, Sir, said I, let me interrupt you in my turn;--Why don't you
assert, in still plainer words, the obligation you have laid me under by
this your boasted devotion? Why don't you let me know, in terms as high
as your implication, that a perseverance I have not wished for, which
has set all my relations at variance with me, is a merit that throws
upon me the guilt of ingratitude for not having answered it as you seem
to expect?

I must forgive him, he said, if he, who pretended only to a comparative
merit, (and otherwise thought no man living could deserve me,) had
presumed to hope for a greater share in my favour, than he had hitherto
met with, when such men as Mr. Symmes, Mr. Wyerley, and now, lastly, so
vile a reptile as this Solmes, however discouraged by myself, were made
his competitors. As to the perseverance I mentioned, it was impossible
for him not to persevere: but I must needs know, that were he not in
being, the terms Solmes had proposed were such, as would have involved
me in the same difficulties with my relations that I now laboured under.
He therefore took the liberty to say, that my favour to him, far from
increasing those difficulties, would be the readiest way to extricate me
from them. They had made it impossible [he told me, with too much truth]
to oblige them any way, but by sacrificing myself to Solmes. They were
well apprized besides of the difference between the two; one, whom they
hoped to manage as they pleased; the other, who could and would protect
me from every insult; and who had natural prospects much superior to my
brother's foolish views of a title.

How comes this man to know so well all our foibles? But I more wonder,
how he came to have a notion of meeting me in this place?

I was very uneasy to be gone; and the more as the night came on apace.
But there was no getting from him, till I had heard a great deal more of
what he had to say.

As he hoped, that I would one day make him the happiest man in the
world, he assured me, that he had so much regard for my fame, that he
would be as far from advising any step that was likely to cast a shade
upon my reputation, (although that step was to be ever so much in his
own favour,) as I would be to follow such advice. But since I was not
to be permitted to live single, he would submit it to my consideration,
whether I had any way but one to avoid the intended violence to my
inclinations--my father so jealous of his authority: both my uncles in
my father's way of thinking: my cousin Morden at a distance: my uncle
and aunt Hervey awed into insignificance, was his word: my brother and
sister inflaming every one: Solmes's offers captivating: Miss Howe's
mother rather of a party with them, for motives respecting example to
her own daughter.

And then he asked me, if I would receive a letter from Lady Betty
Lawrance, on this occasion: for Lady Sarah Sadleir, he said, having
lately lost her only child, hardly looked into the world, or thought of
it farther than to wish him married, and, preferably to all the women in
the world, with me.

To be sure, my dear, there is a great deal in what the man said--I may
be allowed to say this, without an imputed glow or throb. But I told
him nevertheless, that although I had great honour for the ladies he
was related to, yet I should not choose to receive a letter on a subject
that had a tendency to promote an end I was far from intending to
promote: that it became me, ill as I was treated at present, to hope
every thing, to bear every thing, and to try ever thing: when my father
saw my steadfastness, and that I would die rather than have Mr. Solmes,
he would perhaps recede--

Interrupting me, he represented the unlikelihood there was of that,
from the courses they had entered upon; which he thus enumerated:--Their
engaging Mrs. Howe against me, in the first place, as a person I might
have thought to fly to, if pushed to desperation--my brother continually
buzzing in my father's ears, that my cousin Morden would soon arrive,
and then would insist upon giving me possession of my grandfather's
estate, in pursuance of the will; which would render me independent
of my father--their disgraceful confinement of me--their dismissing so
suddenly my servant, and setting my sister's over me--their engaging my
mother, contrary to her own judgment, against me: these, he said, were
all so many flagrant proofs that they would stick at nothing to carry
their point; and were what made him inexpressibly uneasy.

He appealed to me, whether ever I knew my father recede from any
resolution he had once fixed; especially, if he thought either
his prerogative, or his authority concerned in the question. His
acquaintance with our family, he said, enabled him to give several
instances (but they would be too grating to me) of an arbitrariness
that had few examples even in the families of princes: an arbitrariness,
which the most excellent of women, my mother, too severely experienced.
He was proceeding, as I thought, with reflections of this sort; and I
angrily told him, I would not permit my father to be reflected upon;
adding, that his severity to me, however unmerited, was not a warrant
for me to dispense with my duty to him.

He had no pleasure, he said, in urging any thing that could be so
construed; for, however well warranted he was to make such reflections
from the provocations they were continually giving him, he knew how
offensive to me any liberties of this sort would be. And yet he must
own, that it was painful to him, who had youth and passions to be
allowed for, as well as others, and who had always valued himself under
speaking his mind, to curb himself, under such treatment. Nevertheless,
his consideration for me would make him confine himself, in his
observations, to facts that were too flagrant, and too openly avowed, to
be disputed. It could not therefore justly displease, he would venture
to say, if he made this natural inference from the premises, That
if such were my father's behaviour to a wife, who disputed not the
imaginary prerogatives he was so unprecedently fond of asserting, what
room had a daughter to hope, that he would depart from an
authority he was so earnest, and so much more concerned, to
maintain?--Family-interests at the same time engaging; an aversion,
however causelessly conceived, stimulating my brother's and sister's
resentments and selfish views cooperating; and my banishment from their
presence depriving me of all personal plea or entreaty in my own favour.

How unhappy, my dear, that there is but too much reason for these
observations, and for this inference; made, likewise, with more coolness
and respect to my family than one would have apprehended from a man
so much provoked, and of passions so high, and generally thought
uncontroulable!

Will you not question me about throbs and glows, if from such instances
of a command over his fiery temper, for my sake, I am ready to infer,
that were my friends capable of a reconciliation with him, he might be
affected by arguments apparently calculated for his present and future
good! Nor is it a very bad indication, that he has such moderate notions
of that very high prerogative in husbands, of which we in our family
have been accustomed to hear so much.

He represented to me, that my present disgraceful confinement was known
to all the world: that neither my sister nor my brother scrupled to
represent me as an obliged and favoured child in a state of actual
rebellion. That, nevertheless, every body who knew me was ready to
justify me for an aversion to a man whom every body thought utterly
unworthy of me, and more fit for my sister: that unhappy as he was,
in not having been able to make any greater impression upon me in his
favour, all the world gave me to him. Nor was there but one objection
made to him by his very enemies (his birth, his prospects all very
unexceptionable, and the latter splendid); and that objection, he
thanked God, and my example, was in a fair way of being removed for
ever: since he had seen his error, and was heartily sick of the courses
he had followed; which, however, were far less enormous than malice and
envy had represented them to be. But of this he should say the less, as
it were much better to justify himself by his actions, than by the most
solemn asseverations and promises. And then, complimenting my person,
he assured me (for that he always loved virtue, although he had not
followed its rules as he ought) that he was still more captivated with
the graces of my mind: and would frankly own, that till he had the
honour to know me, he had never met with an inducement sufficient to
enable him to overcome an unhappy kind of prejudice to matrimony; which
had made him before impenetrable to the wishes and recommendations of
all his relations.

You see, my dear, he scruples not to speak of himself, as his enemies
speak of him. I can't say, but his openness in these particulars gives
a credit to his other professions. I should easily, I think, detect
an hypocrite: and this man particularly, who is said to have allowed
himself in great liberties, were he to pretend to instantaneous lights
and convictions--at this time of life too. Habits, I am sensible, are
not so easily changed. You have always joined with me in remarking, that
he will speak his mind with freedom, even to a degree of unpoliteness
sometimes; and that his very treatment of my family is a proof that he
cannot make a mean court to any body for interest sake--What pity, where
there are such laudable traces, that they should have been so mired, and
choaked up, as I may say!--We have heard, that the man's head is better
than his heart: But do you really think Mr. Lovelace can have a very bad
heart? Why should not there be something in blood in the human
creature, as well as in the ignobler animals? None of his family are
exceptionable--but himself, indeed. The characters of the ladies are
admirable. But I shall incur the imputation I wish to avoid. Yet what a
look of censoriousness does it carry in an unsparing friend, to take one
to task for doing that justice, and making those which one ought without
scruple to do, and to make, in the behalf of any other man living?

He then again pressed me to receive a letter of offered protection from
Lady Betty. He said, that people of birth stood a little too much upon
punctilio; as people of value also did (but indeed birth, worthily lived
up to, was virtue: virtue, birth; the inducements to a decent punctilio
the same; the origin of both one): [how came this notion from him!]
else, Lady Betty would write to me: but she would be willing to be first
apprized that her offer will be well received--as it would have the
appearance of being made against the liking of one part of my family;
and which nothing would induce her to make, but the degree of unworthy
persecution which I actually laboured under, and had reason further to
apprehend.

I told him, that, however greatly I thought myself obliged to Lady Betty
Lawrance, if this offer came from herself; yet it was easy to see to
what it led. It might look like vanity in me perhaps to say, that this
urgency in him, on this occasion, wore the face of art, in order to
engage me into measures from which I might not easily extricate myself.
I said, that I should not be affected by the splendour of even a royal
title. Goodness, I thought, was greatness. That the excellent characters
of the ladies of his family weighed more with me, than the consideration
that they were half-sisters to Lord M. and daughters of an earl: that
he would not have found encouragement from me, had my friends been
consenting to his address, if he had only a mere relative merit to those
ladies: since, in that case, the very reasons that made me admire them,
would have been so many objections to their kinsman.

I then assured him, that it was with infinite concern, that I had found
myself drawn into an epistolary correspondence with him; especially
since that correspondence had been prohibited: and the only agreeable
use I could think of making of this unexpected and undesired interview,
was, to let him know, that I should from henceforth think myself obliged
to discontinue it. And I hoped, that he would not have the thought of
engaging me to carry it on by menacing my relations.

There was light enough to distinguish, that he looked very grave upon
this. He so much valued my free choice, he said, and my unbiassed
favour, (scorning to set himself upon a footing with Solmes in the
compulsory methods used in that man's behalf,) that he should hate
himself, were he capable of a view of intimidating me by so very poor
a method. But, nevertheless, there were two things to be considered:
First, that the continual outrages he was treated with; the spies set
over him, one of which he had detected; the indignities all his family
were likewise treated with;--as also, myself; avowedly in malice to him,
or he should not presume to take upon himself to resent for me, without
my leave [the artful wretch saw he would have lain open here, had he not
thus guarded]--all these considerations called upon him to shew a proper
resentment: and he would leave it to me to judge, whether it would be
reasonable for him, as a man of spirit, to bear such insults, if it
were not for my sake. I would be pleased to consider, in the next place,
whether the situation I was in, (a prisoner in my father's house, and my
whole family determined to compel me to marry a man unworthy of me, and
that speedily, and whether I consented or not,) admitted of delay in the
preventive measures he was desirous to put me upon, in the last resort
only. Nor was there a necessity, he said, if I were actually in Lady
Betty's protection, that I should be his, if, afterwards, I should see
any thing objectionable in his conduct.

But what would the world conclude would be the end, I demanded, were I,
in the last resort, as he proposed, to throw myself into the protection
of his friends, but that it was with such a view?

And what less did the world think of me now, he asked, than that I was
confined that I might not? You are to consider, Madam, you have not now
an option; and to whom is it owing that you have not; and that you
are in the power of those (parents, why should I call them?) who are
determined, that you shall not have an option. All I propose is, that
you will embrace such a protection--but not till you have tried every
way, to avoid the necessity for it.

And give me leave to say, proceeded he, that if a correspondence, on
which I have founded all my hopes, is, at this critical conjuncture, to
be broken off; and if you are resolved not to be provided against the
worst; it must be plain to me, that you will at last yield to that
worst--worst to me only--it cannot be to you--and then! [and he put his
hand clenched to his forehead] How shall I bear this supposition?--Then
will you be that Solmes's!--But, by all that's sacred, neither he, nor
your brother, nor your uncles, shall enjoy their triumph--Perdition
seize my soul, if they shall!

The man's vehemence frightened me: yet, in resentment, I would have
left him; but, throwing himself at my feet again, Leave me not thus--I
beseech you, dearest Madam, leave me not thus, in despair! I kneel not,
repenting of what I have vowed in such a case as that I have supposed.
I re-vow it, at your feet!--and so he did. But think not it is by way
of menace, or to intimidate you to favour me. If your heart inclines
you [and then he arose] to obey your father (your brother rather) and to
have Solmes; although I shall avenge myself on those who have insulted
me, for their insults to myself and family, yet will I tear out my heart
from this bosom (if possible with my own hands) were it to scruple to
give up its ardours to a woman capable of such a preference.

I told him, that he talked to me in very high language; but he might
assure himself that I never would have Mr. Solmes, (yet that this I said
not in favour to him,) and I had declared as much to my relations, were
there not such a man as himself in the world.

Would I declare, that I would still honour him with my
correspondence?--He could not bear, that, hoping to obtain greater
instances of my favour, he should forfeit the only one he had to boast
of.

I bid him forbear rashness or resentment to any of my family, and I
would, for some time at least, till I saw what issue my present trials
were likely to have, proceed with a correspondence, which, nevertheless,
my heart condemned--

And his spirit him, the impatient creature said, interrupting me, for
bearing what he did; when he considered, that the necessity of it was
imposed upon him, not by my will, (for then he would bear it cheerfully,
and a thousand times more,) but by creatures--And there he stopt.

I told him plainly that he might thank himself (whose indifferent
character, as to morals, had given such a handle against him) for all.
It was but just, that a man should be spoken evil of, who set no value
upon his reputation.

He offered to vindicate himself. But I told him, I would judge him by
his own rule--by his actions, not by his professions.

Were not his enemies, he said, so powerful, and so determined; and had
they not already shewn their intentions in such high acts of even cruel
compulsion; but would leave me to my choice, or to my desire of living
single; he would have been content to undergo a twelvemonth's probation,
or more: but he was confident, that one month would either complete all
their purposes, or render them abortive: and I best knew what hopes I
had of my father's receding--he did not know him, if I had any.

I said, I would try every method, that either my duty or my influence
upon any of them should suggest, before I would put myself into any
other protection: and, if nothing else would do, would resign the envied
estate; and that I dared to say would.

He was contented, he said, to abide that issue. He should be far from
wishing me to embrace any other protection, but, as he had frequently
said, in the last necessity. But dearest creature, said he, catching
my hand with ardour, and pressing it to his lips, if the yielding up
of that estate will do--resign it--and be mine--and I will corroborate,
with all my soul, your resignation!

This was not ungenerously said: But what will not these men say to
obtain belief, and a power over one?

I made many efforts to go; and now it was so dark, that I began to have
great apprehensions. I cannot say from his behaviour: indeed, he has a
good deal raised himself in my opinion by the personal respect, even to
reverence, which he paid me during the whole conference: for, although
he flamed out once, upon a supposition that Solmes might succeed, it was
upon a supposition that would excuse passion, if any thing could, you
know, in a man pretending to love with fervour; although it was so
levelled, that I could not avoid resenting it.

He recommended himself to my favour at parting, with great earnestness,
yet with as great submission; not offering to condition any thing with
me; although he hinted his wishes for another meeting: which I forbad
him ever attempting again in the same place. And I will own to you,
from whom I should be really blamable to conceal any thing, that his
arguments (drawn from the disgraceful treatment I meet with) of what
I am to expect, make me begin to apprehend that I shall be under an
obligation to be either the one man's or the other's--and, if so, I
fancy I shall not incur your blame, were I to say which of the two it
must be: you have said, which it must not be. But, O my dear, the single
life is by far the most eligible to me: indeed it is. And I hope yet to
be permitted to make that option.

I got back without observation; but the apprehension that I should
not, gave me great uneasiness; and made me begin a letter in a greater
flutter than he gave me cause to be in, except at the first seeing him;
for then indeed my spirits failed me; and it was a particular felicity,
that, in such a place, in such a fright, and alone with him, I fainted
not away.

I should add, that having reproached him with his behaviour the last
Sunday at church, he solemnly assured me, that it was not what had been
represented to me: that he did not expect to see me there: but hoped to
have an opportunity to address himself to my father, and to be permitted
to attend him home. But that the good Dr. Lewen had persuaded him not
to attempt speaking to any of the family, at that time; observing to him
the emotions into which his presence had put every body. He intended
no pride, or haughtiness of behaviour, he assured me; and that the
attributing such to him was the effect of that ill-will which he had
the mortification to find insuperable: adding, that when he bowed to my
mother, it was a compliment he intended generally to every one in the
pew, as well as to her, whom he sincerely venerated.

If he may be believed, (and I should think he would not have come
purposely to defy my family, yet expect favour from me,) one may see,
my dear, the force of hatred, which misrepresents all things. Yet why
should Shorey (except officiously to please her principals) make a
report in his disfavour? He told me, that he would appeal to Dr. Lewen
for his justification on this head; adding, that the whole conversation
between the Doctor and him turned upon his desire to attempt to
reconcile himself to us all, in the face of the church; and upon
the Doctor's endeavouring to dissuade him from making such a public
overture, till he knew how it would be accepted. But to what purpose
his appeal, when I am debarred from seeing that good man, or any one who
would advise me what to do in my present difficult situation!

I fancy, my dear, however, that there would hardly be a guilty person in
the world, were each suspected or accused person to tell his or her own
story, and be allowed any degree of credit.

I have written a very long letter.

To be so particular as you require in subjects of conversation, it is
impossible to be short.

I will add to it only the assurance, That I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate and faithful friend and servant, CLARISSA HARLOWE.

You'll be so good, my dear, as to remember, that the date of your last
letter to me was the 9th.




LETTER XXXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE. SUNDAY, MARCH 19.


I beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for having given you occasion to
remind me of the date of my last. I was willing to have before me as
much of the workings of your wise relations as possible; being verily
persuaded, that one side or the other would have yielded by this
time: and then I should have had some degree of certainty to found my
observations upon. And indeed what can I write that I have not already
written?--You know, that I can do nothing but rave at your stupid
persecutors: and that you don't like. I have advised you to resume your
own estate: that you won't do. You cannot bear the thoughts of having
their Solmes: and Lovelace is resolved you shall be his, let who will
say to the contrary. I think you must be either the one man's or the
other's. Let us see what their next step will be.

As to Lovelace, while he tells his own story (having also behaved so
handsomely on his intrusion in the wood-house, and intended so well at
church) who can say, that the man is in the least blameworthy?--Wicked
people! to combine against so innocent a man!--But, as I said, let us
see what their next step will be, and what course you will take upon it;
and then we may be the more enlightened.

As to your change of style to your uncles, and brother and sister, since
they were so fond of attributing to you a regard for Lovelace, and would
not be persuaded to the contrary; and since you only strengthened their
arguments against yourself by denying it; you did but just as I would
have done, in giving way to their suspicions, and trying what that would
do--But if--but if--Pray, my dear, indulge me a little--you yourself
think it was necessary to apologize to me for that change of style to
them--and till you will speak out like a friend to her unquestionable
friend, I must tease you a little--let it run therefore; for it will
run--

If, then, there be not a reason for this change of style, which you have
not thought fit to give me, be so good as to watch, as I once before
advised you, how the cause for it will come on--Why should it be
permitted to steal upon you, and you know nothing of the matter?

When we get a great cold, we are apt to puzzle ourselves to find out
when it began, or how we got it; and when that is accounted for, down
we sit contented, and let it have its course; or, if it be very
troublesome, take a sweat, or use other means to get rid of it. So
my dear, before the malady you wot of, yet wot not of, grows so
importunate, as that you must be obliged to sweat it out, let me advise
you to mind how it comes on. For I am persuaded, as surely as that I am
now writing to you, that the indiscreet violence of your friends on the
one hand, and the insinuating address of Lovelace on the other, (if the
man be not a greater fool than any body thinks him,) will effectually
bring it to this, and do all his work for him.

But let it--if it must be Lovelace or Solmes, the choice cannot admit of
debate. Yet if all be true that is reported, I should prefer almost any
of your other lovers to either; unworthy as they also are. But who can
be worthy of a Clarissa?

I wish you are not indeed angry with me for harping so much on one
string. I must own, that I should think myself inexcusable so to do,
(the rather, as I am bold enough to imagine it a point out of all doubt
from fifty places in your letters, were I to labour the proof,) if you
would ingenuously own--

Own what? you'll say. Why, my Anna Howe, I hope you don't think that I
am already in love--!

No, to be sure! How can your Anna Howe have such a thought?--What then
shall we call it? You might have helped me to a phrase--A conditional
kind of liking!--that's it.--O my friend! did I not know how much you
despise prudery; and that you are too young, and too lovely, to be a
prude--

But, avoiding such hard names, let me tell you one thing, my dear (which
nevertheless I have told you before); and that is this: that I shall
think I have reason to be highly displeased with you, if, when you write
to me, you endeavour to keep from me any secret of your heart.

Let me add, that if you would clearly and explicitly tell me, how far
Lovelace has, or has not, a hold in your affections, I could better
advise you what to do, than at present I can. You, who are so famed
for prescience, as I may call it; and than whom no young lady ever had
stronger pretensions to a share of it; have had, no doubt, reasonings
in your heart about him, supposing you were to be one day his: [no doubt
but you have had the same in Solmes's case: whence the ground for the
hatred of the one; and for the conditional liking of the other.] Will
you tell me, my dear, what you have thought of Lovelace's best and of
his worst?--How far eligible for the first; how far rejectable for the
last?--Then weighing both parts in opposite scales, we shall see which
is likely to preponderate; or rather which does preponderate. Nothing
less than the knowledge of the inmost recesses of your heart, can
satisfy my love and my friendship. Surely, you are not afraid to trust
yourself with a secret of this nature: if you are, then you may the more
allowably doubt me. But, I dare say, you will not own either--nor is
there, I hope, cause for either.

Be pleased to observe one thing, my dear, that whenever I have given
myself any of those airs of raillery, which have seemed to make you look
about you, (when, likewise, your case may call for a more serious turn
from a sympathizing friend,) it has not been upon those passages which
are written, though, perhaps not intended, with such explicitness [don't
be alarmed, my dear!] as leaves little cause of doubt: but only when you
affect reserve; when you give new words for common things; when you
come with your curiosities, with your conditional likings, and with your
PRUDE-encies [mind how I spell the word] in a case that with every other
person defies all prudence--over-acts of treason all these, against the
sovereign friendship we have avowed to each other.

Remember, that you found me out in a moment. You challenged me. I owned
directly, that there was only my pride between the man and me; for I
could not endure, I told you, to think of any fellow living to give me a
moment's uneasiness. And then my man, as I have elsewhere said, was not
such a one as yours: so I had reason to impute full as much as to my own
inconsideration, as to his power over me: nay, more: but still more
to yours. For you reasoned me out of the curiosity first; and when the
liking was brought to be conditional--why then, you know, I throbbed no
more about him.

O! pray now, as you say, now I have mentioned that my fellow was not
such a charming fellow as yours, let Miss Biddulph, Miss Lloyd, Miss
Campion, and me, have your opinion, how far figure ought to engage us:
with a view to your own case, however--mind that--as Mr. Tony says--and
whether at all, if the man be vain of it; since, as you observe in a
former, that vanity is a stop-short pride in such a one, that would make
one justly doubt the worthiness of his interior. You, our pattern, so
lovely in feature, so graceful in person, have none of it; and have
therefore with the best grace always held, that it is not excusable even
in a woman.

You must know, that this subject was warmly debated among us in our last
conversation: and Miss Lloyd wished me to write to you upon it for your
opinion; to which, in every debated case, we always paid the greatest
deference. I hope you will not be so much engrossed by your weighty
cares, as not to have freedom of spirits enough to enter upon the task.
You know how much we all admire your opinion on such topics; which ever
produces something new and instructive, as you handle the subjects. And
pray tell us, to what you think it owing, that your man seems so careful
to adorn that self-adorned person of his! yet so manages, that one
cannot for one's heart think him a coxcomb?--Let this question, and the
above tasks, divert, and not displease you, my dear. One subject, though
ever so important, could never yet engross your capacious mind. If
they should displease you, you must recollect the many instances of my
impertinence which you have forgiven, and then say, 'This is a mad girl:
but yet I love her!--And she is my own'

ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY, MARCH 20.


Your last so sensibly affects me, that I must postpone every other
consideration, however weighty, to reply to it: and this I will do
very distinctly, and with all the openness of heart which our mutual
friendship demands.

But let me observe, in the first place, gratefully observe, that if I
have in fifty passages of my letters given you such undoubted proofs of
my value for Mr. Lovelace, that you have spared me for the sake of my
explicitness, it is acting by me with a generosity worthy of yourself.

But lives the man, think you, who is so very bad, that he does not give
even a doubting mind reason at one time to be better pleased with him
than at another? And when that reason offers, is it not just to express
one's self accordingly? I would do the man who addresses me as much
justice, as if he did not address me: it has such a look of tyranny, it
appears so ungenerous, methinks, in our sex, to use a man worse for his
respect to us, (no other cause for disrespect occurring,) that I would
not by any means be that person who should do so.

But, although I may intend no more than justice, it will perhaps be
difficult to hinder those who know the man's views, from construing it
as a partial favour: and especially if the eager-eyed observer has been
formerly touched herself, and would triumph that her friend had been no
more able to escape than she. Noble minds, emulative of perfection, (and
yet the passion properly directed, I do not take to be an imperfection
neither,) may be allowed a little generous envy, I think.

If I meant by this a reflection, by way of revenge, it is but a revenge,
my dear, in the soft sense of the word. I love, as I have told you, your
pleasantry. Although at the time your reproof may pain me a little; yet,
on recollection, when I find it more of the cautioning friend than
of the satirizing observer, I shall be all gratitude upon it. All the
business will be this; I shall be sensible of the pain in the present
letter perhaps; but I shall thank you in the next, and ever after.

In this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for a little of
that sensibility which you find above, and perhaps still more, as I
proceed.--You frequently remind me, by an excellent example, your own to
me, that I must not spare you!

I am not conscious, that I have written any thing of this man, that has
not been more in his dispraise than in his favour. Such is the man, that
I think I must have been faulty, and ought to take myself to account,
if I had not. But you think otherwise, I will not put you upon labouring
the proof, as you call it. My conduct must then have a faulty appearance
at least, and I will endeavour to rectify it. But of this I assure you,
that whatever interpretation my words were capable of, I intended not
any reserve to you. I wrote my heart at the time: if I had had thought
of disguising it, or been conscious that there was reason for doing
so, perhaps I had not given you the opportunity of remarking upon my
curiosity after his relations' esteem for me; nor upon my conditional
liking, and such-like. All I intended by the first, I believe, I
honestly told you at the time. To that letter I therefore refer, whether
it make for me, or against me: and by the other, that I might bear in
mind, what it became a person of my sex and character to be and to
do, in such an unhappy situation, where the imputed love is thought an
undutiful, and therefore a criminal passion; and where the supported
object of it is a man of faulty morals too. And I am sure you will
excuse my desire of appearing at those times the person I ought to be;
had I no other view in it but to merit the continuance of your good
opinion.

But that I may acquit myself of having reserves--O, my dear, I must here
break off--!




LETTER XXXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY, MARCH 12.


This letter will account to you, my dear, for my abrupt breaking off in
the answer I was writing to yours of yesterday; and which, possibly,
I shall not be able to finish and send you till to-morrow or next day;
having a great deal to say to the subjects you put to me in it. What
I am now to give you are the particulars of another effort made by my
friends, through the good Mrs. Norton.

It seems they had sent to her yesterday, to be here this day, to take
their instructions, and to try what she could do with me. It would,
at least, I suppose they thought, have this effect; to render me
inexcusable with her; or to let her see, that there was no room for the
expostulations she had often wanted to make in my favour to my mother.

The declaration, that my heart was free, afforded them an argument to
prove obstinacy and perverseness upon me; since it could be nothing else
that governed me in my opposition to their wills, if I had no particular
esteem for another man. And now, that I have given them reason (in
order to obviate this argument) to suppose that I have a preference to
another, they are resolved to carry their schemes into execution as soon
as possible. And in order to do this, they sent for this good woman, for
whom they know I have even a filial regard.

She found assembled my father and mother, my brother and sister, my two
uncles, and my aunt Hervey.

My brother acquainted her with all that had passed since she was last
permitted to see me; with the contents of my letters avowing my regard
for Mr. Lovelace (as they all interpreted them); with the substance of
their answers to them; and with their resolutions.

My mother spoke next; and delivered herself to this effect, as the good
woman told me.

After reciting how many times I had been indulged in my refusals of
different men, and the pains she had taken with me, to induce me to
oblige my whole family in one instance out of five or six, and my
obstinacy upon it; 'O my good Mrs. Norton, said the dear lady, could
you have thought, that my Clarissa and your Clarissa was capable of so
determined an opposition to the will of parents so indulgent to her? But
see what you can do with her. The matter is gone too far to be receded
from on our parts. Her father had concluded every thing with Mr. Solmes,
not doubting her compliance. Such noble settlements, Mrs. Norton, and
such advantages to the whole family!--In short, she has it in her power
to lay an obligation upon us all. Mr. Solmes, knowing she has good
principles, and hoping by his patience now, and good treatment
hereafter, to engage her gratitude, and by degrees her love, is willing
to overlook all!--'

[Overlook all, my dear! Mr. Solmes to overlook all! There's a word!]

'So, Mrs. Norton, if you are convinced, that it is a child's duty to
submit to her parents' authority, in the most important point as well as
in the least, I beg you will try your influence over her: I have none:
her father has none: her uncles neither: although it is her apparent
interest to oblige us all; for, on that condition, her grandfather's
estate is not half of what, living and dying, is purposed to be done for
her. If any body can prevail with her, it is you; and I hope you will
heartily enter upon this task.'

The good woman asked, Whether she was permitted to expostulate with them
upon the occasion, before she came up to me?

My arrogant brother told her, she was sent for to expostulate with his
sister, and not with them. And this, Goody Norton [she is always
Goody with him!] you may tell her, that the treaty with Mr. Solmes is
concluded: that nothing but her compliance with her duty is wanting;
of consequence, that there is no room for your expostulation, or hers
either.

Be assured of this, Mrs. Norton, said my father, in an angry tone, that
we will not be baffled by her. We will not appear like fools in this
matter, and as if we have no authority over our own daughter. We will
not, in short, be bullied out of our child by a cursed rake, who had
like to have killed our only son!--And so she had better make a merit
of her obedience; for comply she shall, if I live; independent as she
thinks my father's indiscreet bounty has made her of me, her father.
Indeed, since that, she has never been like she was before. An unjust
bequest!--And it is likely to prosper accordingly!--But if she marry
that vile rake Lovelace, I will litigate every shilling with her: tell
her so; and that the will may be set aside, and shall.

My uncles joined, with equal heat.

My brother was violent in his declarations.

My sister put in with vehemence, on the same side.

My aunt Hervey was pleased to say, there was no article so proper for
parents to govern in, as this of marriage: and it was very fit mine
should be obliged.

Thus instructed, the good woman came up to me. She told me all that had
passed, and was very earnest with me to comply; and so much justice did
she to the task imposed upon her, that I more than once thought, that
her own opinion went with theirs. But when she saw what an immovable
aversion I had to the man, she lamented with me their determined
resolution: and then examined into the sincerity of my declaration,
that I would gladly compound with them by living single. Of this being
satisfied, she was so convinced that this offer, which, carried into
execution, would exclude Lovelace effectually, ought to be accepted,
that she would go down (although I told her, it was what I had tendered
over-and-over to no purpose) and undertake to be guaranty for me on that
score.

She went accordingly; but soon returned in tears; being used harshly for
urging this alternative:--They had a right to my obedience upon their
own terms, they said: my proposal was an artifice, only to gain time:
nothing but marrying Mr. Solmes should do: they had told me so before:
they should not be at rest till it was done; for they knew what an
interest Lovelace had in my heart: I had as good as owned it in my
letters to my uncles, and brother and sister, although I had most
disingenuously declared otherwise to my mother. I depended, they said,
upon their indulgence, and my own power over them: they would not
have banished me from their presence, if they had not known that their
consideration for me was greater than mine for them. And they would
be obeyed, or I never should be restored to their favour, let the
consequence be what it would.

My brother thought fit to tell the good woman, that her whining nonsense
did but harden me. There was a perverseness, he said, in female minds, a
tragedy-pride, that would make a romantic young creature, such a one as
me, risque any thing to obtain pity. I was of an age, and a turn [the
insolent said] to be fond of a lover-like distress: and my grief (which
she pleaded) would never break my heart: I should sooner break that of
the best and most indulgent of mothers. He added, that she might once
more go up to me: but that, if she prevailed not, he should suspect,
that the man they all hated had found a way to attach her to his
interest.

Every body blamed him for this unworthy reflection; which greatly
affected the good woman. But nevertheless he said, and nobody
contradicted him, that if she could not prevail upon her sweet child,
[as it seems she had fondly called me,] she had best draw to her own
home, and there tarry till she was sent for; and so leave her sweet
child to her father's management.

Sure nobody had ever so insolent, so hard-hearted a brother, as I have!
So much resignation to be expected from me! So much arrogance, and to so
good a woman, and of so fine an understanding, to be allowed in him.

She nevertheless told him, that however she might be ridiculed for
speaking of the sweetness of my disposition, she must take upon herself
to say, that there never was a sweeter in the sex: and that she had
ever found, that my mild methods, and gentleness, I might at any time be
prevailed upon, even in points against my own judgment and opinion.

My aunt Hervey hereupon said, It was worth while to consider what
Mrs. Norton said: and that she had sometimes allowed herself to doubt,
whether I had been begun with by such methods as generous tempers are
only to be influenced by, in cases where their hearts are supposed to be
opposite to the will of their friends.

She had both my brother and sister upon her for this: who referred to
my mother, whether she had not treated me with an indulgence that had
hardly any example?

My mother said, she must own, that no indulgence had been wanting from
her: but she must needs say, and had often said it, that the reception
I met with on my return from Miss Howe, and the manner in which the
proposal of Mr. Solmes was made to me, (which was such as left nothing
to my choice,) and before I had an opportunity to converse with him,
were not what she had by any means approved of.

She was silenced, you will guess by whom,--with, My dear!--my dear!--You
have ever something to say, something to palliate, for this rebel of a
girl!--Remember her treatment of you, of me!--Remember, that the wretch,
whom we so justly hate, would not dare persist in his purposes, but for
her encouragement of him, and obstinacy to us.--Mrs. Norton, [angrily to
her,] go up to her once more--and if you think gentleness will do, you
have a commission to be gentle--if it will not, never make use of that
plea again.

Ay, my good woman, said my mother, try your force with her. My sister
Hervey and I will go up to her, and bring her down in our hands, to
receive her father's blessing, and assurances of every body's love, if
she will be prevailed upon: and, in that case, we will all love you the
better for your good offices.

She came up to me, and repeated all these passages with tears. But I
told her, that after what had passed between us, she could not hope to
prevail upon me to comply with measures so wholly my brother's, and so
much to my aversion. And then folding me to her maternal bosom, I leave
you, my dearest Miss, said she--I leave you, because I must!--But let me
beseech you to do nothing rashly; nothing unbecoming your character. If
all be true that is said, Mr. Lovelace cannot deserve you. If you can
comply, remember it is your duty to comply. They take not, I own, the
right method with so generous a spirit. But remember, that there would
not be any merit in your compliance, if it were not to be against
your own liking. Remember also, what is expected from a character
so extraordinary as yours: remember, it is in your power to unite or
disunite your whole family for ever. Although it should at present be
disagreeable to you to be thus compelled, your prudence, I dare say,
when you consider the matter seriously, will enable you to get over
all prejudices against the one, and all prepossessions in favour of the
other: and then the obligation you will lay all your family under,
will be not only meritorious in you, with regard to them, but in a few
months, very probably, highly satisfactory, as well as reputable, to
yourself.

Consider, my dear Mrs. Norton, said I, only consider, that it is not a
small thing that is insisted upon; not for a short duration; it is for
my life: consider too, that all this is owing to an overbearing brother,
who governs every body. Consider how desirous I am to oblige them, if
a single life, and breaking all correspondence with the man they hate,
because my brother hates him, will do it.

I consider every thing, my dearest Miss: and, added to what I have said,
do you only consider, that if, by pursuing your own will, and rejecting
theirs, you should be unhappy, you will be deprived of all that
consolation which those have, who have been directed by their parents,
although the event prove not answerable to their wishes.

I must go, repeated she: your brother will say [and she wept] that I
harden you by my whining nonsense. 'Tis indeed hard, that so much
regard should be paid to the humours of one child, and so little to
the inclination of another. But let me repeat, that it is your duty to
acquiesce, if you can acquiesce: your father has given your brother's
schemes his sanction, and they are now his. Mr. Lovelace, I doubt,
is not a man that will justify your choice so much as he will their
dislike. It is easy to see that your brother has a view in discrediting
you with all your friends, with your uncles in particular: but for that
very reason, you should comply, if possible, in order to disconcert his
ungenerous measures. I will pray for you; and that is all I can do for
you. I must now go down, and make a report, that you are resolved never
to have Mr. Solmes--Must I?--Consider, my dear Miss Clary--Must I?

Indeed you must!--But of this I do assure you, that I will do nothing to
disgrace the part you have had in my education. I will bear every thing
that shall be short of forcing my hand into his who never can have any
share in my heart. I will try by patient duty, by humility, to overcome
them. But death will I choose, in any shape, rather than that man.

I dread to go down, said she, with so determined an answer: they will
have no patience with me.--But let me leave you with one observation,
which I beg of you always to bear in mind:--

'That persons of prudence, and distinguished talents, like yours, seem
to be sprinkled through the world, to give credit, by their example, to
religion and virtue. When such persons wilfully err, how great must
be the fault! How ungrateful to that God, who blessed them with such
talents! What a loss likewise to the world! What a wound to virtue!--But
this, I hope, will never be to be said of Miss Clarissa Harlowe!'

I could give her no answer, but by my tears. And I thought, when she
went away, the better half of my heart went with her.

I listened to hear what reception she would meet with below; and found
it was just such a one as she had apprehended.

Will she, or will she not, be Mrs. Solmes? None of your whining
circumlocutions, Mrs. Norton!--[You may guess who said this] Will she,
or will she not, comply with her parents' will?

This cut short all she was going to say.

If I must speak so briefly, Miss will sooner die, than have--

Any body but Lovelace! interrupted my brother.--This, Madam, this, Sir,
is your meek daughter! This is Mrs. Norton's sweet child!--Well, Goody,
you may return to your own habitation. I am empowered to forbid you to
have any correspondence with this perverse girl for a month to come, as
you value the favour of our whole family, or of any individual of it.

And saying this, uncontradicted by any body, he himself shewed her
to the door,--no doubt, with all that air of cruel insult, which the
haughty rich can put on to the unhappy low, who have not pleased them.

So here, my dear Miss Howe, am I deprived of the advice of one of the
most prudent and conscientious women in the world, were I to have ever
so much occasion for it.

I might indeed write (as I presume, under your cover) and receive her
answers to what I should write. But should such a correspondence be
charged upon her, I know she would not be guilty of a falsehood for the
world, nor even of an equivocation: and should she own it after this
prohibition, she would forfeit my mother's favour for ever. And in my
dangerous fever, some time ago, I engaged my mother to promise me, that,
if I died before I could do any thing for the good woman, she would set
her above want for the rest of her life, should her eyes fail her, or
sickness befall her, and she could not provide for herself, as she now
so prettily does by her fine needle-works.

What measures will they fall upon next?--Will they not recede when they
find that it must be a rooted antipathy, and nothing else, that could
make a temper, not naturally inflexible, so sturdy?

Adieu, my dear. Be you happy!--To know that it is in your power to be
so, is all that seems wanting to make you so.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XL

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [In continuation of the subject in
Letter XXXVIII.]


I will now, though midnight (for I have no sleep in my eyes) resume
the subject I was forced so abruptly to quit, and will obey yours, Miss
Lloyd's, Miss Campion's, and Miss Biddulph's call, with as much temper
as my divided thought will admit. The dead stillness of this solemn hour
will, I hope, contribute to calm my disturbed mind.

In order to acquit myself of so heavy a charge as that of having
reserves to so dear a friend, I will acknowledge (and I thought I had
over-and-over) that it is owing to my particular situation, if Mr.
Lovelace appears to me in a tolerable light: and I take upon me to say,
that had they opposed to him a man of sense, of virtue, of generosity;
one who enjoyed his fortune with credit, who had a tenderness in his
nature for the calamities of others, which would have given a moral
assurance, that he would have been still less wanting in grateful
returns to an obliging spirit:--had they opposed such a man as this to
Mr. Lovelace, and been as earnest to have me married, as now they are,
I do not know myself, if they would have had reason to tax me with that
invincible obstinacy which they lay to my charge: and this whatever
had been the figure of the man; since the heart is what we women should
judge by in the choice we make, as the best security for the party's
good behaviour in every relation of life.

But, situated as I am, thus persecuted and driven, I own to you, that
I have now-and-then had a little more difficulty than I wished for, in
passing by Mr. Lovelace's tolerable qualities, to keep up my dislike to
him for his others.

You say, I must have argued with myself in his favour, and in his
disfavour, on a supposition, that I might possibly be one day his. I
own that I have: and thus called upon by my dearest friend, I will set
before you both parts of the argument.

And first, what occurred to me in his favour.

At his introduction into our family, his negative virtues were insisted
upon:--He was no gamester; no horse-racer; no fox-hunter; no drinker:
my poor aunt Hervey had, in confidence, given us to apprehend much
disagreeable evil (especially to a wife of the least delicacy) from a
wine-lover: and common sense instructed us, that sobriety in a man is
no small point to be secured, when so many mischiefs happen daily from
excess. I remember, that my sister made the most of this favourable
circumstance in his character while she had any hopes of him.

He was never thought to be a niggard; not even ungenerous: nor when
his conduct came to be inquired into, an extravagant, a squanderer: his
pride [so far was it a laudable pride] secured him from that. Then he
was ever ready to own his errors. He was no jester upon sacred things:
poor Mr. Wyerley's fault; who seemed to think there was wit in saying
bold things, which would shock a serious mind. His conversation with us
was always unexceptionable, even chastely so; which, be his actions what
they would, shewed him capable of being influenced by decent company;
and that he might probably therefore be a led man, rather than a leader,
in other company. And one late instance, so late as last Saturday
evening, has raised him not a little in my opinion, with regard to this
point of good (and at the same time, of manly) behaviour.

As to the advantage of birth, that is of his side, above any man who has
been found out for me. If we may judge by that expression of his,
which you were pleased with at the time; 'That upon true quality, and
hereditary distinction, if good sense were not wanting, humour sat as
easy as his glove;' that, with as familiar an air, was his familiar
expression; 'while none but the prosperous upstart, MUSHROOMED into
rank, (another of his peculiars,) was arrogantly proud of it.'--If, I
say, we may judge of him by this, we shall conclude in his favour, that
he knows what sort of behaviour is to be expected from persons of birth,
whether he act up to it or not. Conviction is half way to amendment.

His fortunes in possession are handsome; in expectation, splendid: so
nothing need be said on that subject.

But it is impossible, say some, that he should make a tender or kind
husband. Those who are for imposing upon me such a man as Mr. Solmes,
and by methods so violent, are not entitled to make this objection. But
now, on this subject, let me tell you how I have argued with myself--for
still you must remember, that I am upon the extenuating part of his
character.

A great deal of the treatment a wife may expect from him, will possibly
depend upon herself. Perhaps she must practise as well as promise
obedience, to a man so little used to controul; and must be careful to
oblige. And what husband expects not this?--The more perhaps if he had
not reason to assure himself of the preferable love of his wife before
she became such. And how much easier and pleasanter to obey the man of
her choice, if he should be even more unreasonable sometimes, than one
she would not have had, could she have avoided it? Then, I think, as
the men were the framers of the matrimonial office, and made obedience
a part of the woman's vow, she ought not, even in policy, to shew him,
that she can break through her part of the contract, (however lightly
she may think of the instance,) lest he should take it into his head
(himself is judge) to think as lightly of other points, which she may
hold more important--but, indeed, no point so solemnly vowed can be
slight.

Thus principled, and acting accordingly, what a wretch must that husband
be, who could treat such a wife brutally!--Will Lovelace's wife be the
only person to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of civility and
good manners? He is allowed to be brave: Who ever knew a brave man, if a
brave man of sense, an universally base man? And how much the gentleness
of our sex, and the manner of our training up and education, make us
need the protection of the brave, and the countenance of the generous,
let the general approbation, which we are all so naturally inclined to
give to men of that character, testify.

At worst, will he confine me prisoner to my chamber? Will he deny me the
visits of my dearest friend, and forbid me to correspond with her? Will
he take from me the mistressly management, which I had not faultily
discharged? Will he set a servant over me, with license to insult me?
Will he, as he has not a sister, permit his cousins Montague, or would
either of those ladies accept of a permission, to insult and tyrannize
over me?--It cannot be.--Why then, think I often, do you tempt me, O my
cruel friends, to try the difference?

And then has the secret pleasure intruded itself, to be able to reclaim
such a man to the paths of virtue and honour: to be a secondary means,
if I were to be his, of saving him, and preventing the mischiefs so
enterprising a creature might otherwise be guilty of, if he be such a
one.

When I have thought of him in these lights, (and that as a man of sense
he will sooner see his errors, than another,) I own to you, that I have
had some difficulty to avoid taking the path they so violently endeavour
to make me shun: and all that command of my passions which has been
attributed to me as my greatest praise, and, in so young a creature, as
my distinction, has hardly been sufficient for me.

And let me add, that the favour of his relations (all but himself
unexceptionable) has made a good deal of additional weight, thrown in
the same scale.

But now, in his disfavour. When I have reflected upon the prohibition
of my parents; the giddy appearance, disgraceful to our sex, that such
a preference would have: that there is no manner of likelihood, enflamed
by the rencounter, and upheld by art and ambition on my brother's side,
that ever the animosity will be got over: that I must therefore be at
perpetual variance with all my own family: that I must go to him, and to
his, as an obliged and half-fortuned person: that his aversion to them
all is as strong as theirs to him: that his whole family are hated
for his sake; they hating ours in return: that he has a very immoral
character as to women: that knowing this, it is a high degree of
impurity to think of joining in wedlock with such a man: that he is
young, unbroken, his passions unsubdued: that he is violent in his
temper, yet artful; I am afraid vindictive too: that such a husband
might unsettle me in all my own principles, and hazard my future hopes:
that his own relations, two excellent aunts, and an uncle, from whom
he has such large expectations, have no influence upon him: that what
tolerable qualities he has, are founded more in pride than in virtue:
that allowing, as he does, the excellency of moral precepts, and
believing the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, he can live as
if he despised the one, and defied the other: the probability that the
taint arising from such free principles, may go down into the manners
of posterity: that I knowing these things, and the importance of them,
should be more inexcusable than one who knows them not; since an error
against judgment is worse, infinitely worse, than an error in judgment.
Reflecting upon these things, I cannot help conjuring you, my dear, to
pray with me, and to pray for me, that I may not be pushed upon such
indiscreet measures, as will render me inexcusable to myself: for that
is the test, after all. The world's opinion ought to be but a secondary
consideration.

I have said in his praise, that he is extremely ready to own his errors:
but I have sometimes made a great drawback upon this article, in his
disfavour; having been ready to apprehend, that this ingenuousness may
possibly be attributable to two causes, neither of them, by any means,
creditable to him. The one, that his vices are so much his masters, that
he attempts not to conquer them; the other, that he may think it policy,
to give up one half of his character to save the other, when the
whole may be blamable: by this means, silencing by acknowledgment
the objections he cannot answer; which may give him the praise of
ingenuousness, when he can obtain no other, and when the challenged
proof might bring out, upon discussion, other evils. These, you will
allow, are severe constructions; but every thing his enemies say of him
cannot be false.

I will proceed by-and-by.


***


Sometimes we have both thought him one of the most undesigning merely
witty men we ever knew; at other times one of the deepest creatures
we ever conversed with. So that when in one visit we have imagined
we fathomed him, in the next he has made us ready to give him up as
impenetrable. This impenetrableness, my dear, is to be put among the
shades in his character. Yet, upon the whole, you have been so far
of his party, that you have contested that his principal fault is
over-frankness, and too much regardlessness of appearances, and that he
is too giddy to be very artful: you would have it, that at the time he
says any thing good, he means what he speaks; that his variableness and
levity are constitutional, owing to sound health, and to a soul and body
[that was your observation] fitted for and pleased with each other. And
hence you concluded, that could this consentaneousness [as you call it]
of corporal and animal faculties be pointed by discretion; that is
to say, could his vivacity be confined within the pale of but moral
obligations, he would be far from being rejectable as a companion for
life.

But I used then to say, and I still am of opinion, that he wants
a heart: and if he does, he wants every thing. A wrong head may be
convinced, may have a right turn given it: but who is able to give a
heart, if a heart be wanting? Divine Grace, working a miracle, or next
to a miracle, can only change a bad heart. Should not one fly the man
who is but suspected of such a one? What, O what, do parents do, when
they endeavour to force a child's inclination, but make her think better
than otherwise she would think of a man obnoxious to themselves, and
perhaps whose character will not stand examination?

I have said, that I think Mr. Lovelace a vindictive man: upon my word, I
have sometimes doubted, whether his perseverance in his addresses to
me has not been the more obstinate, since he has found himself so
disagreeable to my friends. From that time I verily think he has
been the more fervent in them; yet courts them not, but sets them at
defiance. For this indeed he pleads disinterestedness [I am sure he
cannot politeness]; and the more plausibly, as he is apprized of the
ability they have to make it worth his while to court them. 'Tis true
he has declared, and with too much reason, (or there would be no bearing
him,) that the lowest submissions on his part would not be accepted; and
to oblige me, has offered to seek a reconciliation with them, if I would
give him hope of success.

As to his behaviour at church, the Sunday before last, I lay no stress
upon that, because I doubt there was too much outward pride in his
intentional humility, or Shorey, who is not his enemy, could not have
mistaken it.

I do not think him so deeply learned in human nature, or in ethics, as
some have thought him. Don't you remember how he stared at the following
trite observations, which every moralist could have furnished him with?
Complaining as he did, in a half-menacing strain, of the obloquies
raised against him--'That if he were innocent, he should despise the
obloquy: if not, revenge would not wipe off his guilt.' 'That nobody
ever thought of turning a sword into a sponge!' 'That it was in his own
power by reformation of an error laid to his charge by an enemy, to make
that enemy one of his best friends; and (which was the noblest revenge
in the world) against his will; since an enemy would not wish him to be
without the faults he taxed him with.'

But the intention, he said, was the wound.

How so, I asked him, when that cannot wound without the application?
'That the adversary only held the sword: he himself pointed it to his
breast:--And why should he mortally resent that malice, which he might
be the better for as long as he lived?'--What could be the reading
he has been said to be master of, to wonder, as he did, at these
observations?

But, indeed, he must take pleasure in revenge; and yet holds others to
be inexcusable for the same fault. He is not, however, the only one
who can see how truly blamable those errors are in another, which they
hardly think such in themselves.

From these considerations, from these over-balances, it was, that I
said, in a former, that I would not be in love with this man for the
world: and it was going further than prudence would warrant, when I was
for compounding with you, by the words conditional liking, which you so
humourously rally.

Well but, methinks you say, what is all this to the purpose? This is
still but reasoning: but, if you are in love, you are: and love,
like the vapours, is the deeper rooted for having no sufficient cause
assignable for its hold. And so you call upon me again to have no
reserves, and so-forth.

Why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think, that, with all his
preponderating faults, I like him better than I ever thought I should
like him; and, those faults considered, better perhaps than I ought to
like him. And I believe, it is possible for the persecution I labour
under to induce me to like him still more--especially while I can
recollect to his advantage our last interview, and as every day produces
stronger instances of tyranny, I will call it, on the other side.--In
a word, I will frankly own (since you cannot think any thing I say too
explicit) that were he now but a moral man, I would prefer him to all
the men I ever saw.

So that this is but conditional liking still, you'll say: nor, I hope,
is it more. I never was in love as it is called; and whether this be it,
or not, I must submit to you. But will venture to think it, if it be,
no such mighty monarch, no such unconquerable power, as I have heard
it represented; and it must have met with greater encouragement than
I think I have given it, to be absolutely unconquerable--since I am
persuaded, that I could yet, without a throb, most willingly give up the
one man to get rid of the other.

But now to be a little more serious with you: if, my dear, my
particularly-unhappy situation had driven (or led me, if you please)
into a liking of the man; and if that liking had, in your opinion,
inclined me to love him, should you, whose mind is susceptible of the
most friendly impressions, who have such high notions of the delicacy
which ought to be observed by our sex in these matters, and who actually
do enter so deeply into the distresses of one you love--should you
have pushed so far that unhappy friend on so very nice a
subject?--Especially, when I aimed not (as you could prove by fifty
instances, it seems) to guard against being found out. Had you rallied
me by word of mouth in the manner you do, it might have been more in
character; especially, if your friend's distresses had been surmounted,
and if she had affected prudish airs in revolving the subject: but to
sit down to write it, as methinks I see you, with a gladdened eye, and
with all the archness of exultation--indeed, my dear, (and I take notice
of it, rather for the sake of your own generosity, than for my sake,
for, as I have said, I love your raillery,) it is not so very pretty;
the delicacy of the subject, and the delicacy of your own mind,
considered.

I lay down my pen here, that you may consider of it a little, if you
please.


***


I resume, to give you my opinion of the force which figure or person
ought to have upon our sex: and this I shall do both generally as to the
other sex, and particularly as to this man; whence you will be able to
collect how far my friends are in the right, or in the wrong, when
they attribute a good deal of prejudice in favour of one man, and in
disfavour of the other, on the score of figure. But, first, let me
observe, that they see abundant reason, on comparing Mr. Lovelace and
Mr. Solmes together, to believe that this may be a consideration with
me; and therefore they believe it is.

There is certainly something very plausible and attractive, as well
as creditable to a woman's choice, in figure. It gives a favourable
impression at first sight, in which we wish to be confirmed: and if,
upon further acquaintance, we find reason to be so, we are pleased with
our judgment, and like the person the better, for having given us cause
to compliment our own sagacity, in our first-sighted impressions. But,
nevertheless, it has been generally a rule with me, to suspect a fine
figure, both in man and woman; and I have had a good deal of reason
to approve my rule;--with regard to men especially, who ought to value
themselves rather upon their intellectual than personal qualities.
For, as to our sex, if a fine woman should be led by the opinion of the
world, to be vain and conceited upon her form and features; and that to
such a degree, as to have neglected the more material and more durable
recommendations, the world will be ready to excuse her; since a pretty
fool, in all she says, and in all she does, will please, we know not
why.

But who would grudge this pretty fool her short day! Since, with her
summer's sun, when her butterfly flutters are over, and the winter
of age and furrows arrives, she will feel the just effects of having
neglected to cultivate her better faculties: for then, lie another
Helen, she will be unable to bear the reflection even of her own glass,
and being sunk into the insignificance of a mere old woman, she will
be entitled to the contempts which follow that character. While the
discreet matron, who carries up [we will not, in such a one's case,
say down] into advanced life, the ever-amiable character of virtuous
prudence and useful experience, finds solid veneration take place of
airy admiration, and more than supply the want of it.

But for a man to be vain of his person, how effeminate! If such a
one happens to have genius, it seldom strikes deep into intellectual
subjects. His outside usually runs away with him. To adorn, and perhaps,
intending to adorn, to render ridiculous that person, takes up all his
attention. All he does is personal; that is to say, for himself: all he
admires, is himself: and in spite of the correction of the stage, which
so often and so justly exposes a coxcomb, he usually dwindles down, and
sinks into that character; and, of consequence, becomes the scorn of one
sex, and the jest of the other.

This is generally the case of your fine figures of men, and of those who
value themselves on dress and outward appearance: whence it is, that I
repeat, that mere person in a man is a despicable consideration. But
if a man, besides figure, has learning, and such talents as would have
distinguished him, whatever were his form, then indeed person is an
addition: and if he has not run too egregiously into self-admiration,
and if he has preserved his morals, he is truly a valuable being.

Mr. Lovelace has certainly taste; and, as far as I am able to determine,
he has judgment in most of the politer arts. But although he has a
humourous way of carrying it off, yet one may see that he values himself
not a little, both on his person and his parts, and even upon his dress;
and yet he has so happy an ease in the latter, that it seems to be the
least part of his study. And as to the former, I should hold myself
inexcusable, if I were to add to his vanity by shewing the least regard
for what is too evidently so much his.

And now, my dear, let me ask you, Have I come up to your expectation? If
I have not, when my mind is more at ease, I will endeavour to please
you better. For, methinks, my sentences drag, my style creeps, my
imagination is sunk, my spirits serve me not, only to tell you, that
whether I have more or less, I am wholly devoted to the commands of my
dear Miss Howe.



P.S. The insolent Betty Barnes has just now fired me anew, by reporting
to me the following expressions of the hideous creature, Solmes--'That
he is sure of the coy girl; and that with little labour to himself. That
be I ever so averse to him beforehand, he can depend upon my principles;
and it will be a pleasure to him to see by what pretty degrees I shall
come to.' [Horrid wretch!] 'That it was Sir Oliver's observation, who
knew the world perfectly well, that fear was a better security than
love, for a woman's good behaviour to her husband; although, for his
part, to such a fine creature [truly] he would try what love would do,
for a few weeks at least; being unwilling to believe what the old knight
used to aver, that fondness spoils more wives than it makes good.'

What think you, my dear, of such a wretch as this! tutored, too, by that
old surly misogynist, as he was deemed, Sir Oliver?--




LETTER XLI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 21.


How willingly would my dear mother shew kindness to me, were she
permitted! None of this persecution should I labour under, I am sure, if
that regard were paid to her prudence and fine understanding, which they
so well deserve. Whether owing to her, or to my aunt, or to both, that
a new trial was to be made upon me, I cannot tell, but this morning her
Shorey delivered into my hand the following condescending letter.


MY DEAR GIRL,

For so I must still call you; since dear you may be to me, in every
sense of the word--we have taken into particular consideration some
hints that fell yesterday from your good Norton, as if we had not, at
Mr. Solmes's first application, treated you with that condescension,
wherewith we have in all other instances treated you. If it even had
been so, my dear, you were not excusable to be wanting in your part,
and to set yourself to oppose your father's will in a point which he had
entered too far, to recede with honour. But all yet may be well. On your
single will, my child, depends all our happiness.

Your father permits me to tell you, that if you now at last comply with
his expectations, all past disobligations shall be buried in oblivion,
as if they had never been: but withal, that this is the last time that
that grace will be offered you.

I hinted to you, you must remember,* that patterns of the richest silks
were sent for. They are come. And as they are come, your father, to shew
how much he is determined, will have me send them up to you. I could
have wished they might not have accompanied this letter, but there is
not great matter in that. I must tell you, that your delicacy is not
quite so much regarded as I had once thought it deserved to be.


     * See Letter XX.


These are the newest, as well as richest, that we could procure;
answerable to our situation in the world; answerable to the fortune,
additional to your grandfather's estate, designed you; and to the noble
settlements agreed upon.

Your father intends you six suits (three of them dressed suits) at his
own expense. You have an entire new suit; and one besides, which I think
you never wore but twice. As the new suit is rich, if you choose to
make that one of the six, your father will present you with an hundred
guineas in lieu.

Mr. Solmes intends to present you with a set of jewels. As you have your
grandmother's and your own, if you choose to have the former new set,
and to make them serve, his present will be made in money; a very round
sum--which will be given in full property to yourself; besides a fine
annual allowance for pin-money, as it is called. So that your objection
against the spirit of a man you think worse of than it deserves, will
have no weight; but you will be more independent than a wife of less
discretion than we attribute to you, perhaps ought to be. You know full
well, that I, who first and last brought a still larger fortune into the
family than you will carry to Mr. Solmes, had not a provision made me
of near this that we have made for you.--Where people marry to their
liking, terms are the least things stood upon--yet should I be sorry if
you cannot (to oblige us all) overcome a dislike.

Wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly and freely upon
this subject. Your behaviour hitherto has been such, that we have had no
opportunity of entering minutely into the subject with you. Yet, after
all that has passed between you and me in conversation, and between you
and your uncles by letter, you have no room to doubt what is to be the
consequence.--Either, child, we must give up our authority, or you your
humour. You cannot expect the one. We have all the reason in the world
to expect the other. You know I have told you more than once, that
you must resolve to have Mr. Solmes, or never to be looked upon as our
child.

The draught of the settlement you may see whenever you will. We think
there can be no room for objection to any of the articles. There is
still more in them in our family's favour, than was stipulated at first,
when your aunt talked of them to you. More so, indeed, than we
could have asked. If, upon perusal of them, you think any alteration
necessary, it shall be made.--Do, my dear girl, send to me within this
day or two, or rather ask me, for the perusal of them.

As a certain person's appearance at church so lately, and what he gives
out every where, makes us extremely uneasy, and as that uneasiness will
continue while you are single, you must not wonder that a short day
is intended. This day fortnight we design it to be, if you have no
objection to make that I shall approve of. But if you determine as we
would have you, and signify it to us, we shall not stand with you for a
week or so.

Your sightlines of person may perhaps make some think this alliance
disparaging. But I hope you will not put such a personal value upon
yourself: if you do, it will indeed be the less wonder that person
should weigh with you (however weak the consideration!) in another man.

Thus we parents, in justice, ought to judge: that our two daughters are
equally dear and valuable to us: if so, why should Clarissa think that
a disparagement, which Arabella would not (nor we for her) have thought
any, had the address been made to her?--You will know what I mean by
this, without my explaining myself farther.

Signify to us, now, therefore, your compliance with our wishes. And then
there is an end of your confinement. An act of oblivion, as I may call
it, shall pass upon all your former refractoriness: and you will once
more make us happy in you, and in one another. You may, in this case,
directly come down to your father and me, in his study; where we will
give you our opinions of the patterns, with our hearty forgiveness and
blessings.

Come, be a good child, as you used to be, my Clarissa. I have
(notwithstanding your past behaviour, and the hopelessness which some
have expressed in your compliance) undertaken this one time more for
you. Discredit not my hopes, my dear girl. I have promised never more
to interfere between your father and you, if this my most earnest
application succeed not. I expect you down, love. Your father expects
you down. But be sure don't let him see any thing uncheerful in your
compliance. If you come, I will clasp you to my fond heart, with as much
pleasure as ever I pressed you to it in my whole life. You don't know
what I have suffered within these few weeks past; nor ever will be able
to guess, till you come to be in my situation; which is that of a fond
and indulgent mother, praying night and day, and struggling to preserve,
against the attempts of more ungovernable spirits, the peace and union
of her family.

But you know the terms. Come not near us, if you have resolve to be
undutiful: but this, after what I have written, I hope you cannot be.

If you come directly, and, as I have said, cheerfully, as if your heart
were in your duty, (and you told me it was free, you know,) I shall
then, as I said, give you the most tender proofs how much I am

Your truly affectionate Mother.


***


Think for me, my dearest friend, how I must be affected by this letter;
the contents of it is so surprisingly terrifying, yet so sweetly
urged!--O why, cried I to myself, am I obliged to undergo this
severe conflict between a command that I cannot obey, and language so
condescendingly moving!--Could I have been sure of being struck dead
at the alter before the ceremony had given the man I hate a title to my
vows, I think I could have submitted to having been led to it. But to
think of living with and living for a man one abhors, what a sad thing
is that!

And then, how could the glare of habit and ornament be supposed any
inducement to one, who has always held, that the principal view of a
good wife in the adorning of her person, ought to be, to preserve the
affection of her husband, and to do credit to his choice; and that she
should be even fearful of attracting the eyes of others?--In this view,
must not the very richness of the patterns add to my disgusts?--Great
encouragement, indeed, to think of adorning one's self to be the wife of
Mr. Solmes!

Upon the whole, it was not possible for me to go down upon the
prescribed condition. Do you think it was?--And to write, if my letter
would have been read, what could I write that would be admitted, and
after what I had written and said to so little effect?

I walked backward and forward. I threw down with disdain the patterns.
Now to my closet retired I; then quitting it, threw myself upon the
settee; then upon this chair, then upon that; then into one window, then
into another--I knew not what to do!--And while I was in this suspense,
having again taken up the letter to re-peruse it, Betty came in,
reminding me, by order, that my papa and mamma waited for me in my
father's study.

Tell my mamma, said I, that I beg the favour of seeing her here for one
moment, or to permit me to attend her any where by herself.

I listened at the stairs-head--You see, my dear, how it is, cried
my father, very angrily: all your condescension (as your indulgence
heretofore) is thrown away. You blame your son's violence, as you call
it [I had some pleasure in hearing this]; but nothing else will do with
her. You shall not see her alone. Is my presence an exception to the
bold creature?

Tell her, said my mother to Betty, she knows upon what terms she may
come down to us. Nor will I see her upon any other.

The maid brought me this answer. I had recourse to my pen and ink; but
I trembled so, that I could not write, nor knew what to say, had I
steadier fingers. At last Betty brought me these lines from my father.


UNDUTIFUL AND PERVERSE CLARISSA,

No condescension, I see, will move you. Your mother shall not see you;
nor will I. Prepare however to obey. You know our pleasure. Your uncle
Antony, your brother, and your sister, and your favourite Mrs. Norton,
shall see the ceremony performed privately at your uncle's chapel. And
when Mr. Solmes can introduce you to us, in the temper we wish to behold
you in, we may perhaps forgive his wife, although we never can, in
any other character, our perverse daughter. As it will be so privately
performed, clothes and equipage may be provided for afterwards. So
prepare to go to your uncle's for an early day in next week. We will not
see you till all is over: and we will have it over the sooner, in order
to shorten the time of your deserved confinement, and our own trouble in
contending with such a rebel, as you have been of late. I will hear no
pleas, I will receive no letter, nor expostulation. Nor shall you hear
from me any more till you have changed your name to my liking. This from

Your incensed Father.


If this resolution be adhered to, then will my father never see me
more!--For I will never be the wife of that Solmes--I will die first--!


TUESDAY EVENING.


He, this Solmes, came hither soon after I had received my father's
letter. He sent up to beg leave to wait upon me--I wonder at his
assurance--!

I said to Betty, who brought me this message, let him restore an unhappy
creature to her father and mother, and then I may hear what he has to
say. But, if my friends will not see me on his account, I will not see
him upon his own.

I hope, Miss, said Betty, you will not send me down with this answer. He
is with you papa and mamma.

I am driven to despair, said I. I cannot be used worse. I will not see
him.

Down she went with my answer. She pretended, it seems, to be loth to
repeat it: so was commanded out of her affected reserves, and gave it in
its full force.

O how I heard my father storm!

They were altogether, it seems, in his study. My brother was for
having me turned out of the house that moment, to Lovelace, and my evil
destiny. My mother was pleased to put in a gentle word for me: I know
not what it was: but thus she was answered--My dear, this is the most
provoking thing in the world in a woman of your good sense!--To love a
rebel, as well as if she were dutiful. What encouragement for duty
is this?--Have I not loved her as well as ever you did? And why am I
changed! Would to the Lord, your sex knew how to distinguish! It is
plain, that she relies upon her power over you. The fond mother ever
made a hardened child!

She was pleased, however, to blame Betty, as the wench owned, for giving
my answer its full force. But my father praised her for it.

The wench says, that he would have come up in his wrath, at my refusing
to see Mr. Solmes, had not my brother and sister prevailed upon him to
the contrary.

I wish he had!--And, were it not for his own sake, that he had killed
me!

Mr. Solmes condescended [I am mightily obliged to him truly!] to plead
for me.

They are all in tumults! How it will end, I know not--I am quite weary
of life--So happy, till within these few weeks!--So miserable now!

Well, indeed, might my mother say, that I should have severe trials.*


* See Letter XXV.


P.S. The idiot [such a one am I treated like!] is begged, as I may say,
by my brother and sister. They have desired, that I may be consigned
over entirely to their management. If it be granted, [it is granted,
on my father's part, I understand, but not yet on my mother's,] what
cruelty may I not expect from their envy, jealousy, and ill-will!--I
shall soon see, by its effects, if I am to be so consigned. This is a
written intimation privately dropt in my wood-house walk, by my cousin
Dolly Hervey. The dear girl longs to see me, she tells me: but is
forbidden till she see me as Mrs. Solmes, or as consenting to be his. I
will take example by their perseverance!--Indeed I will--!




LETTER XLII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


An angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, has passed between my sister
and me. Did you think I could scold, my dear?

She was sent up to me, upon my refusal to see Mr. Solmes--let loose
upon me, I think!--No intention on their parts to conciliate! It seems
evident that I am given up to my brother and her, by general consent.

I will do justice to every thing she said against me, which carried any
force with it. As I ask for your approbation or disapprobation of my
conduct, upon the facts I lay before you, I should think it the sign of
a very bad cause, if I endeavoured to mislead my judge.

She began with representing to me the danger I had been in, had my
father come up, as he would have done had he not been hindered--by
Mr. Solmes, among the rest. She reflected upon my Norton, as if she
encouraged me in my perverseness. She ridiculed me for my supposed
esteem for Mr. Lovelace--was surprised that the witty, the prudent, nay,
the dutiful and pi--ous [so she sneeringly pronounced the word] Clarissa
Harlowe, should be so strangely fond of a profligate man, that her
parents were forced to lock her up, in order to hinder her from running
into his arms. 'Let me ask you, my dear, said she, how you now keep
your account of the disposition of your time? How many hours in the
twenty-four do you devote to your needle? How many to your prayers?
How many to letter-writing? And how many to love?--I doubt, I doubt, my
little dear, was her arch expression, the latter article is like Aaron's
rod, and swallows up the rest!--Tell me; is it not so?'

To these I answered, That it was a double mortification to me to owe
my safety from the effects of my father's indignation to a man I could
never thank for any thing. I vindicated the good Mrs. Norton with a
warmth that was due to her merit. With equal warmth I resented her
reflections upon me on Mr. Lovelace's account. As to the disposition of
my time in the twenty-four hours, I told her it would better have become
her to pity a sister in distress, than to exult over her--especially,
when I could too justly attribute to the disposition of some of her
wakeful hours no small part of that distress.

She raved extremely at this last hint: but reminded me of the gentle
treatment of all my friends, my mother's in particular, before it
came to this. She said, that I had discovered a spirit they never had
expected: that, if they had thought me such a championess, they would
hardly have ventured to engage with me: but that now, the short and the
long of it was, that the matter had gone too far to be given up: that it
was become a contention between duty and willfulness; whether a parent's
authority were to yield to a daughter's obstinacy, or the contrary: that
I must therefore bend or break, that was all, child.

I told her, that I wished the subject were of such a nature, that I
could return her pleasantry with equal lightness of heart: but that, if
Mr. Solmes had such merit in every body's eyes, in hers, particularly,
why might he not be a brother to me, rather than a husband?

O child, says she, methinks you are as pleasant to the full as I am:
I begin to have some hopes of you now. But do you think I will rob my
sister of her humble servant? Had he first addressed himself to me,
proceeded she, something might have been said: but to take my younger
sister's refusal! No, no, child; it is not come to that neither!
Besides, that would be to leave the door open in your heart for you know
who, child; and we would fain bar him out, if possible. In short [and
then she changed both her tone and her looks] had I been as forward
as somebody, to throw myself into the arms of one of the greatest
profligates in England, who had endeavoured to support his claim to me
through the blood of my brother, then might all my family join together
to save me from such a wretch, and to marry me as fast as they could,
to some worthy man, who might opportunely offer himself. And now, Clary,
all's out, and make the most of it.

Did not this deserve a severe return? Do, say it did, to justify my
reply.--Alas! for my poor sister! said I--The man was not always so
great a profligate. How true is the observation, That unrequited love
turns to deepest hate!

I thought she would beat me. But I proceeded--I have heard often of my
brother's danger, and my brother's murderer. When so little ceremony is
made with me, why should I not speak out?--Did he not seek to kill the
other, if he could have done it? Would my brother have given Lovelace
his life, had it been in his power?--The aggressor should not
complain.--And, as to opportune offers, would to Heaven some one
had offered opportunely to somebody! It is not my fault, Bella, the
opportune gentleman don't come!

Could you, my dear, have shewn more spirit? I expected to feel the
weight of her hand. She did come up to me, with it held up: then,
speechless with passion, ran half way down the stairs, and came up
again.

When she could speak--God give me patience with you!

Amen, said I: but you see, Bella, how ill you bear the retort you
provoke. Will you forgive me; and let me find a sister in you, as I am
sorry, if you had reason to think me unsisterly in what I have said?

Then did she pour upon me, with greater violence; considering my
gentleness as a triumph of temper over her. She was resolved, she said,
to let every body know how I took the wicked Lovelace's part against my
brother.

I wished, I told her, I could make the plea for myself, which she
might for herself; to wit, that my anger was more inexcusable than my
judgment. But I presumed she had some other view in coming to me, than
she had hitherto acquainted me with. Let me, said I, but know (after
all that has passed) if you have any thing to propose that I can comply
with; any thing that can make my only sister once more my friend?

I had before, upon hearing her ridiculing me on my supposed character of
meekness, said, that, although I wished to be thought meek, I would not
be abject; although humble not mean: and here, in a sneering way, she
cautioned me on that head.

I replied, that her pleasantry was much more agreeable than her anger.
But I wished she would let me know the end of a visit that had hitherto
(between us) been so unsisterly.

She desired to be informed, in the name of every body, was her word,
what I was determined upon? And whether to comply or not?--One word for
all: My friends were not to have patience with so perverse a creature
for ever.

This then I told her I would do: Absolutely break with the man they were
all so determined against: upon condition, however, that neither Mr.
Solmes, nor any other, were urged upon me with the force of a command.

And what was this, more than I had offered before? What, but ringing
my changes upon the same bells, and neither receding nor advancing one
tittle?

If I knew what other proposals I could make, I told her, that would
be acceptable to them all, and free me from the address of a man so
disagreeable to me, I would make them. I had indeed before offered,
never to marry without my father's consent--

She interrupted me, That was because I depended upon my whining tricks
to bring my father and mother to what I pleased.

A poor dependence! I said:--She knew those who would make that
dependence vain--

And I should have brought them to my own beck, very probably, and my
uncle Harlowe too, as also my aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden from
their sight, and thereby hindered from playing my pug's tricks before
them.

At least, Bella, said I, you have hinted to me to whom I am obliged,
that my father and mother, and every body else, treat me thus harshly.
But surely you make them all very weak. Indifferent persons, judging of
us two from what you say, would either think me a very artful creature,
or you a very spiteful one--

You are indeed a very artful one, for that matter, interrupted she in
a passion: one of the artfullest I ever knew! And then followed an
accusation so low! so unsisterly!--That I half-bewitched people by my
insinuating address: that nobody could be valued or respected, but must
stand like ciphers wherever I came. How often, said she, have I and my
brother been talking upon a subject, and had every body's attention,
till you came in, with your bewitching meek pride, and humble
significance? And then have we either been stopped by references to Miss
Clary's opinion, forsooth; or been forced to stop ourselves, or must
have talked on unattended to by every body.

She paused. Dear Bella, proceed!

She indeed seemed only gathering breath.

And so I will, said she--Did you not bewitch my grandfather? Could any
thing be pleasing to him, that you did not say or do? How did he use
to hang, till he slabbered again, poor doting old man! on your silver
tongue! Yet what did you say, that we could not have said? What did you
do, that we did not endeavour to do?--And what was all this for? Why,
truly, his last will shewed what effect your smooth obligingness had
upon him!--To leave the acquired part of his estate from the next heirs,
his own sons, to a grandchild; to his youngest grandchild! A daughter
too!--To leave the family-pictures from his sons to you, because you
could tiddle about them, and, though you now neglect their examples,
could wipe and clean them with your dainty hands! The family-plate too,
in such quantities, of two or three generations standing, must not be
changed, because his precious child,* humouring his old fal-lal taste,
admired it, to make it all her own.


     * Alluding to his words in the preamble to the clauses in
     his will. See Letter IV.


This was too low to move me: O my poor sister! said I: not to be able,
or at least willing, to distinguish between art and nature! If I did
oblige, I was happy in it: I looked for no further reward: my mind is
above art, from the dirty motives you mention. I wish with all my heart
my grandfather had not thus distinguished me; he saw my brother likely
to be amply provided for out of the family, as well as in it: he desired
that you might have the greater share of my father's favour for it;
and no doubt but you both have. You know, Bella, that the estate my
grandfather bequeathed me was not half the real estate he left.

What's all that to an estate in possession, and left you with such
distinctions, as gave you a reputation of greater value than the estate
itself?

Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your envy, I doubt!--But have I not given
up that possession in the best manner I could--

Yes, interrupting me, she hated me for that best manner. Specious little
witch! she called me: your best manner, so full of art and design, had
never been seen through, if you, with your blandishing ways, have not
been put out of sight, and reduced to positive declarations!--Hindered
from playing your little declarations!--Hindered from playing your
little whining tricks! curling, like a serpent about your mamma; and
making her cry to deny you any thing your little obstinate heart was set
upon--!

Obstinate heart, Bella!

Yes, obstinate heart! For did you ever give up any thing? Had you not
the art to make them think all was right you asked, though my brother
and I were frequently refused favours of no greater import!

I know not, Bella, that I ever asked any thing unfit to be granted. I
seldom asked favours for myself, but for others.

I was a reflecting creature for this.

All you speak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I cannot go so far back
into our childish follies. Little did I think of how long standing your
late-shewn antipathy is.

I was a reflector again! Such a saucy meekness; such a best manner; and
such venom in words!--O Clary! Clary! Thou wert always a two-faced girl!

Nobody thought I had two faces, when I gave up all into my father's
management; taking from his bounty, as before, all my little
pocket-money, without a shilling addition to my stipend, or desiring
it--

Yes, cunning creature!--And that was another of your fetches!--For did
it not engage my fond father (as no doubt you thought it would) to tell
you, that since you had done so grateful and dutiful a thing, he would
keep entire, for your use, all the produce of the estate left you, and
be but your steward in it; and that you should be entitled to the same
allowances as before? Another of your hook-in's, Clary!--So that all
your extravagancies have been supported gratis.

My extravagancies, Bella!--But did my father ever give me any thing he
did not give you?

Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I should have had the
conscience to ask. But I have still the greater part to shew! But you!
What have you to shew?--I dare say, not fifty pieces in the world!

Indeed I have not!

I believe you!--Your mamma Norton, I suppose--But mum for that--!

Unworthy Bella! The good woman, although low in circumstance, is great
in mind! Much greater than those who would impute meanness to a soul
incapable of it.

What then have you done with the sums given you from infancy to
squander?--Let me ask you [affecting archness], Has, has, has Lovelace,
has your rake, put it out at interest for you?

O that my sister would not make me blush for her! It is, however, out at
interest!--And I hope it will bring me interest upon interest!--Better
than to lie useless in my cabinet.

She understood me, she said. Were I a man, she should suppose I was
aiming to carry the county--Popularity! A crowd to follow me with their
blessings as I went to and from church, and nobody else to be regarded,
were agreeable things. House-top-proclamations! I hid not my light under
a bushel, she would say that for me. But was it not a little hard upon
me, to be kept from blazing on a Sunday?--And to be hindered from my
charitable ostentations?

This, indeed, Bella, is cruel in you, who have so largely contributed to
my confinement.--But go on. You'll be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot
wish to be able to return this usage.--Poor Bella! And I believe I
smiled a little too contemptuously for a sister to a sister.

None of your saucy contempts [rising in her voice]: None of your poor
Bella's, with that air of superiority in a younger sister!

Well then, rich Bella! courtesying--that will please you better--and it
is due likewise to the hoards you boast of.

Look ye, Clary, holding up her hand, if you are not a little more abject
in your meekness, a little more mean in your humility, and treat me with
the respect due to an elder sister--you shall find--

Not that you will treat me worse than you have done, Bella!--That cannot
be; unless you were to let fall your uplifted hand upon me--and that
would less become you to do, than me to bear.

Good, meek creature:--But you were upon your overtures just now!--I
shall surprise every body by tarrying so long. They will think some good
may be done with you--and supper will be ready.

A tear would stray down my cheek--How happy have I been, said I,
sighing, in the supper-time conversations, with all my dear friends in
my eye round their hospitable board.

I met only with insult for this--Bella has not a feeling heart. The
highest joy in this life she is not capable of: but then she saves
herself many griefs, by her impenetrableness--yet, for ten times the
pain that such a sensibility is attended with, would I not part with the
pleasure it brings with it.

She asked me, upon my turning from her, if she should not say any thing
below of my compliances?

You may say, that I will do every thing they would have me do, if they
will free me from Mr. Solmes's address.

This is all you desire at present, creeper on! insinuator! [What words
she has!] But will not t'other man flame out, and roar most horribly,
upon the snatching from his paws a prey he thought himself sure of?

I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall never come to a point.
I shall not matter in his roaring, as you call it. I will promise him,
that, if I ever marry any other man, it shall not be till he is married.
And if he be not satisfied with such a condescension, I shall think he
ought: and I will give any assurances, that I will neither correspond
with him, nor see him. Surely this will do.

But I suppose then you will have no objection to see and converse, on a
civil footing, with Mr. Solmes--as your father's friend, or so?

No! I must be permitted to retire to my apartment whenever he comes.
I would no more converse with the one, than correspond with the other.
That would be to make Mr. Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on a belief,
that I broke with him, to have Mr. Solmes.

And so, that wicked wretch is to be allowed such a controul over you,
that you are not to be civil to your father's friends, at his own house,
for fear of incensing him!--When this comes to be represented, be so
good as to tell me, what is it you expect from it!

Every thing, I said, or nothing, as she was pleased to represent it.--Be
so good as to give it your interest, Bella, and say, further, 'That
I will by any means I can, in the law or otherwise, make over to my
father, to my uncles, or even to my brother, all I am entitled to by my
grandfather's will, as a security for the performance of my promises.
And as I shall have no reason to expect any favour from my father, if I
break them, I shall not be worth any body's having. And further
still, unkindly as my brother has used me, I will go down to Scotland
privately, as his housekeeper [I now see I may be spared here] if he
will promise to treat me no worse than he would do an hired one.--Or
I will go to Florence, to my cousin Morden, if his stay in Italy will
admit of it. In either case, it may be given out, that I am gone to the
other; or to the world's end. I care not whither it is said I am gone,
or do go.'

Let me ask you, child, if you will give your pretty proposal in writing?

Yes, with all my heart. And I stepped to my closet, and wrote to the
purpose I have mentioned; and moreover, the following lines to my
brother.


MY DEAR BROTHER,

I hope I have made such proposals to my sister as will be accepted. I am
sure they will, if you please to give them your sanction. Let me beg
of you, for God's sake, that you will. I think myself very unhappy in
having incurred your displeasure. No sister can love a brother better
than I love you. Pray do not put the worst but the best constructions
upon my proposals, when you have them reported to you. Indeed I mean the
best. I have no subterfuges, no arts, no intentions, but to keep to the
letter of them. You shall yourself draw up every thing into writing, as
strong as you can, and I will sign it: and what the law will not do to
enforce it, my resolution and my will shall: so that I shall be worth
nobody's address, that has not my papa's consent: nor shall any person,
nor any consideration, induce me to revoke it. You can do more than any
body to reconcile my parents and uncles to me. Let me owe this desirable
favour to your brotherly interposition, and you will for ever oblige

Your afflicted Sister, CL. HARLOWE.


***


And how do you think Bella employed herself while I was writing?--Why,
playing gently upon my harpsichord; and humming to it, to shew her
unconcernedness.

When I approached her with what I had written, she arose with an air
of levity--Why, love, you have not written already!--You have, I
protest!--O what a ready penwoman!--And may I read it?

If you please. And let me beseech you, my dear Bella, to back these
proposals with your good offices: and [folding my uplifted hands; tears,
I believe, standing in my eyes] I will love you as never sister loved
another.

Thou art a strange creature, said she; there is no withstanding thee.

She took the proposals and letter; and having read them, burst into an
affected laugh: How wise ones may be taken in!--Then you did not know,
that I was jesting with you all this time!--And so you would have me
carry down this pretty piece of nonsense?

Don't let me be surprised at your seeming unsisterliness, Bella. I hope
it is but seeming. There can be no wit in such jesting as this.

The folly of the creature!--How natural is it for people, when they set
their hearts upon any thing, to think every body must see with their
eyes!--Pray, dear child, what becomes of your father's authority
here?--Who stoops here, the parent, or the child?--How does this square
with engagements actually agreed upon between your father and Mr.
Solmes? What security, that your rake will not follow you to the world's
end?--Nevertheless, that you may not think that I stand in the way of
a reconciliation on such fine terms as these, I will be your messenger
this once, and hear what my papa will say to it; although beforehand I
can tell you, these proposals will not answer the principal end.

So down she went. But, it seems, my aunt Hervey and my uncle Harlowe
were not gone away: and as they have all engaged to act in concert,
messengers were dispatched to my uncle and aunt to desire them to be
there to breakfast in the morning.


MONDAY NIGHT, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.


I am afraid I shall not be thought worthy--

Just as I began to fear I should not be thought worthy of an answer,
Betty rapped at my door, and said, if I were not in bed, she had a
letter for me. I had but just done writing the above dialogue, and stept
to the door with the pen in my hand--Always writing, Miss! said the
bold wench: it is admirable how you can get away what you write--but the
fairies, they say, are always at hand to help lovers.--She retired in
so much haste, that, had I been disposed, I could not take the notice of
this insolence which it deserved.

I enclose my brother's letter. He was resolved to let me see, that I
should have nothing to expect from his kindness. But surely he will
not be permitted to carry every point. The assembling of my friends
to-morrow is a good sign: and I will hope something from that, and from
proposals so reasonable. And now I will try if any repose will fall to
my lot for the remainder of this night.


TO MISS CLARY HARLOWE [ENCLOSED IN THE PRECEDING.]

Your proposals will be considered by your father and mother, and
all your friends, to-morrow morning. What trouble does your shameful
forwardness give us all! I wonder you have the courage to write to me,
upon whom you are so continually emptying your whole female quiver. I
have no patience with you, for reflecting upon me as the aggressor in a
quarrel which owed its beginning to my consideration for you.

You have made such confessions in a villain's favour, as ought to cause
all your relations to renounce you for ever. For my part, I will
not believe any woman in the world, who promises against her avowed
inclination. To put it out of your power to ruin yourself is the only
way left to prevent your ruin. I did not intend to write; but your
too-kind sister has prevailed upon me. As to your going to Scotland,
that day of grace is over.--Nor would I advise, that you should go to
grandfather-up your cousin Morden. Besides, that worthy gentleman might
be involved in some fatal dispute, upon your account; and then be called
the aggressor.

A fine situation you have brought yourself to, to propose to hide
yourself from your rake, and to have falsehoods told, to conceal
you!--Your confinement, at this rate, is the happiest thing that could
befal you. Your bravo's behaviour at church, looking out for you, is a
sufficient indication of his power over you, had you not so shamelessly
acknowledged it.

One word for all--Your parents and uncles may do as they will: but if,
for the honour of the family, I cannot carry this point, I will retire
to Scotland, and never see the face of any one of it more.

JAMES HARLOWE.


***


There's a brother!--There's flaming duty to a father, and mother, and
uncles!--But he sees himself valued, and made of consequence; and he
gives himself airs accordingly!--Nevertheless, as I said above, I will
hope better things from those who have not the interest my brother has
to keep open these unhappy differences.




LETTER XLIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 21.


Would you not have thought, my dear Miss Howe, as well as I, that my
proposal must have been accepted: and that my brother, by the last
article of his unbrotherly letter (where he threatens to go to Scotland
if it should be hearkened to) was of opinion that it would.

For my part, after I had read the unkind letter over and over,
I concluded, upon the whole, that a reconciliation upon terms so
disadvantageous to myself, as hardly any other person in my case, I
dare say, would have proposed, must be the result of this morning's
conference. And in that belief I had begun to give myself new trouble in
thinking (this difficulty over) how I should be able to pacify Lovelace
on that part of my engagement, by which I undertook to break off all
correspondence with him, unless my friends should be brought, by the
interposition of his powerful friends, and any offers they might make,
(which it was rather his part to suggest, than mine to intimate,) to
change their minds.

Thus was I employed, not very agreeably, you may believe, because of the
vehemence of the tempers I had to conflict with; when breakfasting-time
approached, and my judges began to arrive.

And oh! how my heart fluttered on hearing the chariot of the one,
and then of the other, rattle through the court-yard, and the
hollow-sounding foot-step giving notice of each person's stepping out,
to take his place on the awful bench which my fancy had formed for them
and my other judges!

That, thought I, is my aunt Hervey's! That my uncle Harlowe's! Now comes
my uncle Antony! And my imagination made a fourth chariot for the odious
Solmes, although it happened he was not there.

And now, thought I, are they all assembled: and now my brother calls
upon my sister to make her report! Now the hard-hearted Bella interlards
her speech with invective! Now has she concluded her report! Now they
debate upon it!--Now does my brother flame! Now threaten to go to
Scotland! Now is he chidden, and now soothed!

And then I ran through the whole conference in my imagination, forming
speeches for this person and that, pro and con, till all concluded, as
I flattered myself, in an acceptance of my conditions, and in giving
directions to have an instrument drawn to tie me up to my good
behaviour; while I supposed all agreed to give Solmes a wife every way
more worthy of him, and with her the promise of my grandfather's estate,
in case of my forfeiture, or dying unmarried, on the righteous condition
he proposes to entitle himself to it with me.

And now, thought I, am I to be ordered down to recognize my own
proposals. And how shall I look upon my awful judges? How shall I stand
the questions of some, the set surliness of others, the returning love
of one or two? How greatly shall I be affected!

Then I wept: then I dried my eyes: then I practised at my glass for a
look more cheerful than my heart.

And now [as any thing stirred] is my sister coming to declare the issue
of all! Tears gushing again, my heart fluttering as a bird against its
wires; drying my eyes again and again to no purpose.

And thus, my Nancy, [excuse the fanciful prolixity,] was I employed, and
such were my thoughts and imaginations, when I found a very different
result from the hopeful conference.

For about ten o'clock up came my sister, with an air of cruel triumph,
waving her hand with a light flourish--

Obedience without reserve is required of you, Clary. My papa is justly
incensed, that you should presume to dispute his will, and to make
conditions with him. He knows what is best for you: and as you own
matters are gone a great way between this hated Lovelace and you,
they will believe nothing you say; except you will give the one only
instance, that will put them out of doubt of the sincerity of your
promises.

What, child, are you surprised?--Cannot you speak?--Then, it seems, you
had expected a different issue, had you?--Strange that you could!--With
all your acknowledgements and confessions, so creditable to your noted
prudence--!

I was indeed speechless for some time: my eyes were even fixed, and
ceased to flow. But upon the hard-hearted Bella's proceeding with her
airs of insult, Indeed I was mistaken, said I; indeed I was!----For in
you, Bella, I expected, I hoped for, a sister--

What! interrupted she, with all your mannerly flings, and your despising
airs, did you expect that I was capable of telling stories for you?--Did
you think, that when I was asked my own opinion of the sincerity of your
declarations, I could not tell tem, how far matters had gone between you
and your fellow?--When the intention is to bend that stubborn will of
yours to your duty, do you think I would deceive them?--Do you think I
would encourage them to call you down, to contradict all that I should
have invented in your favour?

Well, well, Bella; I am the less obliged to you; that's all. I was
willing to think that I had still a brother and sister. But I find I am
mistaken.

Pretty mopsy-eyed soul!--was her expression!--And was it willing to
think it had still a brother and sister? And why don't you go on, Clary?
[mocking my half-weeping accent] I thought I had a father, and mother,
two uncles, and an aunt: but I am mis--taken, that's all--come, Clary,
say this, and it will in part be true, because you have thrown off all
their authority, and because you respect one vile wretch more than them
all.

How have I deserved this at your hands, Sister?--But I will only say, I
pity you.

And with that disdainful air too, Clary!--None of that bridled neck!
none of your scornful pity, girl!--I beseech you!

This sort of behaviour is natural to you, surely, Bella!--What new
talents does it discover in you!--But proceed--If it be a pleasure to
you, proceed, Bella. And since I must not pity you, I will pity myself:
for nobody else will.

Because you don't, said she--

Hush, Bella, interrupting her, because I don't deserve it--I know you
were going to say so. I will say as you say in every thing; and that's
the way to please you.

Then say, Lovelace is a villain.

So I will, when I think him so.

Then you don't think him so?

Indeed I don't. You did not always, Bella.

And what, Clary, mean you by that? [bristling up to me]--Tell me what
you mean by that reflection?

Tell me why you call it a reflection?--What did I say?

Thou art a provoking creature--But what say you to two or three duels of
that wretch's?

I can't tell what to say, unless I knew the occasions.

Do you justify duelling at all?

I do not: neither can I help his duelling.

Will you go down, and humble that stubborn spirit of yours to your
mamma?

I said nothing.

Shall I conduct your Ladyship down? [offering to take my declined hand].

What! not vouchsafe to answer me?

I turned from her in silence.

What! turn your back upon me too!--Shall I bring up your mamma to you,
love? [following me, and taking my struggling hand] What? not speak yet!
Come, my sullen, silent dear, speak one word to me--you must say two
very soon to Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that.

Then [gushing into tears, which I could not hold in longer] they shall
be the last words I will ever speak.

Well, well, [insultingly wiping my averted face with her handkerchief,
while her other hand held mine, in a ridiculing tone,] I am glad any
thing will make thee speak: then you think you may be brought to speak
the two words--only they are to be the last!--How like a gentle lovyer
from its tender bleeding heart was that!

Ridiculous Bella!

Saucy Clary! [changing her sneering tone to an imperious one] But do you
think you can humble yourself to go down to your mamma?

I am tired of such stuff as this. Tell me, Bella, if my mamma will
condescend to see me?

Yes, if you can be dutiful at last.

I can. I will.

But what call you dutiful?

To give up my own inclinations--That's something more for you to tell
of--in obedience to my parents' commands; and to beg that I may not be
made miserable with a man that is fitter for any body than for me.

For me, do you mean, Clary?

Why not? since you have put the question. You have a better opinion of
him than I have. My friends, I hope, would not think him too good for
me, and not good enough for you. But cannot you tell me, Bella, what
is to become of me, without insulting over me thus?--If I must be thus
treated, remember, that if I am guilty of any rashness, the usage I meet
with will justify it.

So, Clary, you are contriving an excuse, I find, for somewhat that we
have not doubted has been in your head a great while.

If it were so, you seem resolved, for your part, and so does my brother
for his, that I shall not want one.--But indeed, Bella, I can bear no
longer this repetition of the worst part of yesterday's conversation:
I desire I may throw myself at my father's and mother's feet, and hear
from them what their sentence is. I shall at least avoid, by that means,
the unsisterly insults I meet with from you.

Hey-day! What, is this you? Is it you, my meek sister Clary?

Yes, it is I, Bella; and I will claim the protection due to a child of
the family, or to know why I am to be thus treated, when I offer only to
preserve to myself the liberty of refusal, which belongs to my sex; and,
to please my parents, would give up my choice. I have contented myself
till now to take second-hand messengers, and first-hand insults: you are
but my sister: my brother is not my sovereign. And while I have a father
and mother living, I will not be thus treated by a brother and sister,
and their servants, all setting upon me, as it should seem, to make me
desperate, and do a rash thing.--I will know, in short, sister Bella,
why I am to be constrained thus?--What is intended by it?--And whether I
am to be considered as a child or a slave?

She stood aghast all this time, partly with real, partly with affected,
surprise.

And is it you? Is it indeed you?--Well, Clary, you amaze me! But since
you are so desirous to refer yourself to your father and mother, I will
go down, and tell them what you say. Your friends are not yet gone,
I believe: they shall assemble again; and then you may come down, and
plead your own cause in person.

Let me then. But let my brother and you be absent. You have made
yourselves too much parties against me, to sit as my judges. And I
desire to have none of yours or his interpositions. I am sure you could
not have represented what I proposed fairly: I am sure you could not.
Nor is it possible you should be commissioned to treat me thus.

Well, well, I'll call up my brother to you.--I will indeed.--He shall
justify himself, as well as me.

I desire not to see my brother, except he will come as a brother, laying
aside the authority he has unjustly assumed over me.

And so, Clary, it is nothing to him, or to me, is it, that our sister
shall disgrace her whole family?

As how, Bella, disgrace it?--The man whom you thus freely treat, is a
man of birth and fortune: he is a man of parts, and nobly allied.--He
was once thought worthy of you: and I wish to Heaven you had had him.
I am sure it was not thus my fault you had not, although you treat me
thus.

This set her into a flame: I wish I had forborne it. O how the poor
Bella raved! I thought she would have beat me once or twice: and she
vowed her fingers itched to do so--but I was not worth her anger: yet
she flamed on.

We were heard to be high.--And Betty came up from my mother to command
my sister to attend her.--She went down accordingly, threatening me with
letting every one know what a violent creature I had shewn myself to be.


TUESDAY NOON, MARCH 21.


I have as yet heard no more of my sister: and have not courage enough
to insist upon throwing myself at the feet of my father and mother, as I
thought in my heat of temper I should be able to do. And I am now grown
as calm as ever; and were Bella to come up again, as fit to be played
upon as before.

I am indeed sorry that I sent her from me in such disorder. But my
papa's letter threatening me with my uncle Antony's house and chapel,
terrifies me strangely; and by their silence I'm afraid some new storm
is gathering.

But what shall I do with this Lovelace? I have just now, but the
unsuspected hole in the wall (that I told you of in my letter by Hannah)
got a letter from him--so uneasy is he for fear I should be prevailed
upon in Solmes's favour; so full of menaces, if I am; so resenting
the usage I receive [for, how I cannot tell, but he has undoubtedly
intelligence of all that is done in the family]; such protestations of
inviolable faith and honour; such vows of reformation; such pressing
arguments to escape from this disgraceful confinement--O my Nancy, what
shall I do with this Lovelace?--




LETTER XLIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WENESDAY MORNING, NINE O'CLOCK.


My aunt Hervey lay here last night, and is but just gone from me. She
came up to me with my sister. They would not trust my aunt without this
ill-natured witness. When she entered my chamber, I told her, that this
visit was a high favour to a poor prisoner, in her hard confinement.
I kissed her hand. She, kindly saluting me, said, Why this distance to
your aunt, my dear, who loves you so well?

She owned, that she came to expostulate with me, for the peace-sake of
the family: for that she could not believe it possible, if I did not
conceive myself unkindly treated, that I, who had ever shewn such a
sweetness of temper, as well as manners, should be thus resolute, in a
point so very near to my father, and all my friends. My mother and she
were both willing to impute my resolution to the manner I had been begun
with; and to my supposing that my brother had originally more of a hand
in the proposals made by Mr. Solmes, than my father or other friends. In
short, fain would my aunt have furnished me with an excuse to come off
my opposition; Bell all the while humming a tune, and opening this book
and that, without meaning; but saying nothing.

After having shewed me, that my opposition could not be of
signification, my father's honour being engaged, my aunt concluded with
enforcing upon me my duty, in stronger terms than I believe she would
have done, (the circumstances of the case considered), had not my sister
been present.

It would be repeating what I have so often mentioned, to give you the
arguments that passed on both sides.--So I will only recite what she was
pleased to say, that carried with it a new face.

When she found me inflexible, as she was pleased to call it, she said,
For her part, she could not but say, that if I were not to have either
Mr. Solmes or Mr. Lovelace, and yet, to make my friends easy, must
marry, she should not think amiss of Mr. Wyerley. What did I think of
Mr. Wyerley?

Ay, Clary, put in my sister, what say you to Mr. Wyerley?

I saw through this immediately. It was said on purpose, I doubted
not, to have an argument against me of absolute prepossession in Mr.
Lovelace's favour: since Mr. Wyerley every where avows his value, even
to veneration, for me; and is far less exceptionable both in person and
mind, than Mr. Solmes: and I was willing to turn the tables, by trying
how far Mr. Solmes's terms might be dispensed with; since the same terms
could not be expected from Mr. Wyerley.

I therefore desired to know, whether my answer, if it should be in
favour of Mr. Wyerley, would release me from Mr. Solmes?--For I owned,
that I had not the aversion to him, that I had to the other.

Nay, she had no commission to propose such a thing. She only knew, that
my father and mother would not be easy till Mr. Lovelace's hopes were
entirely defeated.

Cunning creature! said my sister.

And this, and her joining in the question before, convinced me, that it
was a designed snare for me.

Don't you, dear Madam, said I, put questions that can answer no end, but
to support my brother's schemes against me.--But are there any hopes
of an end to my sufferings and disgrace, without having this hated man
imposed upon me? Will not what I have offered be accepted? I am sure it
ought--I will venture to say that.

Why, Niece, if there be not any such hopes, I presume you don't think
yourself absolved from the duty due from a child to her parents?

Yes, said my sister, I do not doubt but it is Miss Clary's aim, if she
does not fly to her Lovelace, to get her estate into her own hands, and
go to live at The Grove, in that independence upon which she builds all
her perverseness. And, dear heart! my little love, how will you then
blaze away! Your mamma Norton, your oracle, with your poor at your
gates, mingling so proudly and so meanly with the ragged herd!
Reflecting, by your ostentation, upon all the ladies in the county,
who do not as you do. This is known to be your scheme! and the poor
without-doors, and Lovelace within, with one hand building up a name,
pulling it down with the other!--O what a charming scheme is this!--But
let me tell you, my pretty little flighty one, that your father's living
will shall controul your grandfather's dead one; and that estate will be
disposed of as your fond grandfather would have disposed of it, had he
lived to see such a change in his favourite. In a word, Miss, it will be
kept out of your hands, till my father sees you discreet enough to have
the management of it, or till you can dutifully, by law, tear it from
him.

Fie, Miss Harlowe! said my aunt: this is not pretty to your sister.

O Madam, let her go on. This is nothing to what I have borne from Miss
Harlowe. She is either commissioned to treat me ill by her envy, or by
an higher authority, to which I must submit.--As to revoking the estate,
what hinders, if I pleased? I know my power; but have not the least
thought of exerting it. Be pleased to let my father know, that, whatever
be the consequence to myself, were he to turn me out of doors, (which
I should rather he would do, than to be confined and insulted as I am),
and were I to be reduced to indigence and want, I would seek no relief
that should be contrary to his will.

For that matter, child, said my aunt, were you to marry, you must do as
your husband will have you. If that husband be Mr. Lovelace, he will be
glad of any opportunity of further embroiling the families. And, let
me tell you, Niece, if he had the respect for you which he pretends to
have, he would not throw out defiances as he does. He is known to be a
very revengeful man; and were I you, Miss Clary, I should be afraid he
would wreak upon me that vengeance, though I had not offended him, which
he is continually threatening to pour upon the family.

Mr. Lovelace's threatened vengeance is in return for threatened
vengeance. It is not every body will bear insult, as, of late, I have
been forced to bear it.

O how my sister's face shone with passion!

But Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, as I have said twenty and twenty times,
would be quite out of question with me, were I to be generously treated!

My sister said something with great vehemence: but only raising my
voice, to be heard, without minding her, Pray, Madam, (provokingly
interrogated I), was he not known to have been as wild a man, when he
was at first introduced into our family, as he now is said to be? Yet
then, the common phrases of wild oats, and black oxen, and such-like,
were qualifiers; and marriage, and the wife's discretion, were to
perform wonders--but (turning to my sister) I find I have said too much.

O thou wicked reflecter!--And what made me abhor him, think you, but
the proof of those villainous freedoms that ought to have had the same
effect upon you, were you but half so good a creature as you pretend to
be?

Proof, did you say, Bella! I thought you had not proof?--But you know
best.

Was not this very spiteful, my dear?

Now, Clary, said she, would I give a thousand pounds to know all that is
in thy little rancorous and reflecting heart at this moment.

I might let you know for a much less sum, and not be afraid of being
worse treated than I have been.

Well, young ladies, I am sorry to see passion run so high between
you. You know, Niece, (to me,) you had not been confined thus to
your apartment, could your mother by condescension, or your father by
authority, have been able to move you. But how can you expect, when
there must be a concession on one side, that it should be on theirs?
If my Dolly, who has not the hundredth part of your understanding, were
thus to set herself up in absolute contradiction to my will, in a point
so material, I should not take it well of her--indeed I should not.

I believe not, Madam: and if Miss Hervey had just such a brother, and
just such a sister [you may look, Bella!] and if both were to aggravate
her parents, as my brother and sister do mine--then, perhaps, you might
use her as I am used: and if she hated the man you proposed to her, and
with as much reason as I do Mr. Solmes--

And loved a rake and libertine, Miss, as you do Lovelace, said my
sister--

Then might she [continued I, not minding her,] beg to be excused from
obeying. Yet if she did, and would give you the most solemn assurances,
and security besides, that she would never have the man you disliked,
against your consent--I dare say, Miss Hervey's father and mother would
sit down satisfied, and not endeavour to force her inclinations.

So!--[said my sister, with uplifted hands] father and mother now come in
for their share!

But if, child, replied my aunt, I knew she loved a rake, and suspected
that she sought only to gain time, in order to wire-draw me into a
consent--

I beg pardon, Madam, for interrupting you; but if Miss Hervey could
obtain your consent, what further would be said?

True, child; but she never should.

Then, Madam, it would never be.

That I doubt, Niece.

If you do, Madam, can you think confinement and ill usage is the way to
prevent the apprehended rashness?

My dear, this sort of intimation would make one but too apprehensive,
that there is no trusting to yourself, when one knows your inclination.

That apprehension, Madam, seems to have been conceived before this
intimation, or the least cause for it, was given. Why else the
disgraceful confinement I have been laid under?--Let me venture to say,
that my sufferings seem to be rather owing to a concerted design to
intimidate me [Bella held up her hands], (knowing there were too good
grounds for my opposition,) than to a doubt of my conduct; for, when
they were inflicted first, I had given no cause of doubt: nor should
there now be room for any, if my discretion might be trusted to.

My aunt, after a little hesitation, said, But, consider, my dear, what
confusion will be perpetuated in your family, if you marry this hated
Lovelace!

And let it be considered, what misery to me, Madam, if I marry that
hated Solmes!

Many a young creature has thought she could not love a man, with whom
she has afterwards been very happy. Few women, child, marry their first
loves.

That may be the reason there are so few happy marriages.

But there are few first impressions fit to be encouraged.

I am afraid so too, Madam. I have a very indifferent opinion of light
and first impressions. But, as I have often said, all I wish for is, to
have leave to live single.

Indeed you must not, Miss. Your father and mother will be unhappy till
they see you married, and out of Lovelace's reach. I am told that you
propose to condition with him (so far are matters gone between you)
never to have any man, if you have not him.

I know no better way to prevent mischief on all sides, I freely own
it--and there is not, if he be out of the question, another man in the
world I can think favourably of. Nevertheless, I would give all I have
in the world, that he were married to some other person--indeed I would,
Bella, for all you put on that smile of incredulity.

May be so, Clary: but I will smile for all that.

If he be out of the question! repeated my aunt--So, Miss Clary, I see
how it is--I will go down--[Miss Harlowe, shall I follow you?]--And I
will endeavour to persuade your father to let my sister herself come up:
and a happier event may then result.

Depend upon it, Madam, said my sister, this will be the case: my mother
and she will both be in tears; but with this different effect: my
mother will come down softened, and cut to the heart; but will leave her
favourite hardened, from the advantages she will think she has over my
mother's tenderness--why, Madam, it is for this very reason the girl is
not admitted into her presence.

Thus she ran on, as she went downstairs.

END OF VOL. 1





End of Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 1 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 1 (OF 9) ***

***** This file should be named 9296.txt or 9296.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/9/9296/

Produced by Julie C. Sparks

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 2 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Clarissa, Volume 2 (of 9)

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: January, 2006 [EBook #9798]
Posting Date: August 1, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 2 (OF 9) ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks





CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

By Samuel Richardson


Nine Volumes

Volume II.




LETTERS OF VOLUME II


LETTER I. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Another visit from her aunt and
sister. The latter spitefully insults her with the patterns. A tender
scene between her aunt and her in Arabella's absence. She endeavours to
account for the inflexibility of her parents and uncles.

LETTER II. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Humourous description of Mr. Hickman.
Imagines, from what Lovelace, Hickman, and Solmes, are now, what figures
they made when boys at school.

LETTER III. From the same.--Useful observations on general life. Severe
censures of the Harlowe family, for their pride, formality, and other
bad qualities.

LETTER IV. From the same.--Mr. Hickman's conversation with two of
Lovelace's libertine companions.

LETTER V. From the same.--An unexpected visit from Mr. Lovelace. What
passes in it. Repeats her advice to her to resume her estate.

LETTER VI. VII. VIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Farther particulars of the
persecutions she receives from her violent brother.

LETTER IX. From the same.--Impertinence of Betty Barnes. Overhears her
brother and sister encourage Solmes to persevere in his address. She
writes warmly to her brother upon it.

LETTER X. From the same.--Receives a provoking letter from her sister.
Writes to her mother. Her mother's severe reply. Is impatient. Desires
Miss Howe's advice what course to pursue. Tries to compose her angry
passions at her harpsichord. An Ode to Wisdom, by a Lady.

LETTER XI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Chides her for misrepresenting Mr.
Hickman. Fully answers her arguments about resuming her estate. Her
impartiality with regard to what Miss Howe says of Lovelace, Solmes, and
her brother. Reflections on revenge and duelling.

LETTER XII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Sir Harry Downeton's account of what
passed between himself and Solmes. She wishes her to avoid both men.
Admires her for her manifold excellencies.

LETTER XIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Why she cannot overcome her
aversion to Solmes. Sharp letter to Lovelace. On what occasion. All his
difficulties, she tells him, owning to his faulty morals; which level
all distinction. Insists upon his laying aside all thoughts of her. Her
impartial and dutiful reasonings on her difficult situation.

LETTER XIV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--A notable debate between her and her
mother on her case. Those who marry for love seldom so happy as those
who marry for convenience. Picture of a modern marriage. A lesson both
to parents and children in love-cases. Handsome men seldom make good
husbands. Miss Howe reflects on the Harlowe family, as not famous for
strictness in religion or piety. Her mother's partiality for Hickman.

LETTER XV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her increased apprehensions.
Warmly defends her own mother. Extenuates her father's feelings; and
expostulates with her on her undeserved treatment of Mr. Hickman. A
letter to her from Solmes. Her spirited answer. All in an uproar about
it. Her aunt Hervey's angry letter to her. She writes to her mother. Her
letter returned unopened. To her father. He tears her letter in pieces,
and sends it back to her. She then writes a pathetic letter to her uncle
Harlowe.

LETTER XVI. From the same.--Receives a gentler answer than she expected
from her uncle Harlowe. Makes a new proposal in a letter to him, which
she thinks must be accepted. Her relations assembled upon it. Her
opinion of the sacrifice which a child ought to make to her parents.

LETTER XVII. From the same.--She tells her that the proposal she had
made to her relations, on which she had built so much, is rejected.
Betty's saucy report upon it. Her brother's provoking letter to her.
Her letter to her uncle Harlowe on the occasion. Substance of a letter
excusatory from Mr. Lovelace. He presses for an interview with her in
the garden.

LETTER XVIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her uncle's angry answer.
Substance of a humble letter from Mr. Lovelace. He has got a violent
cold and hoarseness, by his fruitless attendance all night in the
coppice. She is sorry he is not well. Makes a conditional appointment
with him for the next night, in the garden. Hates tyranny in all shapes.

LETTER XIX. From the same.--A characteristic dialogue with the pert
Betty Barnes. Women have great advantage over men in all the powers that
relate to the imagination. Makes a request to her uncle Harlowe, which
is granted, on condition that she will admit of a visit from Solmes. She
complies; and appoints that day sevennight. Then writes to Lovelace
to suspend the intended interview. Desires Miss Howe to inquire into
Lovelace's behaviour at the little inn he puts up at in his way to
Harlowe-Place.

LETTER XX. From the same.--Receives a letter from Lovelace, written
in very high terms, on her suspending the interview. Her angry answer.
Resolves against any farther correspondence with him.

LETTER XXI. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Humourous account of her mother and
Mr. Hickman in their little journey to visit her dying cousin. Rallies
her on her present displeasure with Lovelace.

LETTER XXII. Mr. Hickman to Mrs. Howe.--Resenting Miss Howe's treatment
of him.

LETTER XXIII. Mrs. Howe. In answer.

LETTER XXIV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Observes upon the contents of her
seven last letters. Advises her to send all the letters and papers she
would not have her relations see; also a parcel of clothes, linen, &c.
Is in hopes of procuring an asylum for her with her mother, if things
come to extremity.

LETTER XXV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Requisites of true satire. Rejoices
in the hopes she gives of her mother's protection. Deposits a parcel
of linen, and all Lovelace's letters. Useful observations relating to
family management, and to neatness of person and dress. Her contrivances
to amuse Betty Barnes.

LETTER XXVI. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Result of her inquiry after
Lovelace's behaviour at the inn. Doubts not but he has ruined the
innkeeper's daughter. Passionately inveighs against him.

LETTER XXVII. Clarissa. In answer.--Is extremely alarmed at Lovelace's
supposed baseness. Declares her abhorrence of him.

LETTER XXVIII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Lovelace, on inquiry, comes out
to be not only innocent with regard to his Rosebud, but generous. Miss
Howe rallies her on the effects this intelligence must have upon her
generosity.

LETTER XXIX. Clarissa. In reply.--Acknowledges her generosity engaged
in his favour. Frankly expresses tenderness and regard for him; and owns
that the intelligence of his supposed baseness had affected her more
than she thinks it ought. Contents of a letter she has received from
him. Pities him. Writes to him that her rejection of Solmes is not in
favour to himself; for that she is determined to hold herself free
to obey her parents, (as she had offered to them,) of their giving up
Solmes. Reproaches him for his libertine declarations in all companies
against matrimony. Her notions of filial duty, notwithstanding the
persecutions she meets with.

LETTER XXX. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Her treatment of Mr. Hickman on his
intrusion into her company. Applauds Clarissa for the generosity of her
spirit, and the greatness of her mind.

LETTER XXXI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Dr. Lewen makes her a formal visit.
Affected civility of her brother and sister to her. Is visited by her
uncle Harlowe: and by her sister. She penetrates the low art designed in
this change of their outward behaviour. Substance of Lovelace's reply
to her last. He acknowledges his folly for having ever spoken lightly of
matrimony.

LETTER XXXII. From the same.--Another letter from Mr. Lovelace, in
which he expresses himself extremely apprehensive of the issue of
her interview with Solmes. Presses her to escape; proposes means for
effecting it; and threatens to rescue her by violence, if they attempt
to carry her to her uncle Antony's against her will. Her terror on the
occasion. She insists, in her answer, on his forbearing to take any rash
step; and expresses herself highly dissatisfied that he should think
himself entitled to dispute her father's authority in removing her to
her uncle's. She relies on Mrs. Howe's protection till her cousin Morden
arrives.

LETTER XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--A visit from her aunt Hervey,
preparative to the approaching interview with Solmes. Her aunt tells her
what is expected on her having consented to that interview.

LETTER XXXIV. XXXV. From the same.--A particular account of what passed
in the interview with Solmes; and of the parts occasionally taken in
it by her boisterous uncle, by her brutal brother, by her implacable
sister, and by her qualifying aunt. Her perseverance and distress. Her
cousin Dolly's tenderness for her. Her closet searched for papers. All
the pens and ink they find taken from her.

LETTER XXXVI. From the same.--Substance of a letter from Lovelace. His
proposals, promises, and declarations. All her present wish is, to be
able to escape Solmes, on one hand, and to avoid incurring the disgrace
of refuging with the family of a man at enmity with her own, on the
other. Her emotions behind the yew-hedge on seeing her father going into
the garden. Grieved at what she hears him say. Dutiful message to
her mother. Harshly answered. She censures Mr. Lovelace for his rash
threatenings to rescue her. Justifies her friends for resenting them;
and condemns herself for corresponding with him at first.

LETTER XXXVII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Is vexed at the heart to be
obliged to tell her that her mother refuses to receive and protect her.
Offers to go away privately with her.

LETTER XXXVIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her disinterested arguments in
Mrs. Howe's favour, on her refusal to receive her. All her consolation
is, that her unhappy situation is not owing to her own inadvertence of
folly. Is afraid she is singled out, either for her own faults, or for
those of her family, or perhaps for the faults of both, to be a very
unhappy creature. Justifies the ways of Providence, let what will befal
her: and argues with exemplary greatness of mind on this subject. Warmly
discourages Miss Howe's motion to accompany her in her flight.

LETTER XXXIX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Further instances of her
impartiality in condemning Lovelace, and reasoning for her parents.
Overhears her brother and sister exulting in the success of their
schemes; and undertaking, the one to keep his father up to his
resentment on occasion of Lovelace's menaces, the other her mother.
Exasperated at this, and at what her aunt Hervey tells her, she writes
to Lovelace, that she will meet him the following Monday, and throw
herself into the protection of the ladies of his family.

LETTER XL. From the same.--Her frightful dream. Now that Lovelace has
got her letter, she repents her appointment.

LETTER XLI. From the same.--Receives a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full
of transport, vows, and promises. He presumes upon her being his on her
getting away, though she has not given him room for such hopes. In her
answer she tells him, 'that she looks not upon herself as absolutely
bound by her appointment: that there are many points to be adjusted
between them (were she to leave her father's house) before she can give
him particular encouragement: that he must expect she will do her utmost
to procure a reconciliation with her father, and his approbation of
her future steps.' All her friends are to be assembled on the following
Wednesday: she is to be brought before them. How to be proceeded with.
Lovelace, in his reply, asks pardon for writing to her with so much
assurance; and declares his entire acquiescence with her will and
pleasure.

LETTER XLII. From the same.--Confirms her appointment; but tells him
what he is not to expect. Promises, that if she should change her mind
as to withdrawing, she will take the first opportunity to see him, and
acquaint him with her reasons. Reflections on what she has done. Her
deep regret to be thus driven.

LETTER XLIII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Reasons why she ought to allow her
to accompany her in her flight. Punctilio at an end, the moment she is
out of her father's house. Requisites of friendship. Questions whether
she will not rather choose to go off with one of her own sex than
with Lovelace? And if not, whether she should not marry him as soon as
possible?

LETTER XLIV. Clarissa to Miss Howe, (Miss Howe's last not received.)
Lovelace promises compliance, in every article, with her pleasure.
Her heart misgives her notwithstanding. She knows not but she may yet
recede.

LETTER XLV. From the same. In answer to Letter XLIII.--Reflections
worthy of herself on some of the passages in Miss Howe's last letter.
Gives her home-put questions a full consideration; and determines NOT to
withdraw with Lovelace.

LETTER XLVI. XLVII. From the same.--Substance of her letter to Lovelace,
revoking her appointment. Thinks herself obliged (her letter being not
taken away) as well by promise as in order to prevent mischief, to meet
him, and to give him her reason for revoking.--The hour of meeting now
at hand, she is apprehensive of the contest she shall have with him, as
he will come with a different expectation.

LETTER XLVIII. From the same.--Dated from St. Alban's. Writes in the
utmost anguish of mind for the little parcel of linen she had sent to
her with better hopes. Condemns her own rashness in meeting Lovelace.
Begs her pity and her prayers.




THE HISTORY OF CLARISSA HARLOWE




LETTER I

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


My heart fluttered with the hope and the fear of seeing my mother, and
with the shame and grief of having given her so much uneasiness. But it
needed not: she was not permitted to come. But my aunt was so good as to
return, yet not without my sister; and, taking my hand, made me sit down
by her.

She came, she must own, officiously, she said, this once more,
though against the opinion of my father: but knowing and dreading the
consequence of my opposition, she could not but come.

She then set forth to my friends' expectation from me; Mr. Solmes's
riches (three times as rich he came out to be, as any body had thought
him); the settlements proposed; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; their
aversions to him; all in a very strong light; not in a stronger than
my mother had before placed them in. My mother, surely, could not have
given the particulars of what had passed between herself and me: if she
had, my aunt would not have repeated many of the same sentiments, as
you will find she did, that had been still more strongly urged, without
effect by her venerable sister.

She said it would break the heart of my father to have it imagined that
he had not a power over his own child; and that, as he thought, for
my own good: a child too, whom they had always doated upon!--Dearest,
dearest Miss, concluded she, clasping her fingers, with the most
condescending earnestness, let me beg of you, for my sake, for your own
sake, for a hundred sakes, to get over this averseness, to give up your
prejudices, and make every one happy and easy once more.--I would kneel
to you, my dearest Niece--nay, I will kneel to you--!

And down she dropt, and I with her, kneeling to her, and beseeching her
not to kneel; clasping my arms about her, and bathing her worthy bosom
with my tears.

O rise! rise! my beloved Aunt, said I: you cut me to the heart with this
condescending goodness.

Say then, my dearest Niece, say then, that you will oblige all your
friends!--If you love us, I beseech you do--

How can I perform what I can sooner choose to die than to perform--!

Say then, my dear, that you will consider of it. Say you will but
reason with yourself. Give us but hopes. Don't let me entreat, and thus
entreat, in vain--[for still she kneeled, and I by her].

What a hard case is mine!--Could I but doubt, I know I could
conquer.--That which is an inducement to my friends, is none at all to
me--How often, my dearest Aunt, must I repeat the same thing?--Let me
but be single--Cannot I live single? Let me be sent, as I have proposed,
to Scotland, to Florence, any where: let me be sent a slave to the
Indies, any where--any of these I will consent to. But I cannot, cannot
think of giving my vows to man I cannot endure!

Well then, rising, (Bella silently, with uplifted hands, reproaching my
supposed perverseness,) I see nothing can prevail with you to oblige us.

What can I do, my dearest Aunt Hervey? What can I do? Were I capable of
giving a hope I meant not to enlarge, then could I say, I would consider
of your kind advice. But I would rather be thought perverse than
insincere. Is there, however, no medium? Can nothing be thought of? Will
nothing do, but to have a man who is the more disgustful to me, because
he is unjust in the very articles he offers?

Whom now, Clary, said my sister, do you reflect upon? Consider that.

Make not invidious applications of what I say, Bella. It may not be
looked upon in the same light by every one. The giver and the accepter
are principally answerable in an unjust donation. While I think of it in
this light, I should be inexcusable to be the latter. But why do I enter
upon a supposition of this nature?--My heart, as I have often, often
said, recoils, at the thought of the man, in every light.--Whose father,
but mine, agrees upon articles where there is no prospect of a liking?
Where the direct contrary is avowed, all along avowed, without the
least variation, or shadow of a change of sentiment?--But it is not my
father's doing originally. O my cruel, cruel brother, to cause a measure
to be forced upon me, which he would not behave tolerably under, were
the like to be offered to him!

The girl is got into her altitudes, Aunt Hervey, said my sister. You
see, Madam, she spares nobody. Be pleased to let her know what she has
to trust to. Nothing is to be done with her. Pray, Madam, pronounce her
doom.

My aunt retired to the window, weeping, with my sister in her hand:
I cannot, indeed I cannot, Miss Harlowe, said she, softly, (but yet I
heard every word she said): there is great hardship in her case. She
is a noble child after all. What pity things are gone so far!--But Mr.
Solmes ought to be told to desist.

O Madam, said my sister, in a kind of loud whisper, are you caught too
by the little siren?--My mother did well not to come up!--I question
whether my father himself, after his first indignation, would not be
turned round by her. Nobody but my brother can do any thing with her, I
am sure.

Don't think of your brother's coming up, said my aunt, still in a low
voice--He is too furious. I see no obstinacy, no perverseness, in
her manner! If your brother comes, I will not be answerable for the
consequences: for I thought twice or thrice she would have gone into
fits.

O Madam, she has a strong heart!--And you see there is no prevailing
with her, though you were upon your knees to her.

My sister left my aunt musing at the window, with her back towards us,
and took that opportunity to insult me still more barbarously; for,
stepping to my closet, she took up the patterns which my mother had sent
me up, and bringing them to me, she spread them upon the chair by me;
and offering one, and then another, upon her sleeve and shoulder, thus
she ran on, with great seeming tranquility, but whisperingly, that my
aunt might not hear her. This, Clary, is a pretty pattern enough: but
this is quite charming! I would advise you to make your appearance in
it. And this, were I you, should be my wedding night-gown--And this
my second dressed suit! Won't you give orders, love, to have your
grandmother's jewels new set?--Or will you thing to shew away in the new
ones Mr. Solmes intends to present to you? He talks of laying out two
or three thousand pounds in presents, child! Dear heart!--How gorgeously
will you be array'd! What! silent still?--But, Clary, won't you have a
velvet suit? It would cut a great figure in a country church, you know:
and the weather may bear it for a month yet to come. Crimson velvet,
suppose! Such a fine complexion as yours, how it would be set off by it!
What an agreeable blush would it give you!--Heigh-ho! (mocking me, for I
sighed to be thus fooled with,) and do you sigh, love?--Well then, as it
will be a solemn wedding, what think you of black velvet, child?--Silent
still, Clary?--Black velvet, so fair as you are, with those charming
eyes, gleaming through a wintry cloud, like an April sun!--Does not
Lovelace tell you they are charming eyes?--How lovely will you appear to
every one!--What! silent still, love?--But about your laces, Clary?--

She would have gone on still further, had not my aunt advance towards
me, wiping her eyes--What! whispering ladies! You seem so easy and so
pleased, Miss Harlowe, with your private conference, that I hope I shall
carry down good news.

I am only giving her my opinion of her patterns, here.--Unasked indeed;
but she seems, by her silence, to approve of my judgment.

O Bella! said I, that Mr. Lovelace had not taken you at your word!--You
had before now been exercising your judgment on your own account: and I
had been happy as well as you! Was it my fault, I pray you, that it was
not so?--

O how she raved!

To be so ready to give, Bella, and so loth to take, is not very fair in
you.

The poor Bella descended to call names.

Why, Sister, said I, you are as angry, as if there were more in the
hint than possibly might be designed. My wish is sincere, for both our
sakes!--for the whole family's sake!--And what (good now) is there in
it?--Do not, do not, dear Bella, give me cause to suspect, that I have
found a reason for your behaviour to me, and which till now was wholly
unaccountable from sister to sister--

Fie, fie, Clary! said my aunt.

My sister was more and more outrageous.

O how much fitter, said I, to be a jest, than a jester!--But now, Bella,
turn the glass to you, and see how poorly sits the robe upon your own
shoulders, which you have been so unmercifully fixing upon mine!

Fie, fie, Miss Clary! repeated my aunt.

And fie, fie, likewise, good Madam, to Miss Harlowe, you would say, were
you to have heard her barbarous insults!

Let us go, Madam, said my sister, with great violence; let us leave the
creature to swell till she bursts with her own poison.--The last time I
will ever come near her, in the mind I am in!

It is so easy a thing, returned I, were I to be mean enough to follow
an example that is so censurable in the setter of it, to vanquish such
a teasing spirit as your's with its own blunt weapons, that I am amazed
you will provoke me!--Yet, Bella, since you will go, (for she had
hurried to the door,) forgive me. I forgive you. And you have a double
reason to do so, both from eldership and from the offence so studiously
given to one in affliction. But may you be happy, though I never shall!
May you never have half the trials I have had! Be this your comfort,
that you cannot have a sister to treat you as you have treated me!--And
so God bless you!

O thou art a--And down she flung without saying what.

Permit me, Madam, said I to my aunt, sinking down, and clasping her
knees with my arms, to detain you one moment--not to say any thing about
my poor sister--she is her own punisher--only to thank you for all
your condescending goodness to me. I only beg of you not to impute to
obstinacy the immovableness I have shown to so tender a friend; and to
forgive me every thing I have said or done amiss in your presence, for
it has not proceeded from inward rancour to the poor Bella. But I will
be bold to say, that neither she, nor my brother, nor even my father
himself, knows what a heart they have set a bleeding.

I saw, to my comfort, what effect my sister's absence wrought for
me.--Rise, my noble-minded Niece!--Charming creature! [those were her
kind words] kneel not to me!--Keep to yourself what I now say to you.--I
admire you more than I can express--and if you can forbear claiming your
estate, and can resolve to avoid Lovelace, you will continue to be the
greatest miracle I ever knew at your years--but I must hasten down after
your sister.--These are my last words to you: 'Conform to your father's
will, if you possibly can. How meritorious will it be in you if you do
so! Pray to God to enable you to conform. You don't know what may be
done.'

Only, my dear Aunt, one word, one word more (for she was going)--Speak
all you can for my dear Mrs. Norton. She is but low in the world: should
ill health overtake her, she may not know how to live without my mamma's
favour. I shall have no means to help her; for I will want necessaries
before I will assert my right: and I do assure you, she has said so many
things to me in behalf of my submitting to my father's will, that her
arguments have not a little contributed to make me resolve to avoid the
extremities, which nevertheless I pray to God they do not at last force
me upon. And yet they deprive me of her advice, and think unjustly of
one of the most excellent of women.

I am glad to hear you say this: and take this, and this, and this, my
charming Niece! (for so she called me almost at every word, kissing me
earnestly, and clasping her arms about my neck:) and God protect you,
and direct you! But you must submit: indeed you must. Some one day in a
month from this is all the choice that is left you.

And this, I suppose, was the doom my sister called for; and yet no worse
than what had been pronounced upon me before.

She repeated these last sentences louder than the former. 'And remember,
Miss,' added she, 'it is your duty to comply.'--And down she went,
leaving me with my heart full, and my eyes running over.

The very repetition of this fills me with almost equal concern to that
which I felt at the time.

I must lay down my pen. Mistiness, which give to the deluged eye the
appearance of all the colours in the rainbow, will not permit me to
write on.


WEDNESDAY, FIVE O'CLOCK


I will now add a few lines--My aunt, as she went down from me, was met
at the foot of the stairs by my sister, who seemed to think she had
staid a good while after her; and hearing her last words prescribing
to me implicit duty, praised her for it, and exclaimed against my
obstinacy. Did you ever hear of such perverseness, Madam? said she:
Could you have thought that your Clarissa and every body's Clarissa, was
such a girl?--And who, as you said, is to submit, her father or she?

My aunt said something in answer to her, compassionating me, as I
thought, by her accent: but I heard not the words.

Such a strange perseverance in a measure so unreasonable!--But my
brother and sister are continually misrepresenting all I say and do; and
I am deprived of the opportunity of defending myself!--My sister says,*
that had they thought me such a championess, they you not have engaged
with me: and now, not knowing how to reconcile my supposed obstinacy
with my general character and natural temper, they seem to hope to tire
me out, and resolve to vary their measures accordingly. My brother, you
see,** is determined to carry this point, or to abandon Harlowe-place,
and never to see it more. So they are to lose a son, or to conquer
a daughter--the perversest and most ungrateful that ever parents
had!--This is the light he places things in: and has undertaken, it
seems, to subdue me, if his advice should be followed. It will be
farther tried; of that I am convinced; and what will be their next
measure, who can divine?


     * See Letter XLII. of Vol. I.

     ** Ibid.


I shall dispatch, with this, my answer to your's of Sunday last, begun
on Monday;* but which is not yet quite finished. It is too long to copy:
I have not time for it. In it I have been very free with you, my dear,
in more places than one. I cannot say that I am pleased with all I have
written--yet will not now alter it. My mind is not at ease enough for
the subject. Don't be angry with me. Yet, if you can excuse one or two
passages, it will be because they were written by

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.


     * See Letter XL, ibid.




LETTER II

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE WEDNESDAY NIGHT, MARCH 22.


ANGRY!--What should I be angry for? I am mightily pleased with your
freedom, as you call it. I only wonder at your patience with me; that's
all. I am sorry I gave you the trouble of so long a letter upon the
occasion,* notwithstanding the pleasure I received in reading it.


     * See Vol. I, Letter XXXVII, for the occasion; and Letters
     XXXVIII. and XL. of the same volume, for the freedom
     Clarissa apologizes for.


I believe you did not intend reserves to me: for two reasons I believe
you did not: First, because you say you did not: Next, because you have
not as yet been able to convince yourself how it is to be with you; and
persecuted as you are, how so to separate the effects that spring from
the two causes [persecution and love] as to give to each its particular
due. But this I believe I hinted to you once before; and so will say no
more upon this subject at present.

Robin says, you had but just deposited your last parcel when he took it:
for he was there but half an hour before, and found nothing. He had seen
my impatience, and loitered about, being willing to bring me something
from you, if possible.

My cousin Jenny Fynnett is here, and desires to be my bedfellow
to-night. So I shall not have an opportunity to sit down with that
seriousness and attention which the subjects of yours require. For she
is all prate, you know, and loves to set me a prating; yet comes upon
a very grave occasion--to procure my mother to go with her to her
grandmother Larking, who has long been bed-ridden; and at last has taken
it into her head that she is mortal, and therefore will make her will; a
work she was till now extremely averse to; but it must be upon condition
that my mother, who is her distant relation, will go to her, and advise
her as to the particulars of it: for she has a high opinion, as every
one else has, of my mother's judgment in all matters relating to wills,
settlements, and such-like notable affairs.

Mrs. Larking lives about seventeen miles off; and as my mother cannot
endure to lie out of her own house, she proposes to set out early in
the morning, that she might be able to get back again at night. So,
to-morrow I shall be at your devotion from day-light to day-light; nor
will I be at home to any body.

I have hinted before, that I could almost wish my mother and Mr. Hickman
would make a match of it: and I here repeat my wishes. What signifies
a difference of fifteen or twenty years; especially when the lady has
spirits that will make her young a long time, and the lover is a mighty
sober man?--I think, verily, I could like him better for a papa, than
for a nearer relation: and they are strange admirers of one another.

But allow me a perhaps still better (and, as to years, more suitable and
happier) disposal; for the man at least.--What think you, my dear, of
compromising with your friends, by rejecting both men, and encouraging
my parader?--If your liking one of the two go no farther than
conditional, I believe it will do. A rich thought, if it obtain your
approbation! In this light, I should have a prodigious respect for
Mr. Hickman; more by half than I can have in the other. The vein is
opened--Shall I let it flow? How difficult to withstand constitutional
foibles!

Hickman is certainly a man more in your taste than any of those who have
hitherto been brought to address you. He is mighty sober, mighty grave,
and all that. Then you have told me, that he is your favourite. But that
is because he is my mother's perhaps. The man would certainly rejoice at
the transfer; or he must be a greater fool than I take him to be.

O but your fierce lover would knock him o' the head--I forgot
that!--What makes me incapable of seriousness when I write about
Hickman?--Yet the man so good a sort of man in the main!--But who is
perfect? This is one of my foibles: and it is something for you to chide
me for.

You believe me to be very happy in my prospect in relation to him:
because you are so very unhappy in the foolish usage you meet with, you
are apt (as I suspect) to think that tolerable which otherwise would be
far from being so. I dare say, you would not, with all your grave airs,
like him for yourself; except, being addressed by Solmes and him, you
were obliged to have one of them.--I have given you a test. Let me see
what you will say to it.

For my own part, I confess to you, that I have great exceptions to
Hickman. He and wedlock never yet once entered into my head at one time.
Shall I give you my free thoughts of him?--Of his best and his worst;
and that as if I were writing to one who knows him not?--I think I will.
Yet it is impossible I should do it gravely. The subject won't bear to
be so treated in my opinion. We are not come so far as that yet, if ever
we shall: and to do it in another strain, ill becomes my present real
concern for you.


*****


Here I was interrupted on the honest man's account. He has been here
these two hours--courting the mother for the daughter, I suppose--yet
she wants no courting neither: 'Tis well one of us does; else the man
would have nothing but halcyon; and be remiss, and saucy of course.

He was going. His horses at the door. My mother sent for me down,
pretending to want to say something to me.

Something she said when I came that signified nothing--Evidently, for no
reason called me, but to give me an opportunity to see what a fine bow
her man could make; and that she might wish me a good night. She knows
I am not over ready to oblige him with my company, if I happen to be
otherwise engaged. I could not help an air a little upon the fretful,
when I found she had nothing of moment to say to me, and when I saw her
intention.

She smiled off the visible fretfulness, that the man might go away in
good humour with himself.

He bowed to the ground, and would have taken my hand, his whip in the
other. I did not like to be so companioned: I withdrew my hand, but
touched his elbow with a motion, as if from his low bow I had supposed
him falling, and would have helped him up--A sad slip, it might have
been! said I.

A mad girl! smiled it off my mother.

He was quite put out; took his horse-bridle, stumped back, back, back,
bowing, till he run against his servant. I laughed. He mounted his
horse. I mounted up stairs, after a little lecture; and my head is so
filled with him, that I must resume my intention, in hopes to divert you
for a few moments.

Take it then--his best, and his worst, as I said before.

Hickman is a sort of fiddling, busy, yet, to borrow a word from you,
unbusy man: has a great deal to do, and seems to me to dispatch nothing.
Irresolute and changeable in every thing, but in teasing me with his
nonsense; which yet, it is evident, he must continue upon my mother's
interest more than upon his own hopes; for none have I given him.

Then I have a quarrel against his face, though in his person, for
a well-thriven man, tolerably genteel--Not to his features so much
neither; for what, as you have often observed, are features in a
man?--But Hickman, with strong lines, and big cheek and chin bones,
has not the manliness in his aspect, which Lovelace has with the most
regular and agreeable features.

Then what a set and formal mortal he is in some things!--I have not been
able yet to laugh him out of his long bid and beads. Indeed, that is,
because my mother thinks they become him; and I would not be so free
with him, as to own I should choose to have him leave it off. If he did,
so particular is the man, he would certainly, if left to himself, fall
into a King-William's cravat, or some such antique chin-cushion, as by
the pictures of that prince one sees was then the fashion.

As to his dress in general, he cannot indeed be called a sloven, but
sometimes he is too gaudy, at other times too plain, to be uniformly
elegant. And for his manners, he makes such a bustle with them, and
about them, as would induce one to suspect that they are more strangers
than familiars to him. You, I know, lay this to his fearfulness of
disobliging or offending. Indeed your over-doers generally give the
offence they endeavour to avoid.

The man however is honest: is of family: has a clear and good estate;
and may one day be a baronet, an't please you. He is humane and
benevolent, tolerably generous, as people say; and as I might say too,
if I would accept of his bribes; which he offers in hopes of having them
all back again, and the bribed into the bargain. A method taken by all
corrupters, from old Satan, to the lowest of his servants. Yet, to speak
in the language of a person I am bound to honour, he is deemed a prudent
man; that is to say a good manager.

Then I cannot but confess, that now I like not anybody better, whatever
I did once.

He is no fox-hunter: he keeps a pack indeed; but prefers not his hounds
to his fellow-creatures. No bad sign for a wife, I own. He loves his
horse; but dislikes racing in a gaming way, as well as all sorts of
gaming. Then he is sober; modest; they say, virtuous; in short,
has qualities that mothers would be fond of in a husband for their
daughters; and for which perhaps their daughters would be the happier
could they judge as well for themselves, as experience possibly may
teach them to judge for their future daughters.

Nevertheless, to own the truth, I cannot say I love the man: nor, I
believe, ever shall.

Strange! that these sober fellows cannot have a decent sprightliness,
a modest assurance with them! Something debonnaire; which need not be
separated from that awe and reverence, when they address a woman, which
should shew the ardour of their passion, rather than the sheepishness
of their nature; for who knows not that love delights in taming the
lion-hearted? That those of the sex, who are most conscious of their
own defect in point of courage, naturally require, and therefore as
naturally prefer, the man who has most of it, as the most able to give
them the requisite protection? That the greater their own cowardice, as
it would be called in a man, the greater is their delight in subjects
of heroism? As may be observed in their reading; which turns upon
difficulties encountered, battles fought, and enemies overcome, four or
five hundred by the prowess of one single hero, the more improbable the
better: in short, that their man should be a hero to every one living
but themselves; and to them know no bound to his humility. A woman has
some glory in subduing a heart no man living can appall; and hence too
often the bravo, assuming the hero, and making himself pass for one,
succeeds as only a hero should.

But as for honest Hickman, the good man is so generally meek, as I
imagine, that I know not whether I have any preference paid me in his
obsequiousness. And then, when I rate him, he seems to be so naturally
fitted for rebuke, and so much expects it, that I know not how to
disappoint him, whether he just then deserve it, or not. I am sure, he
has puzzled me many a time when I have seen him look penitent for faults
he has not committed, whether to pity or laugh at him.

You and I have often retrospected the faces and minds of grown people;
that is to say, have formed images for their present appearances,
outside and in, (as far as the manners of the persons would justify us
in the latter) what sort of figures they made when boys and girls. And
I'll tell you the lights in which HICKMAN, SOLMES, and LOVELACE, our
three heroes, have appeared to me, supposing them boys at school.

Solmes I have imagined to be a little sordid, pilfering rogue, who would
purloin from every body, and beg every body's bread and butter from him;
while, as I have heard a reptile brag, he would in a winter-morning spit
upon his thumbs, and spread his own with it, that he might keep it all
to himself.

Hickman, a great overgrown, lank-haired, chubby boy, who would be
hunched and punched by every body; and go home with his finger in his
eye, and tell his mother.

While Lovelace I have supposed a curl-pated villain, full of fire,
fancy, and mischief; an orchard-robber, a wall-climber, a horse-rider
without saddle or bridle, neck or nothing: a sturdy rogue, in short,
who would kick and cuff, and do no right, and take no wrong of any
body; would get his head broke, then a plaster for it, or let it heal
of itself; while he went on to do more mischief, and if not to get,
to deserve, broken bones. And the same dispositions have grown up with
them, and distinguish them as me, with no very material alteration.

Only that all men are monkeys more or less, or else that you and I
should have such baboons as these to choose out of, is a mortifying
thing, my dear.

I am sensible that I am a little out of season in treating thus
ludicrously the subject I am upon, while you are so unhappy; and if
my manner does not divert you, as my flightiness used to do, I am
inexcusable both to you, and to my own heart: which, I do assure you,
notwithstanding my seeming levity, is wholly in your case.

As this letter is extremely whimsical, I will not send it until I can
accompany it with something more solid and better suited to your
unhappy circumstances; that is to say, to the present subject of our
correspondence. To-morrow, as I told you, will be wholly my own, and of
consequence yours. Adieu, therefore, till then.




LETTER III

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE TUESDAY MORN. 7 O'CLOCK


My mother and cousin are already gone off in our chariot and four,
attended by their doughty 'squire on horseback, and he by two of his
own servants, and one of my mother's. They both love parade when they
go abroad, at least in compliment to one another; which shews, that
each thinks the other does. Robin is your servant and mine, and nobody's
else--and the day is all my own.

I must begin with blaming you, my dear, for your resolution not to
litigate for your right, if occasion were to be given you. Justice is
due to ourselves, as well as to every body else. Still more must I blame
you for declaring to your aunt and sister, that you will not: since (as
they will tell it to your father and brother) the declaration must needs
give advantage to spirits who have so little of that generosity for
which you are so much distinguished.

There never was a spirit in the world that would insult where it dared,
but it would creep and cringe where it dared not. Let me remind you of
a sentence of your own, the occasion for which I have forgotten: 'That
little spirits will always accommodate themselves to the temper of those
they would work upon: will fawn upon a sturdy-tempered person: will
insult the meek:'--And another given to Miss Biddulph, upon an occasion
you cannot forget:--'If we assume a dignity in what we say and do, and
take care not to disgrace by arrogance our own assumption, every body
will treat us with respect and deference.'

I remember that you once made an observation, which you said, you was
obliged to Mrs. Norton for, and she to her father, upon an excellent
preacher, who was but an indifferent liver: 'That to excel in theory,
and to excel in practice, generally required different talents; which
did not always meet in the same person.' Do you, my dear (to whom theory
and practice are the same thing in almost every laudable quality), apply
the observation to yourself, in this particular case, where resolution
is required; and where the performance of the will of the defunct is the
question--no more to be dispensed with by you, in whose favour it was
made, than by any body else who have only themselves in view by breaking
through it.

I know how much you despise riches in the main: but yet it behoves
you to remember, that in one instance you yourself have judged them
valuable--'In that they put it into our power to lay obligations; while
the want of that power puts a person under a necessity of receiving
favours--receiving them perhaps from grudging and narrow spirits, who
know not how to confer them with that grace, which gives the principal
merit to a beneficent action.'--Reflect upon this, my dear, and see how
it agrees with the declaration you have made to your aunt and sister,
that you would not resume your estate, were you to be turned out of
doors, and reduced to indigence and want. Their very fears that you will
resume, point out to you the necessity of resuming upon the treatment
you meet with.

I own, that (at first reading) I was much affected with your mother's
letter sent with the patterns. A strange measure however from a mother;
for she did not intend to insult you; and I cannot but lament that so
sensible and so fine a woman should stoop to so much art as that letter
is written with: and which also appears in some of the conversations
you have given me an account of. See you not in her passiveness, what
boisterous spirits can obtain from gentler, merely by teasing and
ill-nature?

I know the pride they have always taken in calling you a
Harlowe--Clarissa Harlowe, so formal and so set, at every word,
when they are grave or proudly solemn.--Your mother has learnt it of
them--and as in marriage, so in will, has been taught to bury her own
superior name and family in theirs. I have often thought that the same
spirit governed them, in this piece of affectation, and others of
the like nature (as Harlowe-Place, and so-forth, though not the elder
brother's or paternal seat), as governed the tyrant Tudor,* who marrying
Elizabeth, the heiress of the house of York, made himself a title to
a throne, which he would not otherwise have had (being but a base
descendant of the Lancaster line); and proved a gloomy and vile
husband to her; for no other cause, than because she had laid him under
obligations which his pride would not permit him to own.--Nor would the
unprincely wretch marry her till he was in possession of the crown, that
he might not be supposed to owe it to her claim.


     * Henry VII.


You have chidden me, and again will, I doubt not, for the liberties I
take with some of your relations. But my dear, need I tell you, that
pride in ourselves must, and for ever will, provoke contempt, and bring
down upon us abasement from others?--Have we not, in the case of a
celebrated bard, observed, that those who aim at more than their due,
will be refused the honours they may justly claim?--I am very much loth
to offend you; yet I cannot help speaking of your relations, as well as
of others, as I think they deserve. Praise or dispraise, is the reward
or punishment which the world confers or inflicts on merit or
demerit; and, for my part, I neither can nor will confound them in the
application. I despise them all, but your mother: indeed I do: and as
for her--but I will spare the good lady for your sake--and one
argument, indeed, I think may be pleaded in her favour, in the present
contention--she who has for so many years, and with such absolute
resignation, borne what she has borne to the sacrifice of her own will,
may think it an easier task than another person can imagine it, for her
daughter to give up hers. But to think to whose instigation all this is
originally owing--God forgive me; but with such usage I should have been
with Lovelace before now! Yet remember, my dear, that the step which
would not be wondered at from such a hasty-tempered creatures as me,
would be inexcusable in such a considerate person as you.

After your mother has been thus drawn in against her judgment, I am the
less surprised, that your aunt Hervey should go along with her; since
the two sisters never separate. I have inquired into the nature of the
obligation which Mr. Hervey's indifferent conduct in his affairs has
laid him under--it is only, it seems, that your brother has paid off
for him a mortgage upon one part of his estate, which the mortgagee was
about to foreclose; and taken it upon himself. A small favour (as he has
ample security in his hands) from kindred to kindred: but such a one, it
is plain, as has laid the whole family of the Herveys under obligation
to the ungenerous lender, who has treated him, and his aunt too (as
Miss Dolly Hervey has privately complained), with the less ceremony ever
since.

Must I, my dear, call such a creature your brother?--I believe I
must--Because he is your father's son. There is no harm, I hope, in
saying that.

I am concerned, that you ever wrote at all to him. It was taking too
much notice of him: it was adding to his self-significance; and a call
upon him to treat you with insolence. A call which you might have been
assured he would not fail to answer.

But such a pretty master as this, to run riot against such a man as
Lovelace; who had taught him to put his sword into his scabbard, when
he had pulled it out by accident!--These in-door insolents, who, turning
themselves into bugbears, frighten women, children, and servants, are
generally cravens among men. Were he to come fairly across me, and say
to my face some of the free things which I am told he has said of me
behind my back, or that (as by your account) he has said of our sex, I
would take upon myself to ask him two or three questions; although he
were to send me a challenge likewise.

I repeat, you know that I will speak my mind, and write it too. He is
not my brother. Can you say, he is yours?--So, for your life, if you
are just, you can't be angry with me: For would you side with a false
brother against a true friend? A brother may not be a friend: but a
friend will always be a brother--mind that, as your uncle Tony says!

I cannot descend so low, as to take very particular notice of the
epistles of these poor souls, whom you call uncles. Yet I love to divert
myself with such grotesque characters too. But I know them and love you;
and so cannot make the jest of them which their absurdities call for.

You chide me, my dear,* for my freedoms with relations still nearer and
dearer to you, than either uncles or brother or sister. You had better
have permitted me (uncorrected) to have taken my own way. Do not use
those freedoms naturally arise from the subject before us? And from whom
arises that subject, I pray you? Can you for one quarter of an hour
put yourself in my place, or in the place of those who are still more
indifferent to the case than I can be?--If you can--But although I have
you not often at advantage, I will not push you.


     * See Vol. I. Letter XXVIII.


Permit me, however, to subjoin, that well may your father love your
mother, as you say he does. A wife who has no will but his! But were
there not, think you, some struggles between them at first, gout out of
the question?--Your mother, when a maiden, had, as I have heard (and it
is very likely) a good share of those lively spirits which she liked
in your father. She has none of them now. How came they to be
dissipated?--Ah! my dear!--she has been too long resident in
Trophonius's cave, I doubt.*


     * Spectator, Vol. VIII. No. 599.


Let me add one reflection upon this subject, and so entitle myself to
your correction for all at once.--It is upon the conduct of those wives
(for you and I know more than one such) who can suffer themselves to
be out-blustered and out-gloomed of their own wills, instead of being
fooled out of them by acts of tenderness and complaisance.--I wish,
that it does not demonstrate too evidently, that, with some of the
sex, insolent controul is a more efficacious subduer than kindness or
concession. Upon my life, my dear, I have often thought, that many of us
are mere babies in matrimony: perverse fools when too much indulged and
humoured; creeping slaves, when treated harshly. But shall it be said,
that fear makes us more gentle obligers than love?--Forbid it, Honour!
Forbid it, Gratitude! Forbid it, Justice! that any woman of sense should
give occasion to have this said of her!

Did I think you would have any manner of doubt, from the style or
contents of this letter, whose saucy pen it is that has run on at this
rate, I would write my name at length; since it comes too much from my
heart to disavow it: but at present the initials shall serve; and I will
go on again directly.

A.H.




LETTER IV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORN. 10 O'CLOCK (MAR. 23).


I will postpone, or perhaps pass by, several observations which I had to
make on other parts of your letters; to acquaint you, that Mr. Hickman,
when in London, found an opportunity to inquire after Mr. Lovelace's
town life and conversation.

At the Cocoa-tree, in Pall-mall, he fell in with two of his intimates,
the one named Belton, the other Mowbray; both very free of speech,
and probably as free in their lives: but the waiters paid them great
respect, and on Mr. Hickman's inquiry after their characters, called
them men of fortune and honour.

They began to talk of Mr. Lovelace of their own accord; and upon some
gentlemen in the room asking, when they expected him in town, answered,
that very day. Mr. Hickman (as they both went on praising Lovelace)
said, he had indeed heard, that Mr. Lovelace was a very fine
gentleman--and was proceeding, when one of them, interrupting him,
said,--Only, Sir, the finest gentleman in the world; that's all.

And so he led them on to expatiate more particularly on his qualities;
which they were very fond of doing: but said not one single word in
behalf of his morals--Mind that also, in your uncle's style.

Mr. Hickman said, that Mr. Lovelace was very happy, as he understood, in
the esteem of the ladies; and smiling, to make them believe he did not
think amiss of it, that he pushed his good fortune as far as it would
go.

Well put, Mr. Hickman! thought I; equally grave and sage--thou seemest
not to be a stranger to their dialect, as I suppose this is. But I said
nothing; for I have often tried to find out this might sober man of my
mother's: but hitherto have only to say, that he is either very moral,
or very cunning.

No doubt of it, replied one of them; and out came an oath, with a Who
would not?--That he did as every young fellow would do.

Very true! said my mother's puritan--but I hear he is in treaty with a
fine lady--

So he was, Mr. Belton said--The devil fetch her! [vile brute!] for
she engrossed all his time--but that the lady's family ought to
be--something--[Mr. Hickman desired to be excused repeating what--though
he had repeated what was worse] and might dearly repent their usage of a
man of his family and merit.

Perhaps they may think him too wild, cries Hickman: and theirs is, I
hear, a very sober family--

SOBER! said one of them: A good honest word, Dick!--Where the devil has
it lain all this time?--D---- me if I have heard of it in this sense
ever since I was at college! and then, said he, we bandied it about
among twenty of us as an obsolete.

These, my dear, are Mr. Lovelace's companions: you'll be pleased to take
notice of that!

Mr. Hickman said, this put him out of countenance.

I stared at him, and with such a meaning in my eyes, as he knew how to
take; and so was out of countenance again.

Don't you remember, my dear, who it was that told a young gentleman
designed for the gown, who owned that he was apt to be too easily put
out of countenance when he came into free company, 'That it was a bad
sign; that it looked as if his morals were not proof; but that his good
disposition seemed rather the effect of accident and education, than
of such a choice as was founded upon principle?' And don't you know
the lesson the very same young lady gave him, 'To endeavour to stem and
discountenance vice, and to glory in being an advocate in all companies
for virtue;' particularly observing, 'That it was natural for a man to
shun or to give up what he was ashamed of?' Which she should be sorry
to think his case on this occasion: adding, 'That vice was a coward, and
would hide its head, when opposed by such a virtue as had presence of
mind, and a full persuasion of its own rectitude to support it.' The
lady, you may remember, modestly put her doctrine into the mouth of a
worthy preacher, Dr. Lewen, as she used to do, when she has a mind not
to be thought what she is at so early an age; and that it may give more
weight to any thing she hit upon, that might appear tolerable, was her
modest manner of speech.

Mr. Hickman, upon the whole, professed to me, upon his second recovery,
that he had no reason to think well of Mr. Lovelace's morals, from what
he heard of him in town; yet his two intimates talked of his being more
regular than he used to be. That he had made a very good resolution,
that of old Tom Wharton, was the expression, That he would never give
a challenge, nor refuse one; which they praised in him highly: that, in
short, he was a very brave fellow, and the most agreeable companion in
the world: and would one day make a great figure in his country; since
there was nothing he was not capable of--

I am afraid that his last assertion is too true. And this, my dear, is
all that Mr. Hickman could pick up about him: And is it not enough to
determine such a mind as yours, if not already determined?

Yet it must be said too, that if there be a woman in the world that can
reclaim him, it is you. And, by your account of his behaviour in the
interview between you, I own I have some hope of him. At least, this
I will say, that all the arguments he then used with you, seemed to
be just and right. And if you are to be his--But no more of that: he
cannot, after all, deserve you.




LETTER V

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 23.


An unexpected visitor has turned the course of my thoughts, and changed
the subject I had intended to pursue. The only one for whom I would have
dispensed with my resolution not to see any body all the dedicated day:
a visiter, whom, according to Mr. Hickman's report from the expectations
of his libertine friends, I supposed to be in town.--Now, my dear, have
I saved myself the trouble of telling you, that it was you too-agreeable
rake. Our sex is said to love to trade in surprises: yet have I, by
my promptitude, surprised myself out of mine. I had intended, you must
know, to run twice the length, before I had suffered you to know so much
as to guess who, and whether man or woman, my visiter was: but since you
have the discovery at so cheap a rate, you are welcome to it.

The end of his coming was, to engage my interest with my charming
friend; and he was sure that I knew all your mind, to acquaint him what
he had to trust to.

He mentioned what had passed in the interview between you: but could not
be satisfied with the result of it, and with the little satisfaction he
had obtained from you: the malice of your family to him increasing, and
their cruelty to you not abating. His heart, he told me, was in tumults,
for fear you should be prevailed upon in favour of a man despised by
every body.

He gave me fresh instance of indignities cast upon himself by your
uncles and brother; and declared, that if you suffered yourself to
be forced into the arms of the man for whose sake he was loaded with
undeserved abuses, you should be one of the youngest, as you would be
one of the loveliest widows in England. And that he would moreover call
your brother to account for the liberties he takes with his character to
every one he meets with.

He proposed several schemes, for you to choose some one of them, in
order to enable you to avoid the persecutions you labour under: One
I will mention--That you will resume your estate; and if you find
difficulties that can be no otherwise surmounted, that you will, either
avowedly or privately, as he had proposed to you, accept of Lady Betty
Lawrance's or Lord M.'s assistance to instate you in it. He declared,
that if you did, he would leave absolutely to your own pleasure
afterwards, and to the advice which your cousin Morden on his arrival
should give you, whether to encourage his address, or not, as you should
be convinced of the sincerity of the reformation which his enemies make
him so much want.

I had now a good opportunity to sound him, as you wished Mr. Hickman
would Lord M. as to the continued or diminished favour of the ladies,
and of his Lordship, towards you, upon their being acquainted with the
animosity of your relations to them, as well as to their kinsman. I laid
hold of the opportunity, and he satisfied me, by reading some passages
of a letter he had about him, from Lord M. That an alliance with
you, and that on the foot of your own single merit, would be the most
desirable event to them that could happen: and so far to the purpose of
your wished inquiry does his Lordship go in this letter, that he assures
him, that whatever you suffer in fortune from the violence of your
relations on his account, he and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty will join to
make it up to him. And yet that the reputation of a family so splendid,
would, no doubt, in a case of such importance to the honour of both,
make them prefer a general consent.

I told him, as you yourself I knew had done, that you were extremely
averse to Mr. Solmes; and that, might you be left to your own choice,
it would be the single life. As to himself, I plainly said, That you had
great and just objections to him on the score of his careless morals:
that it was surprising, that men who gave themselves the liberties he
was said to take, should presume to think, that whenever they took it
into their heads to marry, the most virtuous and worthy of the sex
were to fall to their lot. That as to the resumption, it had been very
strongly urged by myself, and would be still further urged; though you
had been hitherto averse to that measure: that your chief reliance and
hopes were upon your cousin Morden; and that to suspend or gain time
till he arrived, was, as I believed, your principal aim.

I told him, That with regard to the mischief he threatened, neither the
act nor the menace could serve any end but theirs who persecuted you; as
it would give them a pretence for carrying into effect their compulsory
projects; and that with the approbation of all the world; since he must
not think the public would give its voice in favour of a violent young
man, of no extraordinary character as to morals, who should seek to rob
a family of eminence of a child so valuable; and who threatened, if he
could not obtain her in preference to a man chosen by themselves, that
he would avenge himself upon them all by acts of violence.

I added, That he was very much mistaken, if he thought to intimidate you
by such menaces: for that, though your disposition was all sweetness,
yet I knew not a steadier temper in the world than yours; nor one more
inflexible, (as your friends had found, and would still further find, if
they continued to give occasion for its exertion,) whenever you thought
yourself in the right; and that you were ungenerously dealt with in
matters of too much moment to be indifferent about. Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, Mr. Lovelace, let me tell you, said I, timid as her foresight
and prudence may make her in some cases, where she apprehends dangers to
those she loves, is above fear, in points where her honour, and the true
dignity of her sex, are concerned.--In short, Sir, you must not think to
frighten Miss Clarissa Harlowe into such a mean or unworthy conduct as
only a weak or unsteady mind can be guilty of.

He was so very far from intending to intimidate you, he said, that he
besought me not to mention one word to you of what had passed between
us: that what he had hinted at, which carried the air of menace, was
owing to the fervour of his spirits, raised by his apprehensions of
losing all hope of you for ever; and on a supposition, that you were to
be actually forced into the arms of a man you hated: that were this to
be the case, he must own, that he should pay very little regard to the
world, or its censures: especially as the menaces of some of your family
now, and their triumph over him afterwards, would both provoke and
warrant all the vengeance he could take.

He added, that all the countries in the world were alike to him, but on
your account: so that, whatever he should think fit to do, were you lost
to him, he should have noting to apprehend from the laws of this.

I did not like the determined air he spoke this with: he is certainly
capable of great rashness.

He palliated a little this fierceness (which by the way I warmly
censured) by saying, That while you remain single, he will bear all the
indignities that shall be cast upon him by your family. But would
you throw yourself, if you were still farther driven, into any other
protection, if not Lord M.'s, or that of the ladies of his family, into
my mother's,* suppose; or would you go to London to private lodgings,
where he would never visit you, unless he had your leave (and from
whence you might make your own terms with your relations); he would be
entirely satisfied; and would, as he had said before, wait the effect of
your cousin's arrival, and your free determination as to his own fate.
Adding, that he knew the family so well, and how much fixed they were
upon their measures, as well as the absolute dependence they had upon
your temper and principles, that he could not but apprehend the worst,
while you remained in their power, and under the influence of their
persuasions and menaces.


     * Perhaps it will be unnecessary to remind the reader, that
     although Mr. Lovelace proposes (as above) to Miss Howe, that
     her fair friend should have recourse to the protection of
     Mrs. Howe, if farther driven; yet he had artfully taken
     care, by means of his agent in the Harlowe family, not only
     to inflame the family against her, but to deprive her of
     Mrs. Howe's, and of every other protection, being from the
     first resolved to reduce her to an absolute dependence upon
     himself. See Vol. I. Letter XXXI.


We had a great deal of other discourse: but as the reciting of the rest
would be but a repetition of many of the things that passed between you
and him in the interview between you in the wood-house, I refer myself
to your memory on that occasion.*


     * See Vol. I. Letter XXXVI.


And now, my dear, upon the whole, I think it behoves you to make
yourself independent: all then will fall right. This man is a violent
man. I should wish, methinks, that you should not have either him or
Solmes. You will find, if you get out of your brother's and sister's
way, what you can or cannot do, with regard to either.

If your relations persist in their foolish scheme, I think I will take
his hint, and, at a proper opportunity, sound my mother. Mean time, let
me have your clear opinion of the resumption, which I join with Lovelace
in advising. You can but see how your demand will work. To demand, is
not to litigate. But be your resolution what it will, do not by any
means repeat to them, that you will not assert your right. If they go on
to give you provocation, you may have sufficient reason to change your
mind: and let them expect that you will change it. They have not the
generosity to treat you the better for disclaiming the power they know
you have. That, I think, need not now be told you. I am, my dearest
friend, and ever will be,

Your most affectionate and faithful ANNA HOWE.




LETTER VI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDN. NIGHT, MARCH 22.


On the report made by my aunt and sister of my obstinacy, my assembled
relations have taken an unanimous resolution (as Betty tells me it
is) against me. This resolution you will find signified to me in the
inclosed letter from my brother, just now brought me. Be pleased to
return it, when perused. I may have occasion for it, in the altercations
between my relations and me.


*****


MISS CLARY,

I am commanded to let you know, that my father and uncles having heard
your aunt Hervey's account of all that has passed between her and you:
having heard from your sister what sort of treatment she has had from
you: having recollected all that has passed between your mother and
you: having weighed all your pleas and proposals: having taken into
consideration their engagements with Mr. Solmes; that gentleman's
patience, and great affection for you; and the little opportunity you
have given yourself to be acquainted either with his merit, or his
proposals: having considered two points more; to wit, the wounded
authority of a father; and Mr. Solmes's continued entreaties (little
as you have deserved regard from him) that you may be freed from a
confinement to which he is desirous to attribute your perverseness to
him [averseness I should have said, but let it go], he being unable to
account otherwise for so strong a one, supposing you told truth to your
mother, when you asserted that your heart was free; and which Mr. Solmes
is willing to believe, though nobody else does--For all these reasons,
it is resolved, that you shall go to your uncle Antony's: and you must
accordingly prepare yourself to do so. You will have but short notice of
the day, for obvious reasons.

I will honestly tell you the motive for your going: it is a double one;
first, That they may be sure, that you shall not correspond with any
body they do not like (for they find from Mrs. Howe, that, by some means
or other, you do correspond with her daughter; and, through her, perhaps
with somebody else): and next, That you may receive the visits of Mr.
Solmes; which you have thought fit to refuse to do here; by which means
you have deprived yourself of the opportunity of knowing whom and what
you have hitherto refused.

If after one fortnight's conversation with Mr. Solmes, and after
you have heard what your friends shall further urge in his behalf,
unhardened by clandestine correspondencies, you shall convince them,
that Virgil's amor omnibus idem (for the application of which I refer
you to the Georgic as translated by Dryden) is verified in you, as well
as in the rest of the animal creation; and that you cannot, or will
not forego your prepossession in favour of the moral, the virtuous,
the pious Lovelace, [I would please you if I could!] it will then be
considered, whether to humour you, or to renounce you for ever.

It is hoped, that as you must go, you will go cheerfully. Your uncle
Antony will make ever thing at his house agreeable to you. But indeed he
won't promise, that he will not, at proper times, draw up the bridge.

Your visiters, besides Mr. Solmes, will be myself, if you permit me that
honour, Miss Clary; your sister; and, as you behave to Mr. Solmes, your
aunt Hervey, and your uncle Harlowe; and yet the two latter will
hardly come neither, if they think it will be to hear your whining
vocatives.--Betty Barnes will be your attendant: and I must needs tell
you, Miss, that we none of us think the worse of the faithful maid for
your dislike of her: although Betty, who would be glad to oblige you,
laments it as a misfortune.

Your answer is required, whether you cheerfully consent to go? And your
indulgent mother bids me remind you from her, that a fortnight's visit
from Mr. Solmes, are all that is meant at present.

I am, as you shall be pleased to deserve, Yours, &c. JAMES HARLOWE, JUN.


So here is the master-stroke of my brother's policy! Called upon to
consent to go to my uncle Antony's avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's
visits!--A chapel! A moated-house!--Deprived of the opportunity of
corresponding with you!--or of any possibility of escape, should
violence be used to compel me to be that odious man's!*


     * These violent measures, and the obstinate perseverance of
     the whole family in them, will be the less wondered at, when
     it is considered, that all the time they were but as so many
     puppets danced upon Mr. Lovelace's wires, as he boasts, Vol.
     I. Letter XXXI.


Late as it was when I received this insolent letter, I wrote an answer
to it directly, that it might be ready for the writer's time of rising.
I inclose the rough draught of it. You will see by it how much his vile
hint from the Georgic; and his rude one of my whining vocatives, have
set me up. Besides, as the command to get ready to go to my uncle's is
in the name of my father and uncles, it is but to shew a piece of the
art they accuse me of, to resent the vile hint I have so much reason to
resent in order to palliate my refusal of preparing to go to my uncle's;
which refusal would otherwise be interpreted an act of rebellion by my
brother and sister: for it seems plain to me, that they will work but
half their ends, if they do not deprive me of my father's and uncles'
favour, even although it were possible for me to comply with their own
terms.


You might have told me, Brother, in three lines, what the determination
of my friends was; only, that then you would not have had room to
display your pedantry by so detestable an allusion or reference to the
Georgic. Give me leave to tell you, Sir, that if humanity were a branch
of your studies at the university, it has not found a genius in you for
mastering it. Nor is either my sex or myself, though a sister, I see
entitled to the least decency from a brother, who has studied, as it
seems, rather to cultivate the malevolence of his natural temper,
than any tendency which one might have hoped his parentage, if not his
education, might have given him to a tolerable politeness.

I doubt not, that you will take amiss my freedom: but as you have
deserved it from me, I shall be less and less concerned on that score,
as I see you are more and more intent to shew your wit at the expense of
justice and compassion.

The time is indeed come that I can no longer bear those contempts and
reflections which a brother, least of all men, is entitled to give. And
let me beg of you one favour, Sir:--It is this, That you will not give
yourself any concern about a husband for me, till I shall have the
forwardness to propose a wife to you. Pardon me, Sir; but I cannot
help thinking, that could I have the art to get my father of my side, I
should have as much right to prescribe for you, as you have for me.

As to the communication you make me, I must take upon me to say, That
although I will receive, as becomes me, any of my father's commands;
yet, as this signification is made by a brother, who has shewn of late
so much of an unbrotherly animosity to me, (for no reason in the world
that I know if, but that he believes he has, in me, one sister too much
for his interest,) I think myself entitled to conclude, that such a
letter as you have sent me, is all your own: and of course to declare,
that, while I so think it, I will not willingly, nor even without
violence, go to any place, avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's visits.

I think myself so much entitled to resent your infamous hint, and this
as well for the sake of my sex, as for my own, that I ought to declare,
as I do, that I will not receive any more of your letters, unless
commanded to do so by an authority I never will dispute; except in a
case where I think my future as well as present happiness concerned: and
were such a case to happen, I am sure my father's harshness will be less
owing to himself than to you; and to the specious absurdities of your
ambitious and selfish schemes.--Very true, Sir!

One word more, provoked as I am, I will add: That had I been thought as
really obstinate and perverse as of late I am said to be, I should not
have been so disgracefully treated as I have been--Lay your hand upon
your heart, Brother, and say, By whose instigations?--And examine what I
have done to deserve to be made thus unhappy, and to be obliged to style
myself

Your injured sister, CL. HARLOWE.


When, my dear, you have read my answer to my brother's letter, tell me
what you think of me?--It shall go!




LETTER VII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY MORNING, MARCH 23.


My letter has set them all in tumults: for, it seems, none of them went
home last night; and they all were desired to be present to give
their advice, if I should refuse compliance with a command thought so
reasonable as it seems this is.

Betty tells me, that at first my father, in a rage, was for coming up
to me himself, and for turning me out of his doors directly. Nor was he
restrained, till it was hinted to him, that that was no doubt my wish,
and would answer all my perverse views. But the result was, that my
brother (having really, as my mother and aunt insisted, taken wrong
measures with me) should write again in a more moderate manner: for
nobody else was permitted or cared to write to such a ready scribbler.
And, I having declared, that I would not receive any more of his
letters, without command from a superior authority, my mother was
to give it hers: and accordingly has done so in the following lines,
written on the superscription of his letter to me: which letter also
follows; together with my reply.


CLARY HARLOWE,

Receive and read this, with the temper that becomes your sex, your
character, your education, and your duty: and return an answer to it,
directed to your brother.

CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING.

Once more I write, although imperiously prohibited by a younger sister.
Your mother will have me do so, that you may be destitute of all
defence, if you persist in your pervicacy. Shall I be a pedant, Miss,
for this word? She is willing to indulge in you the least appearance of
that delicacy for which she once, as well as every body else, admired
you--before you knew Lovelace; I cannot, however, help saying that: and
she, and your aunt Hervey, will have it--[they would fain favour you,
if they could] that I may have provoked from you the answer they
nevertheless own to be so exceedingly unbecoming. I am now learning, you
see, to take up the softer language, where you have laid it down. This
then is the case:

They entreat, they pray, they beg, they supplicate (will either of
these do, Miss Clary?) that you will make no scruple to go to your uncle
Antony's: and fairly I am to tell you, for the very purpose mentioned
in my last--or, 'tis presumable, they need not entreat, beg, pray,
supplicate. Thus much is promised to Mr. Solmes, who is your advocate,
and very uneasy that you should be under constraint, supposing that your
dislike to him arises from that. And, if he finds that you are not to be
moved in his favour, when you are absolutely freed from what you call
a controul, he will forbear thinking of you, whatever it costs him.
He loves you too well: and in this, I really think, his understanding,
which you have reflected upon, is to be questioned.

Only for one fornight [sic], therefore, permit his visits. Your
education (you tell me of mine, you know) ought to make you incapable
of rudeness to any body. He will not, I hope, be the first man, myself
excepted, whom you ever treated rudely, purely because he is esteemed
by us all. I am, what you have a mind to make me, friend, brother,
or servant--I wish I could be still more polite, to so polite, to so
delicate, a sister.

JA. HARLOWE.

You must still write to me, if you condescend to reply. Your mother
will not be permitted to be disturbed with your nothing-meaning
vocatives!--Vocatives, once more, Madam Clary, repeats the pedant your
brother!


*****


TO JAMES HARLOWE, JUNIOR, ESQ.

Permit me, my ever-dear and honoured Papa and Mamma, in this manner to
surprise you into an audience, (presuming this will be read to you,)
since I am denied the honour of writing to you directly. Let me beg of
you to believe, that nothing but the most unconquerable dislike
could make me stand against your pleasure. What are riches, what are
settlements, to happiness? Let me not thus cruelly be given up to a man
my very soul is averse to. Permit me to repeat, that I cannot honestly
be his. Had I a slighter notion of the matrimonial duty than I have,
perhaps I might. But when I am to bear all the misery, and that for
life; when my heart is less concerned in this matter, than my soul;
my temporary, perhaps, than my future good; why should I be denied the
liberty of refusing? That liberty is all I ask.

It were easy for me to give way to hear Mr. Solmes talk for the
mentioned fortnight, although it is impossible for me, say what he
would, to get over my dislike to him. But the moated-house, the chapel
there, and the little mercy my brother and sister, who are to be there,
have hitherto shewn me, are what I am extremely apprehensive of. And why
does my brother say, my restraint is to be taken off, (and that too
at Mr. Solmes's desire,) when I am to be a still closer prisoner than
before; the bridge threatened to be drawn up; and no dear papa and mamma
near me, to appeal to, in the last resort?

Transfer not, I beseech you, to a brother and sister your own authority
over your child--to a brother and sister, who treat me with unkindness
and reproach; and, as I have too much reason to apprehend, misrepresent
my words and behaviour; or, greatly favoured as I used to be, it is
impossible I should be sunk so low in your opinions, as I unhappily am!

Let but this my hard, my disgraceful confinement be put an end to.
Permit me, my dear Mamma, to pursue my needleworks in your presence,
as one of your maidens; and you shall be witness, that it is not either
wilfulness or prepossession that governs me. Let me not, however, be put
out of your own house. Let Mr. Solmes come and go, as my papa pleases:
let me but stay or retire when he comes, as I can; and leave the rest to
Providence.

Forgive me, Brother, that thus, with an appearance of art, I address
myself to my father and mother, to whom I am forbidden to approach,
or to write. Hard it is to be reduced to such a contrivance! Forgive
likewise the plain dealing I have used in the above, with the nobleness
of a gentleman, and the gentleness due from a brother to a sister.
Although of late you have given me but little room to hope either for
your favour or compassion; yet, having not deserved to forfeit either, I
presume to claim both: for I am confident it is at present much in your
power, although but my brother (my honoured parents both, I bless God,
in being), to give peace to the greatly disturbed mind of

Your unhappy sister, CL. HARLOWE.


Betty tells me, my brother has taken my letter all in pieces; and has
undertaken to write such an answer to it, as shall confirm the wavering.
So, it is plain, that I should have moved somebody by it, but for this
hard-hearted brother--God forgive him!




LETTER VIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 23.


I send you the boasted confutation-letter, just now put into my
hands. My brother and sister, my uncle Antony and Mr. Solmes, are,
I understand, exulting over the copy of it below, as an unanswerable
performance.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

Once again, my inflexible Sister, I write to you. It is to let you know,
that the pretty piece of art you found out to make me the vehicle
of your whining pathetics to your father and mother, has not had the
expected effect.

I do assure you, that your behaviour has not been misrepresented--nor
need it. Your mother, who is solicitous to take all opportunities of
putting the most favourable constructions upon all you do, has been
forced, as you well know, to give you up, upon full trial. No need then
of the expedient of pursuing your needleworks in her sight. She cannot
bear your whining pranks: and it is for her sake, that you are not
permitted to come into her presence--nor will be, but upon her own
terms.

You had like to have made a simpleton of your aunt Hervey yesterday:
she came down from you, pleading in your favour. But when she was asked,
What concession she had brought you to? she looked about her, and knew
not what to answer. So your mother, when surprised into the beginning
of your cunning address to her and to your father, under my name, (for
I had begun to read it, little suspecting such an ingenious
subterfuge,)and would then make me read it through, wrung her hands, Oh!
her dear child, her dear child, must not be so compelled!--But when she
was asked, Whether she would be willing to have for her son-in-law the
man who bids defiance to her whole family; and who had like to have
murdered her son? And what concession she had gained from her dear child
to merit this tenderness? And that for one who had apparently deceived
her in assuring her that her heart was free?--Then could she look
about her, as her sister had done before: then was she again brought to
herself, and to a resolution to assert her authority [not to transfer
it, witty presumer!] over the rebel, who of late has so ungratefully
struggled to throw it off.

You seem, child, to have a high notion of the matrimonial duty; and I'll
warrant, like the rest of your sex, (one or two, whom I have the honour
to know, excepted,) that you will go to church to promise what you will
never think of afterwards. But, sweet child! as your worthy Mamma Norton
calls you, think a little less of the matrimonial, (at least, till you
come into that state,) and a little more of the filial duty.

How can you say, you are to bear all the misery, when you give so large
a share of it to your parents, to your uncles, to your aunt, to myself,
and to your sister; who all, for eighteen years of your life, loved you
so well?

If of late I have not given you room to hope for my favour or
compassion, it is because of late you have not deserved either. I know
what you mean, little reflecting fool, by saying, it is much in my
power, although but your brother, (a very slight degree of relationship
with you,) to give you that peace which you can give yourself whenever
you please.

The liberty of refusing, pretty Miss, is denied you, because we are all
sensible, that the liberty of choosing, to every one's dislike, must
follow. The vile wretch you have set your heart upon speaks this plainly
to every body, though you won't. He says you are his, and shall be his,
and he will be the death of any man who robs him of his PROPERTY. So,
Miss, we have a mind to try this point with him. My father, supposing he
has the right of a father in his child, is absolutely determined not to
be bullied out of that right. And what must that child be, who prefers
the rake to a father?

This is the light in which this whole debate ought to be taken. Blush,
then, Delicacy, that cannot bear the poet's amor omnibus idem!--Blush,
then, Purity! Be ashamed, Virgin Modesty! And, if capable of conviction,
surrender your whole will to the will of the honoured pair, to whom you
owe your being: and beg of all your friends to forgive and forget the
part you have of late acted.

I have written a longer letter than ever I designed to write to you,
after the insolent treatment and prohibition you have given me: and,
now I am commissioned to tell you, that your friends are as weary of
confining you, as you are of being confined. And therefore you must
prepare yourself to go in a very few days, as you have been told before,
to your uncle Antony's; who, notwithstanding you apprehensions, will
draw up his bridge when he pleases; will see what company he pleases
in his own house; nor will he demolish his chapel to cure you of your
foolish late-commenced antipathy to a place of divine worship.--The more
foolish, as, if we intended to use force, we could have the ceremony
pass in your chamber, as well as any where else.

Prejudice against Mr. Solmes has evidently blinded you, and there is a
charitable necessity to open your eyes: since no one but you thinks
the gentleman so contemptible in his person; nor, for a plain country
gentleman, who has too much solid sense to appear like a coxcomb, justly
blamable in his manners.--And as to his temper, it is necessary you
should speak upon fuller knowledge, than at present it is plain you can
have of him.

Upon the whole, it will not be amiss, that you prepare for your speedy
removal, as well for the sake of your own conveniency, as to shew your
readiness, in one point, at least, to oblige your friends; one of whom
you may, if you please to deserve it, reckon, though but a brother,

JAMES HARLOWE.

P.S. If you are disposed to see Mr. Solmes, and to make some excuses
to him for past conduct, in order to be able to meet him somewhere else
with the less concern to yourself for your freedoms with him, he shall
attend you where you please.

If you have a mind to read the settlements, before they are read to you
for your signing, they shall be sent you up--Who knows, but they will
help you to some fresh objections?--Your heart is free, you know--It
must--For, did you not tell your mother it was? And will the pious
Clarissa fib to her mamma?

I desire no reply. The case requires none. Yet I will ask you, Have you,
Miss, no more proposals to make?


*****


I was so vexed when I came to the end of this letter, (the postscript to
which, perhaps, might be written after the others had seen the letter,)
that I took up my pen, with an intent to write to my uncle Harlowe about
resuming my own estate, in pursuance of your advice. But my heart failed
me, when I recollected, that I had not one friend to stand by or
support me in my claim; and it would but the more incense them, without
answering any good end. Oh! that my cousin were but come!

Is it not a sad thing, beloved as I thought myself so lately by every
one, that now I have not one person in the world to plead for me, to
stand by me, or who would afford me refuge, were I to be under the
necessity of asking for it!--I who had the vanity to think I had as
many friends as I saw faces, and flattered myself too, that it was not
altogether unmerited, because I saw not my Maker's image, either in man,
woman, or child, high or low, rich or poor, whom, comparatively, I
loved not as myself.--Would to heaven, my dear, that you were married!
Perhaps, then, you could have induced Mr. Hickman to afford me
protection, till these storms were over-blown. But then this might have
involved him in difficulties and dangers; and that I would not have done
for the world.

I don't know what to do, not I!--God forgive me, but I am very
impatient! I wish--But I don't know what to wish, without a sin!--Yet I
wish it would please God to take me to his mercy!--I can meet with none
here--What a world is this!--What is there in it desirable? The good we
hope for, so strangely mixed, that one knows not what to wish for! And
one half of mankind tormenting the other, and being tormented themselves
in tormenting!--For here is this my particular case, my relations cannot
be happy, though they make me unhappy!--Except my brother and sister,
indeed--and they seem to take delight in and enjoy the mischief they
make.

But it is time to lay down my pen, since my ink runs nothing but gall.




LETTER IX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY MORNING, SIX O'CLOCK

Mrs. Betty tells me, there is now nothing talked of but of my going
to my uncle Antony's. She has been ordered, she says, to get ready to
attend me thither: and, upon my expressing my averseness to go, had the
confidence to say, That having heard me often praise the romanticness
of the place, she was astonished (her hands and eyes lifted up) that I
should set myself against going to a house so much in my taste.

I asked if this was her own insolence, or her young mistress's
observation?

She half-astonished me by her answer: That it was hard she could not say
a good thing, without being robbed of the merit of it.

As the wench looked as if she really thought she had said a good thing,
without knowing the boldness of it, I let it pass. But, to say the
truth, this creature has surprised me on many occasions with her
smartness: for, since she has been employed in this controuling office,
I have discovered a great deal of wit in her assurance, which I never
suspected before. This shews, that insolence is her talent: and that
Fortune, in placing her as a servant to my sister, had not done so
kindly by her as Nature; for that she would make a better figure as her
companion. And indeed I can't help thinking sometimes, that I myself was
better fitted by Nature to be the servant of both, than the mistress of
the one, or the servant of the other. And within these few months past,
Fortune has acted by me, as if she were of the same mind.


FRIDAY, TEN O'CLOCK

Going down to my poultry-yard, just now, I heard my brother and sister
and that Solmes laughing and triumphing together. The high yew-hedge
between us, which divides the yard from the garden, hindered them from
seeing me.

My brother, as I found, has been reading part, or the whole perhaps, of
the copy of his last letter--Mighty prudent, and consistent, you'll say,
with their views to make me the wife of a man from whom they conceal
not what, were I to be such, it would be kind in them to endeavour to
conceal, out of regard to my future peace!--But I have no doubt, that
they hate me heartily.

Indeed, you was up with her there, brother, said my sister. You need not
have bid her not to write to you. I'll engage, with all her wit, she'll
never pretend to answer it.

Why, indeed, said my brother, with an air of college-sufficiency, with
which he abounds, (for he thinks nobody writes like himself,) I believe
I have given her a choke-pear. What say you, Mr. Solmes?

Why, Sir, said he, I think it is unanswerable. But will it not
exasperate he more against me?

Never fear, Mr. Solmes, said my brother, but we'll carry our point, if
she do not tire you out first. We have gone too far in this method to
recede. Her cousin Morden will soon be here: so all must be over before
that time, or she'll be made independent of us all.

There, Miss Howe, is the reason given for their jehu-driving.

Mr. Solmes declared, that he was determined to persevere while my
brother gave him any hopes, and while my father stood firm.

My sister told my brother, that he hit me charmingly on the reason why
I ought to converse with Mr. Solmes: but that he should not be so smart
upon the sex, for the faults of this perverse girl.

Some lively, and, I suppose, witty answer, my brother returned; for he
and Mr. Solmes laughed outrageously upon it, and Bella, laughing too,
called him a naughty man: but I heard no more of what they said; they
walked on into the garden.

If you think, my dear, that what I have related did not again fire me,
you will find yourself mistaken when you read at this place the enclosed
copy of my letter to my brother; struck off while the iron was red hot.

No more call me meek and gentle, I beseech you.


TO MR. JAMES HARLOWE

FRIDAY MORNING.

SIR,

If, notwithstanding your prohibition, I should be silent, on occasion of
your last, you would, perhaps, conclude, that I was consenting to go to
my uncle Antony's upon the condition you mention. My father must do as
he pleases with his child. He may turn me out of his doors, if he thinks
fit, or give you leave to do it; but (loth as I am to say it) I should
think it very hard to be carried by force to any body's house, when I
have one of my own to go to.

Far be it from me, notwithstanding yours and my sister's provocations,
to think of my taking my estate into my own hands, without my father's
leave: But why, if I must not stay any longer here, may I not be
permitted to go thither? I will engage to see nobody they would not have
me see, if this favour be permitted. Favour I call it, and am ready to
receive and acknowledge it as such, although my grandfather's will has
made it a matter of right.

You ask me, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the postscript to your
letter, if I have not some new proposals to make? I HAVE (since you put
the question) three or four; new ones all, I think; though I will be
bold to say, that, submitting the case to any one person whom you have
not set against me, my old ones ought not to have been rejected. I think
this; why then should I not write it?--Nor have you any more reason to
storm at your sister for telling it you, (since you seem in your letter
to make it your boast how you turned my mother and my aunt Hervey
against me,) than I have to be angry with my brother, for treating me as
no brother ought to treat a sister.

These, then, are my new proposals.

That, as above, I may not be hindered from going to reside (under such
conditions as shall be prescribed to me, which I will most religiously
observe) at my grandfather's late house. I will not again in this place
call it mine. I have reason to think it a great misfortune that ever it
was so--indeed I have.

If this be not permitted, I desire leave to go for a month, or for what
time shall be thought fit, to Miss Howe's. I dare say my mother will
consent to it, if I have my father's permission to go.

If this, neither, be allowed, and I am to be turned out of my father's
house, I beg I may be suffered to go to my aunt Hervey's, where I will
inviolably observe her commands, and those of my father and mother.

But if this, neither, is to be granted, it is my humble request, that I
may be sent to my uncle Harlowe's, instead of my uncle Antony's. I mean
not by this any disrespect to my uncle Antony: but his moat, with his
bridge threatened to be drawn up, and perhaps the chapel there, terrify
me beyond expression, notwithstanding your witty ridicule upon me for
that apprehension.

If this likewise be refused, and if I must be carried to the
moated-house, which used to be a delightful one to me, let it be
promised me, that I shall not be compelled to receive Mr. Solmes's
visits there; and then I will as cheerfully go, as ever I did.

So here, Sir, are your new proposals. And if none of them answer
your end, as each of them tends to the exclusion of that ungenerous
persister's visits, be pleased to know, that there is no misfortune I
will not submit to, rather than yield to give my hand to the man to whom
I can allow no share in my heart.

If I write in a style different from my usual, and different from what
I wished to have occasion to write, an impartial person, who knew what I
have accidentally, within this hour past, heard from your mouth, and my
sister's, and a third person's, (particularly the reason you give
for driving on at this violent rate, to wit, my cousin Morden's
soon-expected arrival,) would think I have but too much reason for it.
Then be pleased to remember, Sir, that when my whining vocatives have
subjected me to so much scorn and ridicule, it is time, were it but to
imitate examples so excellent as you and my sister set me, that I should
endeavour to assert my character, in order to be thought less an alien,
and nearer of kin to you both, than either of you have of late seemed to
suppose me.

Give me leave, in order to empty my female quiver at once, to add, that
I know no other reason which you can have for forbidding me to reply to
you, after you have written what you pleased to me, than that you are
conscious you cannot answer to reason and to justice the treatment you
have given me.

If it be otherwise, I, an unlearned, an unlogical girl, younger by near
a third than yourself, will venture (so assured am I of the justice of
my cause) to put my fate upon an issue with you: with you, Sir, who have
had the advantage of an academical education; whose mind must have been
strengthened by observation, and learned conversation, and who, pardon
my going so low, have been accustomed to give choke-pears to those you
vouchsafe to write against.

Any impartial person, your late tutor, for instance, or the pious and
worthy Dr. Lewen, may be judge between us: and if either give it against
me, I will promise to resign to my destiny: provided, if it be given
against you, that my father will be pleased only to allow of my negative
to the person so violently sought to be imposed upon me.

I flatter myself, Brother, that you will the readier come into this
proposal, as you seem to have a high opinion of your talents for
argumentation; and not a low one of the cogency of the arguments
contained in your last letter. And if I can possibly have no advantage
in a contention with you, if the justice of my cause affords me not any
(as you have no opinion it will,) it behoves you, methinks, to shew to
an impartial moderator that I am wrong, and you not so.

If this be accepted, there is a necessity for its being carried on
by the pen; the facts being stated, and agreed upon by both; and the
decision to be given, according to the force of the arguments each shall
produce in support of their side of the question: for give me leave
to say, I know too well the manliness of your temper, to offer at a
personal debate with you.

If it be not accepted, I shall conclude, that you cannot defend your
conduct towards me; and shall only beg of you, that, for the future, you
will treat me with the respect due to a sister from a brother who would
be thought as polite as learned.

And now, Sir, if I have seemed to shew some spirit, not foreign to the
relation I have the honour to be to you, and to my sister; and which may
be deemed not altogether of a piece with that part of my character which
once, it seems, gained me every one's love; be pleased to consider to
whom, and to what it is owing; and that this part of that character was
not dispensed with, till it subjected me to that scorn, and to those
insults, which a brother, who has been so tenacious of an independence
voluntarily given up by me, and who has appeared so exalted upon it,
ought not to have shewn to any body, much less to a weak and defenceless
sister; who is, notwithstanding, an affectionate and respectful one, and
would be glad to shew herself to be so upon all future occasions; as she
has in every action of her past life, although of late she has met with
such unkind returns.

CL. HARLOWE


*****


See, my dear, the force, and volubility, as I may say, of passion; for
the letter I send you is my first draught, struck off without a blot or
erasure.


*****


FRIDAY, THREE O'CLOCK

As soon as I had transcribed it, I sent it down to my brother by Mrs.
Betty.

The wench came up soon after, all aghast, with a Laud, Miss! What have
you done?--What have you written? For you have set them all in a joyful
uproar!


*****


My sister is but this moment gone from me. She came up all in a flame;
which obliged me abruptly to lay down my pen: she ran to me--

O Spirit! said she; tapping my neck a little too hard. And is it come to
this at last--!

Do you beat me, Bella?

Do you call this beating you? only tapping you shoulder thus, said
she; tapping again more gently--This is what we expected it would come
to--You want to be independent--My father has lived too long for you--!

I was going to speak with vehemence; but she put her handkerchief
before my mouth, very rudely--You have done enough with your pen, mean
listener, as you are!--But know that neither your independent scheme,
nor any of your visiting ones, will be granted you. Take your course,
perverse one! Call in your rake to help you to an independence upon
your parents, and a dependence upon him!--Do so!--Prepare this
moment--resolve what you will take with you--to-morrow you go--depend
upon it to-morrow you go!--No longer shall you stay here, watching
and creeping about to hearken to what people say--'Tis determined,
child!--You go to-morrow--my brother would have come up to tell you so;
but I persuaded him to the contrary--for I know not what had become
of you, if he had--Such a letter! such an insolent, such a
conceited challenger!--O thou vain creature! But prepare yourself, I
say--to-morrow you go--my brother will accept of your bold challenge;
but it must be personal; and at my uncle Antony's--or perhaps at Mr.
Solmes's--

Thus she ran on, almost foaming with passion; till, quite out of
patience, I said, No more of your violence, Bella--Had I known in what
way you designed to come up, you should not have found my chamber-door
open--talk to your servant in this manner. Unlike you, as I bless God I
am, I am nevertheless your sister--and let me tell you, that I won't go
to-morrow, nor next day, nor next day to that--except I am dragged away
by violence.

What! not if your father or mother command it--Girl? said she, intending
another word, by her pause and manner before it came out.

Let it come to that, Bella; then I shall know what to say. But it shall
be from their own mouths, if I do--not from yours, nor you Betty's--And
say another word to me, in this manner, and be the consequence what it
may, I will force myself into their presence; and demand what I have
done to be used thus!

Come along, Child! Come along, Meekness--taking my hand, and leading me
towards the door--Demand it of them now--you'll find both your despised
parents together!--What! does your heart fail you?--for I resisted,
being thus insolently offered to be led, and pulled my hand from her.

I want not to be led, said I; and since I can plead your invitation, I
will go: and was posting to the stairs accordingly in my passion--but
she got between me and the door, and shut it--

Let me first, Bold one, said she, apprize them of your visit--for your
own sake let me--for my brother is with them. But yet opening it again,
seeing me shrink back--Go, if you will!--Why don't you go?--Why don't
you go, Miss?--following me to my closet, whither I retired, with my
heart full, and pulled the sash-door after me; and could no longer hold
in my tears.

Nor would I answer one word to her repeated aggravations, nor to her
demands upon me to open my door (for the key was on the inside); nor so
much as turn my head towards her, as she looked through the glass at me.
And at last, which vexed her to the heart, I drew the silk curtain, that
she should not see me, and down she went muttering all the way.

Is not this usage enough to provoke a rashness never before thought of?

As it is but too probable that I may be hurried away to my uncle's
without being able to give you previous notice of it; I beg that as soon
as you shall hear of such a violence, you would send to the usual place,
to take back such of your letters as may not have reached my hands, or
to fetch any of mine that may be there.

May you, my dear, be always happy, prays you CLARISSA HARLOWE.

I have received your four letters. But am in such a ferment, that I
cannot at present write to them.




LETTER X

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY NIGHT, MARCH 24.


I have a most provoking letter from my sister. I might have supposed she
would resent the contempt she brought upon herself in my chamber. Her
conduct surely can only be accounted for by the rage instigate by a
supposed rivalry.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

I am to tell you, that your mother has begged you off for the morrow:
but that you have effectually done your business with her, as well as
with every body else.

In your proposals and letter to your brother, you have shewn yourself so
silly, and so wise; so young, and so old; so gentle, and so obstinate;
so meek, and so violent; that never was there so mixed a character.

We all know of whom you have borrowed this new spirit. And yet the seeds
of it must be in your heart, or it could not all at once shew itself so
rampant. It would be doing Mr. Solmes a spite to wish him such a shy,
un-shy girl; another of your contradictory qualities--I leave you to
make out what I mean by it.

Here, Miss, your mother will not let you remain: she cannot have any
peace of mind while such a rebel of a child is so near her. Your aunt
Hervey will not take a charge which all the family put together cannot
manage. Your uncle Harlowe will not see you at his house, till you are
married. So, thanks to your own stubbornness, you have nobody that will
receive you but your uncle Antony. Thither you must go in a very
few days; and, when there, your brother will settle with you, in my
presence, all that relates to your modest challenge; for it is accepted,
I assure you. Dr. Lewen will possibly be there, since you make choice of
him. Another gentleman likewise, were it but to convince you, that he is
another sort of man than you have taken him to be. Your two uncles
will possibly be there too, to see that the poor, weak, and defenceless
sister has fair play. So, you see, Miss, what company your smart
challenge will draw together.

Prepare for the day. You'll soon be called upon. Adieu, Mamma Norton's
sweet child!

ARAB. HARLOWE.


*****


I transcribed this letter, and sent it to my mother, with these lines:


A very few words, my ever-honoured Mamma!

If my sister wrote the enclosed by my father's direction, or yours, I
must submit to the usage she gave me in it, with this only observation,
That it is short of the personal treatment I have received from her.
If it be of her own head--why then, Madam--But I knew that when I was
banished from your presence--Yet, till I know if she has or has not
authority for this usage, I will only write further, that I am

Your very unhappy child, CL. HARLOWE.


*****


This answer I received in an open slip of paper; but it was wet in one
place. I kissed the place; for I am sure it was blistered, as I may
say, by a mother's tear!--She must (I hope she must) have written it
reluctantly.


To apply for protection, where authority is defied, is bold. Your
sister, who would not in your circumstances have been guilty of your
perverseness, may allowably be angry at you for it. However, we have
told her to moderate her zeal for our insulted authority. See, if you
can deserve another behaviour, than that you complain of: which cannot,
however be so grievous to you, as the cause of it is to

Your more unhappy Mother.

How often must I forbid you any address to me!


*****


Give me, my dearest Miss Howe, your opinion, what I can, what I ought
to do. Not what you would do (pushed as I am pushed) in resentment or
passion--since, so instigated, you tell me, that you should have been
with somebody before now--and steps taken in passion hardly ever fail
of giving cause for repentance: but acquaint me with what you think
cool judgment, and after-reflection, whatever were to be the event, will
justify.

I doubt not your sympathizing love: but yet you cannot possibly feel
indignity and persecution so very sensibly as the immediate sufferer
feels them--are fitter therefore to advise me, than I am myself.

I will here rest my cause. Have I, or have I not, suffered or borne
enough? And if they will still persevere; if that strange persister
against an antipathy so strongly avowed, will still persist; say, What
can I do?--What course pursue?--Shall I fly to London, and endeavour to
hide myself from Lovelace, as well as from all my own relations, till
my cousin Morden arrives? Or shall I embark for Leghorn in my way to my
cousin? Yet, my sex, my youth, considered, how full of danger is this
last measure!--And may not my cousin be set out for England, while I
am getting thither?--What can I do?--Tell me, tell me, my dearest Miss
Howe, [for I dare not trust myself,] tell me, what I can do.

ELEVEN O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.

I have been forced to try to compose my angry passions at my
harpsichord; having first shut close my doors and windows, that I might
not be heard below. As I was closing the shutters of the windows, the
distant whooting of the bird of Minerva, as from the often-visited
woodhouse, gave the subject in that charming Ode to Wisdom, which does
honour to our sex, as it was written by one of it. I made an essay, a
week ago, to set the three last stanzas of it, as not unsuitable to my
unhappy situation; and after I had re-perused the Ode, those were
my lesson; and, I am sure, in the solemn address they contain to the
All-Wise and All-powerful Deity, my heart went with my fingers.

I enclose the Ode, and my effort with it. The subject is solemn; my
circumstances are affecting; and I flatter myself, that I have not been
quite unhappy in the performance. If it obtain your approbation, I shall
be out of doubt, and should be still more assured, could I hear it tried
by your voice and finger.



ODE TO WISDOM BY A LADY


     I.
     The solitary bird of night
     Thro' thick shades now wings his flight,
        And quits his time-shook tow'r;
     Where, shelter'd from the blaze of day,
     In philosophic gloom he lay,
        Beneath his ivy bow'r.

     II.
     With joy I hear the solemn sound,
     Which midnight echoes waft around,
        And sighing gales repeat.
     Fav'rite of Pallas! I attend,
     And, faithful to thy summons, bend
        At Wisdom's awful seat.

     III.
     She loves the cool, the silent eve,
     Where no false shows of life deceive,
        Beneath the lunar ray.
     Here folly drops each vain disguise;
     Nor sport her gaily colour'd dyes,
        As in the beam of day.

     IV.
     O Pallas! queen of ev'ry art,
     That glads the sense, and mends the heart,
        Blest source of purer joys!
     In ev'ry form of beauty bright,
     That captivates the mental sight
        With pleasure and surprise;

     V.
     To thy unspotted shrine I bow:
     Attend thy modest suppliant's vow,
        That breathes no wild desires;
     But, taught by thy unerring rules,
     To shun the fruitless wish of fools,
        To nobler views aspires.

     VI.
     Not Fortune's gem, Ambition's plume,
     Nor Cytherea's fading bloom,
        Be objects of my prayer:
     Let av'rice, vanity, and pride,
     Those envy'd glitt'ring toys divide,
        The dull rewards of care.

     VII.
     To me thy better gifts impart,
     Each moral beauty of the heart,
        By studious thought refin'd;
     For wealth, the smile of glad content;
     For pow'r, its amplest, best extent,
        An empire o'er my mind.

     VIII.
     When Fortune drops her gay parade.
     When Pleasure's transient roses fade,
        And wither in the tomb,
     Unchang'd is thy immortal prize;
     Thy ever-verdant laurels rise
        In undecaying bloom.

     IX.
     By thee protected, I defy
     The coxcomb's sneer, the stupid lie
        Of ignorance and spite:
     Alike contemn the leaden fool,
     And all the pointed ridicule
        Of undiscerning wit.

     X.
     From envy, hurry, noise, and strife,
     The dull impertinence of life,
        In thy retreat I rest:
     Pursue thee to the peaceful groves,
     Where Plato's sacred spirit roves,
        In all thy beauties drest.

     XI.
     He bad Ilyssus' tuneful stream
     Convey thy philosophic theme
        Of perfect, fair, and good:
     Attentive Athens caught the sound,
     And all her list'ning sons around
        In awful silence stood.

     XII.
     Reclaim'd her wild licentious youth,
     Confess'd the potent voice of Truth,
        And felt its just controul.
     The Passions ceas'd their loud alarms,
     And Virtue's soft persuasive charms
        O'er all their senses stole.

     XIII.
     Thy breath inspires the Poet's song
     The Patriot's free, unbiass'd tongue,
        The Hero's gen'rous strife;
     Thine are retirement's silent joys,
     And all the sweet engaging ties
        Of still, domestic life.

     XIV.
     No more to fabled names confin'd;
     To Thee supreme, all perfect mind,
        My thought direct their flight.
     Wisdom's thy gift, and all her force
     From thee deriv'd, Eternal source
        Of Intellectual Light!

     XV.
     O send her sure, her steady ray,
     To regulate my doubtful way,
        Thro' life's perplexing road:
     The mists of error to controul,
     And thro' its gloom direct my soul
        To happiness and good.

     XVI.
     Beneath her clear discerning eye
     The visionary shadows fly
        Of Folly's painted show.
     She sees thro' ev'ry fair disguise,
     That all but Virtue's solid joys,
        Is vanity and woe.

[Facsimile of the music to "The Ode to Wisdom" (verse 14).]




LETTER XI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY MIDNIGHT.


I have now a calmer moment. Envy, ambition, high and selfish resentment,
and all the violent passions, are now, most probably, asleep all around
me; and shall now my own angry ones give way to the silent hour, and
subside likewise?--They have given way to it; and I have made use of
the gentler space to re-peruse your last letters. I will touch upon
some passages in them. And that I may the less endanger the but-just
recovered calm, I will begin with what you write about Mr. Hickman.

Give me leave to say, That I am sorry you cannot yet persuade yourself
to think better, that is to say, more justly, of that gentleman, than
your whimsical picture of him shews you so; or, at least, than the
humourousness of your natural vein would make one think you do.

I do not imagine, that you yourself will say, he sat for the picture
you have drawn. And yet, upon the whole, it is not greatly to his
disadvantage. Were I at ease in my mind, I would venture to draw a much
more amiable and just likeness.

If Mr. Hickman has not that assurance which some men have, he has that
humility and gentleness which many want: and which, with the infinite
value he has for you, will make him one of the fittest husbands in the
world for a person of your vivacity and spirit.

Although you say I would not like him myself, I do assure you, if Mr.
Solmes were such a man as Mr. Hickman, in person, mind, and behaviour,
my friends and I had never disagreed about him, if they would not have
permitted me to live single; Mr. Lovelace (having such a character as
he has) would have stood no chance with me. This I can the more boldly
aver, because I plainly perceive, that of the two passions, love
and fear, this man will be able to inspire one with a much greater
proportion of the latter, than I imagine is compatible with the former,
to make a happy marriage.

I am glad you own, that you like no one better than Mr. Hickman. In a
little while, I make no doubt, you will be able, if you challenge
your heart upon it, to acknowledge, that you like not any man so well:
especially, when you come to consider, that the very faults you find in
Mr. Hickman, admirably fit him to make you happy: that is to say, if it
be necessary to your happiness, that you should have your own will in
every thing.

But let me add one thing: and that is this:--You have such a sprightly
turn, that, with your admirable talents, you would make any man in the
world, who loved you, look like a fool, except he were such a one as
Lovelace.

Forgive me, my dear, for my frankness: and forgive me, also, for so soon
returning to subject so immediately relative to myself, as those I now
must touch upon.

You again insist (strengthened by Mr. Lovelace's opinion) upon my
assuming my own estate [I cannot call it resuming, having never been
in possession of it]: and I have given you room to expect, that I will
consider this subject more closely than I have done before. I must
however own, that the reasons which I had to offer against taking
your advice were so obvious, that I thought you would have seen
them yourself, and been determined by them, against your own hastier
counsel.--But since this has not been so, and that both you and Mr.
Lovelace call upon me to assume my own estate, I will enter briefly into
the subject.

In the first place, let me ask you, my dear, supposing I were inclined
to follow your advice, Whom have I to support me in my demand? My uncle
Harlowe is one of my trustees--he is against me. My cousin Morden is the
other--he is in Italy, and very probably may be set against me too.
My brother has declared, that they are resolved to carry their points
before he arrives: so that, as they drive on, all will probably be
decided before I can have an answer from him, were I to write: and,
confined as I am, were the answer to come in time, and they did not like
it, they would keep it from me.

In the next place, parents have great advantages in every eye over the
child, if she dispute their pleasure in the disposing of her: and so
they ought; since out of twenty instances, perhaps two could not be
produced, when they were not in the right, the child in the wrong.

You would not, I am sure, have me accept of Mr. Lovelace's offered
assistance in such a claim. If I would embrace any other person's, who
else would care to appear for a child against parents, ever, till of
late, so affectionate?==But were such a protector to be found, what a
length of time would it take up in a course of litigation! The will and
the deeds have flaws in them, they say. My brother sometimes talks
of going to reside at The Grove: I suppose, with a design to make
ejectments necessary, were I to offer at assuming; or, were I to marry
Mr. Lovelace, in order to give him all the opposition and difficulty the
law would help him to give.

These cases I have put to myself, for argument-sake: but they are
all out of the question, although any body were to be found who would
espouse my cause: for I do assure you, I would sooner beg my bread, than
litigate for my right with my father: since I am convinced, that whether
the parent do his duty by the child or not, the child cannot be excused
from doing hers to him. And to go to law with my father, what a
sound has that! You will see, that I have mentioned my wish (as an
alternative, and as a favour) to be permitted, if I must be put out of
his house, to go thither: but not one step further can I go. And you see
how this is resented.

Upon the whole, then, what have I to hope for, but a change in my
father's resolution?--And is there any probability of that; such an
ascendancy as my brother and sister have obtained over every body;
and such an interest to pursue the enmity they have now openly avowed
against me?

As to Mr. Lovelace's approbation of your assumption-scheme, I wonder not
at. He very probably penetrates the difficulties I should have to bring
it to effect, without his assistance. Were I to find myself as free as I
would wish myself to be, perhaps Mr. Lovelace would stand a worse chance
with me than his vanity may permit him to imagine; notwithstanding the
pleasure you take in rallying me on his account. How know you, but
all that appears to be specious and reasonable in his offers; such as,
standing his chance for my favour, after I became independent, as I may
call it [by which I mean no more, than to have the liberty of refusing
for my husband a man whom it hurts me but to think of in that light];
and such as his not visiting me but by my leave; and till Mr. Morden
come; and till I am satisfied of his reformation;--How know you, I say,
that he gives not himself these airs purely to stand better in your
graces as well as mine, by offering of his own accord conditions which
he must needs think would be insisted on, were the case to happen?

Then am I utterly displeased with him. To threaten as he threatens; yet
to pretend, that it is not to intimidate me; and to beg of you not to
tell me, when he must know you would, and no doubt intended that you
should, is so meanly artful!--The man must think he has a frightened
fool to deal with.--I, to join hands with such a man of violence! my
own brother the man whom he threatens!--And what has Mr. Solmes done to
him?--Is he to be blamed, if he thinks a person would make a wife worth
having, to endeavour to obtain her?--Oh that my friends would but
leave me to my own way in this one point! For have I given the man
encouragement sufficient to ground these threats upon? Were Mr. Solmes a
man to whom I could but be indifferent, it might be found, that to have
spirit, would very little answer the views of that spirit. It is my
fortune to be treated as a fool by my brother: but Mr. Lovelace shall
find--Yet I will let him know my mind; and then it will come with a
better grace to your knowledge.

Mean time, give me leave to tell you, that it goes against me, in my
cooler moments, unnatural as my brother is to me, to have you, my dear,
who are my other self, write such very severe reflections upon him, in
relation to the advantage Lovelace had over him. He is not indeed your
brother: but remember, that you write to his sister.--Upon my word, my
dear Miss Howe, you dip your pen in gall whenever you are offended: and
I am almost ready to question, whether I read some of your expressions
against others of my relations as well as him, (although in my favour,)
whether you are so thoroughly warranted to call other people to account
for their warmth. Should we not be particularly careful to keep clear
of the faults we censure?--And yet I am so angry both at my brother and
sister, that I should not have taken this liberty with my dear friend,
notwithstanding I know you never loved them, had you not made so light
of so shocking a transaction where a brother's life was at stake: when
his credit in the eye of the mischievous sex has received a still deeper
wound than he personally sustained; and when a revival of the same
wicked resentments (which may end more fatally) is threatened.

His credit, I say, in the eye of the mischievous sex: Who is not
warranted to call it so; when it is re (as the two libertines his
companions gloried) to resolve never to give a challenge; and among whom
duelling is so fashionable a part of brutal bravery, that the man of
temper, who is, mostly, I believe, the truly brave man, is often at
a loss so to behave as to avoid incurring either a mortal guilt, or a
general contempt?

To enlarge a little upon this subject, May we not infer, that those who
would be guilty of throwing these contempts upon a man of temper, who
would rather pass by a verbal injury, than to imbrue his hands in blood,
know not the measure of true magnanimity? nor how much nobler it is to
forgive, and even how much more manly to despise, than to resent, an
injury? Were I a man, methinks, I should have too much scorn for a
person, who could wilfully do me a mean wrong, to put a value upon his
life, equal to what I put upon my own. What an absurdity, because a man
had done me a small injury, that I should put it in his power (at least,
to an equal risque) to do me, and those who love me, an irreparable
one!--Were it not a wilful injury, nor avowed to be so, there could not
be room for resentment.

How willingly would I run away from myself, and what most concerns
myself, if I could! This digression brings me back again to the occasion
of it--and that to the impatience I was in, when I ended my last
letter, for my situation is not altered. I renew, therefore, my former
earnestness, as the new day approaches, and will bring with it perhaps
new trials, that you will (as undivestedly as possible of favour or
resentment) tell me what you would have me do:--for, if I am obliged to
go to my uncle Antony's, all, I doubt, will be over with me. Yet how to
avoid it--that's the difficulty!

I shall deposit this the first thing. When you have it, lose no time, I
pray you, to advise (lest it be too late)

Your ever obliged CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SATURDAY, MARCH 25.


What can I advise you to do, my noble creature? Your merit is your
crime. You can no more change your nature, than your persecutors can
theirs. Your distress is owing to the vast disparity between you and
them. What would you have of them? Do they not act in character?--And to
whom? To an alien. You are not one of them. They have two dependencies
in their hope to move you to compliance.--Upon their impenetrableness
one [I'd give it a more proper name, if I dared]; the other, on the
regard you have always had for your character, [Have they not heretofore
owned as much?] and upon your apprehensions from that of Lovelace, which
would discredit you, should you take any step by his means to extricate
yourself. Then they know, that resentment and unpersuadableness are not
natural to you; and that the anger they have wrought you up to, will
subside, as all extraordinaries soon do; and that once married, you will
make the best of it.

But surely your father's son and eldest daughter have a view (by
communicating to so narrow a soul all they know of your just aversion to
him) to entail unhappiness for life upon you, were you to have the man
who is already more nearly related to them, than ever he can be to you,
although the shocking compulsion should take place.

As to that wretch's perseverance, those only, who know not the man,
will wonder at it. He has not the least delicacy. His principal view in
marriage is not to the mind. How shall those beauties be valued, which
cannot be comprehended? Were you to be his, and shew a visible want of
tenderness to him, it is my opinion, he would not be much concerned at
it. I have heard you well observe, from your Mrs. Norton, That a person
who has any over-ruling passion, will compound by giving up twenty
secondary or under-satisfactions, though more laudable ones, in order to
have that gratified.

I'll give you the substance of a conversation [no fear you can be made
to like him worse than you do already] that passed between Sir Harry
Downeton and this Solmes, but three days ago, as Sir Harry told it but
yesterday to my mother and me. It will confirm to you that what your
sister's insolent Betty reported he should say, of governing by fear,
was not of her own head.

Sir Harry told her, he wondered he should wish to obtain you so much
against you inclination as every body knew it would be, if he did.

He matter'd not that, he said: coy maids made the fondest wives: [A
sorry fellow!] It would not at all grieve him to see a pretty woman make
wry faces, if she gave him cause to vex her. And your estate, by the
convenience of its situation, would richly pay him for all he could bear
with your shyness.

He should be sure, he said, after a while, of your complaisance, if not
of your love: and in that should be happier than nine parts in ten of
his married acquaintance.

What a wretch is this!

For the rest, your known virtue would be as great a security to him, as
he could wish for.

She will look upon you, said Sir Harry, if she be forced to marry you,
as Elizabeth of France did upon Philip II. of Spain, when he received
her on his frontiers as her husband, who was to have been but her
father-in-law: that is, with fear and terror, rather than with
complaisance and love: and you will perhaps be as surly to her, as that
old monarch was to his young bride.

Fear and terror, the wretch, the horrid wretch! said, looked pretty in
a bride as well as in a wife: and, laughing, [yes, my dear, the hideous
fellow laughed immoderately, as Sir Harry told us, when he said it,] it
should be his care to perpetuate the occasion for that fear, if he could
not think he had the love. And, truly, he was of opinion, that if
LOVE and FEAR must be separated in matrimony, the man who made himself
feared, fared best.

If my eyes would carry with them the execution which the eyes of the
basilisk are said to do, I would make it my first business to see this
creature.

My mother, however, says, it would be a prodigious merit in you, if you
could get over your aversion to him. Where, asks she [as you have been
asked before], is the praise-worthiness of obedience, if it be only paid
in instance where we give up nothing?

What a fatality, that you have no better an option--either a Scylla or a
Charybdis.

Were it not you, I should know how (barbarously as you are used) to
advise you in a moment. But such a noble character to suffer from a
(supposed) rashness and indiscretion of such a nature, would, as I have
heretofore observed, be a wound to the sex.

While I was in hope, that the asserting of your own independence would
have helped you, I was pleased that you had one resource, as I thought.
But now, that you have so well proved, that such a step would not avail
you, I am entirely at a loss what to say.

I will lay down my pen, and think.


*****


I have considered, and considered again; but, I protest, I know no more
what to say now, than before. Only this: That I am young, like yourself;
and have a much weaker judgment, and stronger passions, than you have.

I have heretofore said, that you have offered as much as you ought, in
offering to live single. If you were never to marry, the estate they are
so loth should go out of their name, would, in time, I suppose, revert
to your brother: and he or his would have it, perhaps, much more
certainly this way, than by the precarious reversions which Solmes makes
them hope for. Have you put this into their odd heads, my dear?--The
tyrant word AUTHORITY, as they use it, can be the only objection against
this offer.

One thing you must consider, that, if you leave your parents, your duty
and love will not suffer you to justify yourself by an appeal against
them; and so you'll have the world against you. And should Lovelace
continue his wild life, and behave ungratefully to you, will not his
baseness seem to justify their cruel treatment of you, as well as their
dislike of him?

May heaven direct you for the best!--I can only say, that for my own
part, I would do any thing, go any where, rather than be compelled to
marry the man I hate; and (were he such a man as Solmes) must always
hate. Nor could I have borne what you have borne, if from father and
uncles, not from brother and sister.

My mother will have it, that after they have tried their utmost efforts
to bring you into their measures, and find them ineffectual, they will
recede. But I cannot say I am of her mind. She does not own, she has
any authority for this, but her own conjecture. I should otherwise have
hoped, that your uncle Antony and she had been in on one secret, and
that favourable to you. Woe be to one of them at least [to you uncle to
be sure I mean] if they should be in any other!

You must, if possible, avoid being carried to that uncle's. The man, the
parson, your brother and sister present!--They'll certainly there marry
you to the wretch. Nor will your newly-raised spirit support you in your
resistance on such an occasion. Your meekness will return; and you
will have nothing for it but tears [tears despised by them all] and
ineffectual appeals and lamentations: and these tears when the ceremony
is profaned, you must suddenly dry up; and endeavour to dispose of
yourself to such a humble frame of mind, as may induce your new-made
lord to forgive all your past declarations of aversion.

In short, my dear, you must then blandish him over with a confession,
that all your past behaviour was maidenly reserve only: and it will be
your part to convince him of the truth of his imprudent sarcasm, that
the coyest maids make the fondest wives. Thus will you enter the state
with a high sense of obligation to his forgiving goodness: and if you
will not be kept to it by that fear, by which he proposes to govern, I
am much mistaken.

Yet, after all, I must leave the point undetermined, and only to be
determined, as you find they recede from their avowed purpose, or
resolve to remove you to your uncle Antony's. But I must repeat my
wishes, that something may fall out, that neither of these men may call
you his!--And may you live single, my dearest friend, till some man
shall offer, that may be as worthy of you, as man can be!

But yet, methinks, I would not, that you, who are so admirably qualified
to adorn the married state, should be always single. You know I am
incapable of flattery; and that I always speak and write the sincerest
dictates of my heart. Nor can you, from what you must know of your
own merit (taken only in a comparative light with others) doubt my
sincerity. For why should a person who delight to find out and admire
every thing that is praise-worthy in another, be supposed ignorant of
like perfections in herself, when she could not so much admire them in
another, if she had them not herself? And why may not I give her those
praises, which she would give to any other, who had but half of her
excellencies?--Especially when she is incapable of pride and vain-glory;
and neither despises others for the want of her fine qualities, nor
overvalues herself upon them?--Over-values, did I say!--How can that be?

Forgive me, my beloved friend. My admiration of you (increased, as it
is, by every letter you write) will not always be held down in silence;
although, in order to avoid offending you, I generally endeavour to keep
it from flowing to my pen, when I write to you, or to my lips, whenever
I have the happiness to be in your company.

I will add nothing (though I could add a hundred things on account of
your latest communications) but that I am

Your ever affectionate and faithful ANNA HOWE.

I hope I have pleased you with my dispatch. I wish I had been able to
please you with my requested advice.

You have given new beauties to the charming Ode which you have
transmitted to me. What pity that the wretches you have to deal with,
put you out of your admirable course; in the pursuit of which, like the
sun, you was wont to cheer and illuminate all you shone upon!




LETTER XIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 26.


How soothing a thing is praise from those we love!--Whether conscious
or not of deserving it, it cannot but give us great delight, to see
ourselves stand high in the opinion of those whose favour we are
ambitious to cultivate. An ingenuous mind will make this farther use of
it, that if he be sensible that it does not already deserve the charming
attributes, it will hasten (before its friend finds herself mistaken) to
obtain the graces it is complimented for: and this it will do, as well
in honour to itself, as to preserve its friend's opinion, and justify
her judgment. May this be always my aim!--And then you will not only
give the praise, but the merit; and I shall be more worthy of that
friendship, which is the only pleasure I have to boast of.

Most heartily I thank you for the kind dispatch of your last favour. How
much am I indebted to you! and even to your honest servant!--Under what
obligations does my unhappy situation lay me!

But let me answer the kind contents of it, as well as I may.

As to getting over my disgusts to Mr. Solmes, it is impossible to
be done; while he wants generosity, frankness of heart, benevolence,
manners and every qualification that distinguishes the worthy man. O my
dear! what a degree of patience, what a greatness of soul, is required
in the wife, not to despise a husband who is more ignorant, more
illiterate, more low-minded than herself!--The wretch, vested with
prerogatives, who will claim rule in virtue of them (and not to permit
whose claim, will be as disgraceful to the prescribing wife as to the
governed husband); How shall such a husband as this be borne, were he,
for reasons of convenience and interest, even to be our CHOICE? But,
to be compelled to have such a one, and that compulsion to arise from
motives as unworthy of the prescribers as of the prescribed, who can
think of getting over an aversion so justly founded? How much easier to
bear the temporary persecutions I labour under, because temporary, than
to resolve to be such a man's for life? Were I to comply, must I not
leave my relations, and go to him? A month will decide the one, perhaps:
But what a duration of woe will the other be!--Every day, it is likely,
rising to witness to some new breach of an altar-vowed duty!

Then, my dear, the man seems already to be meditating vengeance against
me for an aversion I cannot help: for yesterday my saucy gaoleress
assured me, that all my oppositions would not signify that pinch of
snuff, holding out her genteel finger and thumb: that I must have Mr.
Solmes: that therefore I had not best carry my jest too far; for that
Mr. Solmes was a man of spirit, and had told HER, that as I should
surely be his, I acted very unpolitely; since, if he had not more mercy
[that was her word, I know not if it were his] than I had, I might have
cause to repent the usage I gave him to the last day of my life. But
enough of this man; who, by what you repeat from Sir Harry Downeton,
has all the insolence of his sex, without any one quality to make that
insolence tolerable.

I have receive two letters from Mr. Lovelace, since his visit to you;
which make three that I have not answered. I doubt not his being very
uneasy; but in his last he complains in high terms of my silence; not
in the still small voice, or rather style of an humble lover, but in a
style like that which would probably be used by a slighted protector.
And his pride is again touched, that like a thief, or eves-dropper, he
is forced to dodge about in hopes of a letter, and returns five miles
(and then to an inconvenient lodging) without any.

His letters and the copy of mine to him, shall soon attend you. Till
when, I will give you the substance of what I wrote him yesterday.

I take him severely to task for his freedom in threatening me, through
you, with a visit to Mr. Solmes, or to my brother. I say, 'That, surely,
I must be thought to be a creature fit to bear any thing; that violence
and menaces from some of my own family are not enough for me to bear, in
order to make me avoid him; but that I must have them from him too, if
I oblige those to whom it is both my inclination and duty to oblige in
every thing that is reasonable, and in my power.

'Very extraordinary, I tell him, that a violent spirit shall threaten to
do a rash and unjustifiable thing, which concerns me but a little, and
himself a great deal, if I do not something as rash, my character and
sex considered, to divert him from it.

'I even hint, that, however it would affect me, were any mischief to
happen on my own account, yet there are persons, as far as I know, who
in my case would not think there would be reason for much regret, were
such a committed rashness as he threatens Mr. Solmes with, to rid her of
two persons whom, had she never known, she had never been unhappy.'

This is plain-dealing, my dear: and I suppose he will put it into still
plainer English for me.

I take his pride to task, on his disdaining to watch for my letters; and
for his eves-dropping language: and say, 'That, surely, he has the less
reason to think so hardly of his situation; since his faulty morals
are the cause of all; and since faulty morals deservedly level all
distinction, and bring down rank and birth to the canaille, and to the
necessity which he so much regrets, of appearing (if I must descent to
his language) as an eves-dropper and a thief. And then I forbid him
ever to expect another letter from me that is to subject him to such
disgraceful hardships.

'As to the solemn vows and protestations he is so ready, upon all
occasions, to make, they have the less weight with me, I tell him,
as they give a kind of demonstration, that he himself, from his own
character, thinks there is reason to make them. Deeds are to me the
only evidence of intentions. And I am more and more convinced of
the necessity of breaking off a correspondence with a person, whose
addresses I see it is impossible either to expect my friends to
encourage, or him to appear to wish that they should think him worthy of
encouragement.

'What therefore I repeatedly desire is, That since his birth, alliances,
and expectations, are such as will at any time, if his immoral character
be not an objection, procure him at least equal advantages in a woman
whose taste and inclinations moreover might be better adapted to
his own; I insist upon it, as well as advise it, that he give up all
thoughts of me: and the rather, as he has all along (by his threatening
and unpolite behaviour to my friends, and whenever he speaks of them)
given me reason to conclude, that there is more malice in them, than
regard to me, in his perseverance.'

This is the substance of the letter I have written to him.

The man, to be sure, must have the penetration to observe, that my
correspondence with him hitherto is owing more to the severity I meet
with, than to a very high value for him. And so I would have him think.
What a worse than moloch deity is that, which expects an offering of
reason, duty, and discretion, to be made to its shrine!

Your mother is of opinion, you say, that at last my friends will relent.
Heaven grant that they may!--But my brother and sister have such an
influence over every body, and are so determined; so pique themselves
upon subduing me, and carrying their point; that I despair that they
will. And yet, if they do not, I frankly own, I would not scruple to
throw myself upon any not disreputable protection, by which I might
avoid my present persecutions, on one hand, and not give Mr. Lovelace
advantage over me, on the other--that is to say, were there manifestly
no other way left me: for, if there were, I should think the leaving my
father's house, without his consent, one of the most inexcusable actions
I could be guilty of, were the protection to be ever so unexceptionable;
and this notwithstanding the independent fortune willed me by my
grandfather. And indeed I have often reflected with a degree of
indignation and disdain, upon the thoughts of what a low, selfish
creature that child must be, who is to be reined in only by the hopes of
what a parent can or will do for her.

But notwithstanding all this, I owe it to the sincerity of friendship to
confess, that I know not what I should have done, had your advice been
conclusive any way. Had you, my dear, been witness to my different
emotions, as I read your letter, when, in one place, you advise me of
my danger, if I am carried to my uncle's; in another, when you own you
could not bear what I bear, and would do any thing rather than marry
the man you hate; yet, in another, to represent to me my reputation
suffering in the world's eye; and the necessity I should be under to
justify my conduct, at the expense of my friends, were I to take a rash
step; in another, insinuate the dishonest figure I should be forced to
make, in so compelled a matrimony; endeavouring to cajole, fawn upon,
and play the hypocrite with a man to whom I have an aversion; who would
have reason to believe me an hypocrite, as well from my former avowals,
as from the sense he must have (if common sense he has) of his own
demerits; the necessity you think there would be for me, the more averse
(were I capable of so much dissimulation) that would be imputable to
disgraceful motives; as it would be too visible, that love, either of
person or mind, could be neither of them: then his undoubted, his even
constitutional narrowness: his too probably jealousy, and unforgiveness,
bearing in my mind my declared aversion, and the unfeigned despights I
took all opportunities to do him, in order to discourage his address:
a preference avowed against him from the same motive; with the pride he
professes to take in curbing and sinking the spirits of a woman he had
acquired a right to tyrannize over: had you, I say, been witness of
my different emotions as I read; now leaning this way, now that; now
perplexed; now apprehensive; now angry at one, then at another; now
resolving; now doubting; you would have seen the power you have over me;
and would have had reason to believe, that, had you given your advice
in any determined or positive manner, I had been ready to have
been concluded by it. So, my dear, you will find, from these
acknowledgements, that you must justify me to those laws of friendship,
which require undisguised frankness of heart; although you justification
of me in that particular, will perhaps be at the expense of my prudence.

But, upon the whole, this I do repeat--That nothing but the last
extremity shall make me abandon my father's house, if they will permit
me to stay; and if I can, by any means, by any honest pretences, but
keep off my evil destiny in it till my cousin Morden arrives. As one
of my trustees, his is a protection, into which I may without discredit
throw myself, if my other friends should remain determined. And this
(although they seem too well aware of it) is all my hope: for, as
to Lovelace, were I to be sure of his tenderness, and even of his
reformation, must not the thought of embracing the offered protection of
his family, be the same thing, in the world's eye, as accepting of his
own?--Could I avoid receiving his visits at his own relations'? Must I
not be his, whatever, (on seeing him in a nearer light,) I should find
him out to be? For you know, it has always been my observation, that
very few people in courtship see each other as they are. Oh! my dear!
how wise have I endeavoured to be! How anxious to choose, and to avoid
every thing, precautiously, as I may say, that might make me happy,
or unhappy; yet all my wisdom now, by a strange fatality, is likely to
become foolishness!

Then you tell me, in your usual kindly-partial manner, what is expected
of me, more than would be of some others. This should be a lesson to me.
What ever my motives were, the world would not know them. To complain
of a brother's unkindness, that, indeed, I might do. Differences between
brothers and sisters, where interests clash, but too commonly arise:
but, where the severe father cannot be separated from the faulty
brother, who could bear to lighten herself, by loading a father?--Then,
in this particular case, must not the hatred Mr. Lovelace expresses
to every one of my family (although in return for their hatred of
him) shock one extremely? Must it not shew, that there is something
implacable, as well as highly unpolite in his temper?--And what creature
can think of marrying so as to be out of all hopes ever to be well with
her own nearest and tenderest relations?

But here, having tired myself, and I dare say you, I will lay down my
pen.


*****


Mr. Solmes is almost continually here: so is my aunt Hervey: so are my
two uncles. Something is working against me, I doubt. What an uneasy
state is suspense!--When a naked sword, too, seems hanging over one's
head!

I hear nothing but what this confident creature Betty throws out in
the wantonness of office. Now it is, Why, Miss, don't you look up your
things? You'll be called upon, depend upon it, before you are aware.
Another time she intimates darkly, and in broken sentences, (as if on
purpose to tease me,) what one says, what another; with their inquiries
how I dispose of my time? And my brother's insolent question comes
frequently in, Whether I am not writing a history of my sufferings?

But I am now used to her pertness: and as it is only through that that
I can hear of any thing intended against me, before it is to be put in
execution; and as, when she is most impertinent, she pleads a commission
for it; I bear with her: yet, now-and-then, not without a little of the
heart-burn.

I will deposit thus far. Adieu, my dear. CL. HARLOWE.


Written on the cover, after she went down, with a pencil:

On coming down, I found your second letter of yesterday's date.* I
have read it; and am in hopes that the enclosed will in a great measure
answer your mother's expectations of me.


     * See the next letter.


My most respectful acknowledgements to her for it, and for her very kind
admonitions.

You'll read to her what you please of the enclosed.




LETTER XIV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SAT. MARCH 25.


I follow my last of this date by command. I mentioned in my former my
mother's opinion of the merit you would have, if you could oblige your
friends against your own inclination. Our conference upon this subject
was introduced by the conversation we had had with Sir Harry Downeton;
and my mother thinks it of so much importance, that she enjoins me to
give you the particulars of it. I the rather comply, as I was unable in
my last to tell what to advise you to; and as you will in this recital
have my mother's opinion at least, and, perhaps, in hers what the
world's would be, were it only to know what she knows, and not so much
as I know.

My mother argues upon this case in a most discouraging manner for all
such of our sex as look forward for happiness in marriage with the man
of their choice.

Only, that I know, she has a side-view of her daughter; who, at the
same time that she now prefers no one to another, values not the man her
mother most regards, of one farthing; or I should lay it more to heart.

What is there in it, says she, that all this bustle is about? Is it such
a mighty matter for a young woman to give up her inclinations to oblige
her friends?

Very well, my mamma, thought I! Now, may you ask this--at FORTY, you
may. But what would you have said at EIGHTEEN, is the question?

Either, said she, the lady must be thought to have very violent
inclinations [And what nice young creature would have that supposed?]
which she could not give up; or a very stubborn will, which she would
not; or, thirdly, have parents she was indifferent about obliging.

You know my mother now-and-then argues very notably; always very warmly
at least. I happen often to differ from her; and we both think so well
of our own arguments, that we very seldom are so happy as to convince
one another. A pretty common case, I believe, in all vehement debatings.
She says, I am too witty; Angelice, too pert: I, That she is too wise;
that is to say, being likewise put into English, not so young as she has
been: in short, is grown so much into mother, that she has forgotten
she ever was a daughter. So, generally, we call another cause by
consent--yet fall into the old one half a dozen times over, without
consent--quitting and resuming, with half-angry faces, forced into a
smile, that there might be some room to piece together again: but go
a-bed, if bedtime, a little sullen nevertheless: or, if we speak, her
silence is broken with an Ah! Nancy! You are so lively! so quick! I wish
you were less like your papa, child!

I pay it off with thinking, that my mother has no reason to disclaim her
share in her Nancy: and if the matter go off with greater severity on
her side than I wish for, then her favourite Hickman fares the worse for
it next day.

I know I am a saucy creature. I know, if I do not say so, you will think
so. So no more of this just now. What I mention it for, is to tell you,
that on this serious occasion I will omit, if I can, all that passed
between us, that had an air of flippancy on my part, or quickness on my
mother's, to let you into the cool and cogent of the conversation.

'Look through the families, said she, which we both know, where the man
and the woman have been said to marry for love; which (at the time it
is so called) is perhaps no more than a passion begun in folly or
thoughtlessness, and carried on from a spirit of perverseness and
opposition [here we had a parenthetical debate, which I omit]; and see,
if they appear to be happier than those whose principal inducement to
marry has been convenience, or to oblige their friends; or ever whether
they are generally so happy: for convenience and duty, where observed,
will afford a permanent and even an increasing satisfaction (as well
at the time, as upon the reflection) which seldom fail to reward
themselves: while love, if love be the motive, is an idle passion' [idle
in ONE SENSE my mother cannot say; for love is as busy as a monkey, and
as mischievous as a school-boy]--'it is a fervour, that, like all other
fervours, lasts but a little while after marriage; a bow overstrained,
that soon returns to its natural bent.

'As it is founded generally upon mere notional excellencies, which
were unknown to the persons themselves till attributed to either by the
other; one, two, or three months, usually sets all right on both sides;
and then with opened eyes they think of each other--just as every body
else thought of them before.

'The lovers imaginaries [her own notable word!] are by that time gone
off; nature and old habits (painfully dispensed with or concealed)
return: disguises thrown aside, all the moles, freckles, and defects in
the minds of each discover themselves; and 'tis well if each do not sink
in the opinion of the other, as much below the common standard, as the
blinded imagination of both had set them above it. And now, said she,
the fond pair, who knew no felicity out of each other's company, are
so far from finding the never-ending variety each had proposed in
an unrestrained conversation with the other (when they seldom were
together; and always parted with something to say; or, on recollection,
when parted, wishing they had said); that they are continually on the
wing in pursuit of amusements out of themselves; and those, concluded my
sage mamma, [Did you think her wisdom so very modern?] will perhaps be
the livelier to each, in which the other has no share.'

I told my mother, that if you were to take any rash step, it would be
owing to the indiscreet violence of your friends. I was afraid, I said,
that these reflection upon the conduct of people in the married state,
who might set out with better hopes, were but too well grounded: but
that this must be allowed me, that if children weighed not these matters
so thoroughly as they ought, neither did parents make those allowances
for youth, inclination, and inexperience, which had been found necessary
to be made for themselves at their children's time of life.

I remembered a letter, I told her, hereupon, which you wrote a few
months ago, personating an anonymous elderly lady (in Mr. Wyerley's
day of plaguing you) to Miss Drayton's mother, who, by her severity and
restraints, had like to have driven the young lady into the very fault
against which her mother was most solicitous to guard her. And I dared
to say, she would be pleased with it.

I fetched the first draught of it, which at my request you obliged me
at the time; and read the whole letter to my mother. But the following
passage she made me read twice. I think you once told me you had not a
copy of this letter.

'Permit me, Madam, [says the personated grave writer,] to observe, That
if persons of your experience would have young people look forward, in
order to be wiser and better by their advice, it would be kind in them
to look backward, and allow for their children's youth, and natural
vivacity; in other words, for their lively hopes, unabated by time,
unaccompanied by reflection, and unchecked by disappointment. Things
appear to us all in a very different light at our entrance upon
a favourite party, or tour; when, with golden prospects, and high
expectations, we rise vigorous and fresh like the sun beginning its
morning course; from what they do, when we sit down at the end of our
views, tired, and preparing for our journey homeward: for then we take
into our reflection, what we had left out in prospect, the fatigues,
the checks, the hazards, we had met with; and make a true estimate of
pleasures, which from our raised expectations must necessarily have
fallen miserably short of what we had promised ourselves at setting out.
Nothing but experience can give us a strong and efficacious conviction
of this difference: and when we would inculcate the fruits of that upon
the minds of those we love, who have not lived long enough to find those
fruits; and would hope, that our advice should have as much force upon
them, as experience has upon us; and which, perhaps, our parents' advice
had not upon ourselves, at our daughter' time of life; should we not
proceed by patient reasoning and gentleness, that we may not harden,
where we would convince? For, Madam, the tenderest and most generous
minds, when harshly treated, become generally the most inflexible. If
the young lady knows her heart to be right, however defective her
head may be for want of age and experience, she will be apt to be very
tenacious. And if she believes her friends to be wrong, although perhaps
they may be only so in their methods of treating her, how much will
every unkind circumstance on the parent's part, or heedless one on the
child's, though ever so slight in itself, widen the difference! The
parent's prejudice in disfavour, will confirm the daughter's in favour,
of the same person; and the best reasonings in the world on either side,
will be attributed to that prejudice. In short, neither of them will be
convinced: a perpetual opposition ensues: the parent grows impatient;
the child desperate: and, as a too natural consequence, that falls
out which the mother was most afraid of, and which possibly had not
happened, if the child's passions had been only led, not driven.'

My mother was pleased with the whole letter; and said, It deserved to
have the success it met with. But asked me what excuse could be offered
for a young lady capable of making such reflections (and who at her time
of life could so well assume the character of one of riper years) if she
should rush into any fatal mistake herself?

She then touched upon the moral character of Mr. Lovelace; and how
reasonable the aversion of your reflections is to a man who gives
himself the liberties he is said to take; and who indeed himself denies
not the accusation; having been heard to declare, that he will do all
the mischief he can to the sex, in revenge for the ill usage and
broken vows of his first love, at a time when he was too young [his own
expression it seems] to be insincere.

I replied, that I had heard every one say, that the lady meant really
used him ill; that it affected him so much at the time, that he was
forced to travel upon it; and to drive her out of his heart, ran into
courses which he had ingenuousness enough himself to condemn: that,
however, he had denied that he had thrown out such menaces against the
sex when charged with them by me in your presence; and declared himself
incapable of so unjust and ungenerous a resentment against all, for the
perfidy of one.

You remember this, my dear, as I do your innocent observation upon it,
that you could believe his solemn asseveration and denial: 'For surely,
said you, the man who would resent, as the highest indignity that could
be offered to a gentleman, the imputation of a wilful falsehood, would
not be guilty of one.'

I insisted upon the extraordinary circumstances in your case;
particularizing them. I took notice, that Mr. Lovelace's morals were at
one time no objection with your relations for Arabella: that then much
was built upon his family, and more upon his part and learning, which
made it out of doubt, that he might be reclaimed by a woman of virtue
and prudence: and [pray forgive me for mentioning it] I ventured to
add, that although your family might be good sort of folks, as the world
went, yet no body but you imputed to any of them a very punctilious
concern for religion or piety--therefore were they the less entitled to
object to defect of that kind in others. Then, what an odious man, said
I, have they picked out, to supplant in a lady's affections one of the
finest figures of a man, and one noted for his brilliant parts, and
other accomplishments, whatever his morals may be!

Still my mother insisted, that there was the greater merit in your
obedience on that account; and urged, that there hardly ever was a very
handsome and a very sprightly man who made a tender and affectionate
husband: for that they were generally such Narcissus's, as to imagine
every woman ought to think as highly of them, as they did of themselves.

There was no danger from that consideration here, I said, because the
lady still had greater advantages of person and mind, than the man;
graceful and elegant, as he must be allowed to be, beyond most of his
sex.

She cannot endure to hear me praise any man but her favourite Hickman;
upon whom, nevertheless, she generally brings a degree of contempt which
he would escape, did she not lessen the little merit he has, by giving
him, on all occasions, more than I think he can deserve, and entering
him into comparisons in which it is impossible but he must be a
sufferer. And now [preposterous partiality!] she thought for her part,
that Mr. Hickman, bating that his face indeed was not so smooth, nor his
complexion quite so good, and saving that he was not so presuming and
so bold (which ought to be no fault with a modest woman) equaled Mr.
Lovelace at any hour of the day.

To avoid entering further into such an incomparable comparison, I said,
I did not believe, had they left you to your own way, and treated you
generously, that you would have had the thought of encouraging any man
whom they disliked--

Then, Nancy, catching me up, the excuse is less--for if so, must there
not be more of contradiction, than love, in the case?

Not so, neither, Madam: for I know Miss Clarissa Harlowe would prefer
Mr. Lovelace to all men, if morals--

IF, Nancy!--That if is every thing.--Do you really think she loves Mr.
Lovelace?

What would you have had me say, my dear?--I won't tell you what I did
say: But had I not said what I did, who would have believed me?

Besides, I know you love him!--Excuse me, my dear: Yet, if you deny it,
what do you but reflect upon yourself, as if you thought you ought not
to allow yourself in what you cannot help doing?

Indeed, Madam, said I, the man is worthy of any woman's love [if, again,
I could say]--But her parents--

Her parents, Nancy--[You know, my dear, how my mother, who accuses her
daughter of quickness, is evermore interrupting one!]

May take wrong measures, said I--

Cannot do wrong--they have reason, I'll warrant, said she--

By which they may provoke a young woman, said I, to do rash things,
which otherwise she would not do.

But, if it be a rash thing, [returned she,] should she do it? A prudent
daughter will not wilfully err, because her parents err, if they were to
err: if she do, the world which blames the parents, will not acquit the
child. All that can be said, in extenuation of a daughter's error in
this case, arises from a kind consideration, which Miss Clary's letter
to Lady Drayton pleads for, to be paid to her daughter's youth and
inexperience. And will such an admirable young person as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, whose prudence, as we see, qualifies her to be an advisor of
persons much older than herself, take shelter under so poor a covert?

Let her know, Nancy, out of hand, what I say; and I charge you to
represent farther to her, That let he dislike one man and approve
of another ever so much, it will be expected of a young lady of her
unbounded generosity and greatness of mind, that she should deny herself
when she can oblige all her family by so doing--no less than ten or a
dozen perhaps the nearest and dearest to her of all the persons in the
world, an indulgent father and mother at the head of them. It may be
fancy only on her side; but parents look deeper: And will not Miss
Clarissa Harlowe give up her fancy to her parents' judgment?

I said a great deal upon this judgment subject: all that you could wish
I should say; and all that your extraordinary case allowed me to say.
And my mother was so sensible of the force of it, that she charged me
not to write to you any part of my answer to what she said; but only
what she herself had advanced; lest, in so critical a case, it should
induce you to take measures which might give us both reason (me for
giving it, you for following it) to repent it as long as we lived.

And thus, my dear, have I set my mother's arguments before you. And the
rather, as I cannot myself tell what to advise you to do--you know best
your own heart; and what that will let you do.

Robin undertakes to deposit this very early, that you may have an
opportunity to receive it by your first morning airing.

Heaven guide and direct you for the best, is the incessant prayer of

Your ever affectionate ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY AFTERNOON


I am in great apprehension. Yet cannot help repeating my humble thanks
to your mother and you for your last favour. I hope her kind end is
answered by the contents of my last. Yet I must not think it enough to
acknowledge her goodness to me, with a pencil only, on the cover of a
letter sealed up. A few lines give me leave to write with regard to my
anonymous letter to Lady Drayton. If I did not at that time tell you, as
I believe I did, that my excellent Mrs. Norton gave me her assistance in
that letter, I now acknowledge that she did.

Pray let your mother know this, for two reasons: one, that I may not be
thought to arrogate to myself a discretion which does not belong to me;
the other, that I may not suffer by the severe, but just inference she
was pleased to draw; doubling my faults upon me, if I myself should act
unworthy of the advice I was supposed to give.

Before I come to what most nearly affects us all, I must chide you once
more, for the severe, the very severe things you mention of our family,
to the disparagement of their MORALS. Indeed, my dear, I wonder at
you!--A slighter occasion might have passed me, after I had written to
you so often to so little purpose, on this topic. But, affecting as
my own circumstances are, I cannot pass by, without animadversion, the
reflection I need not repeat in words.

There is not a worthier woman in England than my mother. Nor is my
father that man you sometimes make him. Excepting in one point, I know
not any family which lives more up to their duty, than the principals of
ours. A little too uncommunicative for their great circumstances--that
is all.--Why, then, have they not reason to insist upon unexceptionable
morals in a man whose sought-for relationship to them, by a marriage
in their family, they have certainly a right either to allow of, or to
disallow.

Another line or two, before I am engrossed by my own concerns--upon your
treatment of Mr. Hickman. Is it, do you think, generous to revenge upon
an innocent person, the displeasure you receive from another quarter,
where, I doubt, you are a trespasser too?--But one thing I could tell
him; and you have best not provoke me to it: It is this, That no woman
uses ill the man she does not absolutely reject, but she has it in her
heart to make him amends, when her tyranny has had its run, and he
has completed the measure of his services and patience. My mind is not
enough at ease to push this matter further.

I will now give you the occasion of my present apprehensions.

I had reason to fear, as I mentioned in mine of this morning, that a
storm was brewing. Mr. Solmes came home from church this afternoon with
my brother. Soon after, Betty brought me up a letter, without saying
from whom. It was in a cover, and directed by a hand I never saw before;
as if it were supposed that I would not receive and open it, had I known
from whom it came.

These are the contents:


*****


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SUNDAY, MARCH 26.

DEAREST MADAM,

I think myself a most unhappy man, in that I have never yet been able
to pay my respects to you with youre consent, for one halfe-hour. I
have something to communicat to you that concernes you much, if you be
pleased to admit me to youre speech. Youre honour is concerned in it,
and the honour of all youre familly. It relates to the designes of one
whom you are sed to valew more than he desarves; and to some of his
reprobat actions; which I am reddie to give you convincing proofes of
the truth of. I may appear to be interested in it: but, neverthelesse,
I am reddie to make oathe, that every tittle is true: and you will
see what a man you are sed to favour. But I hope not so, for your owne
honour.

Pray, Madam, vouchsafe me a hearing, as you valew your honour and
familly: which will oblidge, dearest Miss,

Your most humble and most faithful servant, ROGER SOLMES.

I wait below for the hope of admittance.


*****


I have no manner of doubt, that this is a poor device to get this man
into my company. I would have sent down a verbal answer; but Betty
refused to carry any message, which should prohibit his visiting me. So
I was obliged either to see him, or to write to him. I wrote therefore
an answer, of which I shall send you the rough draught. And now my heart
aches for what may follow from it; for I hear a great hurry below.


*****


TO ROGER SOLMES, ESQ.

SIR,

Whatever you have to communicate to me, which concerns my honour, may as
well be done by writing as by word of mouth. If Mr. Lovelace is any
of my concern, I know not that therefore he ought to be yours: for the
usage I receive on your account [I must think it so!] is so harsh, that
were there not such a man in the world as Mr. Lovelace, I would not wish
to see Mr. Solmes, no, not for one half-hour, in the way he is pleased
to be desirous to see me. I never can be in any danger from Mr.
Lovelace, (and, of consequence, cannot be affected by any of your
discoveries,) if the proposal I made be accepted. You have been
acquainted with it no doubt. If not, be pleased to let my friends know,
that if they will rid me of my apprehensions of one gentleman, I will
rid them of their of another: And then, of what consequence to them, or
to me, will it be, whether Mr. Lovelace be a good man, or a bad? And if
not to them, nor to me, I see not how it can be of any to you. But if
you do, I have nothing to say to that; and it will be a christian part
if you will expostulate with him upon the errors you have discovered,
and endeavour to make him as good a man, as, no doubt, you are yourself,
or you would not be so ready to detect and expose him.

Excuse me, Sir: but, after my former letter to you, and your ungenerous
perseverance; and after this attempt to avail yourself at the expense of
another man's character, rather than by your own proper merit; I see
not that you can blame any asperity in her, whom you have so largely
contributed to make unhappy.

CL. HARLOWE.


*****


SUNDAY NIGHT.

My father was for coming up to me, in great wrath, it seems; but was
persuaded to the contrary. My aunt Hervey was permitted to send me this
that follow.--Quick work, my dear!


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

NIECE,

Every body is now convinced, that nothing is to be done with you by way
of gentleness or persuasion. Your mother will not permit you to stay in
the house; for your father is so incensed by your strange letter to his
friend, that she knows not what will be the consequence if you do. So,
you are commanded to get ready to go to your uncle Antony's out of hand.

Your uncle thinks he has not deserved of you such an unwillingness as
you shew to go to his house.

You don't know the wickedness of the man for whose sake you think it
worth while to quarrel with all your friends.

You must not answer me. There will be no end of that.

You know not the affliction you give to every body; but to none more
than to

Your affectionate aunt, DOROTHY HERVEY.


*****


Forbid to write to my aunt, I took a bolder liberty. I wrote a few lines
to my mother; beseeching her to procure me leave to throw myself at my
father's feet, and hers, if I must go, (nobody else present,) to beg
pardon for the trouble I had given them both, and their blessings; and
to receive their commands as to my removal, and the time for it, from
their own lips.

'What new boldness this!--Take it back; and bid her learn to obey,' was
my mother's angry answer, with my letter returned, unopened.

But that I might omit nothing, that had an appearance of duty, I wrote
a few lines to my father himself, to the same purpose; begging, that he
would not turn me out of his house, without his blessing. But this, torn
in two pieces, and unopened, was brought me up again by Betty, with an
air, one hand held up, the other extended, the torn letter in her open
palm; and a See here!--What a sad thing is this!--Nothing will do but
duty, Miss!--Your papa said, Let her tell me of deeds!--I'll receive no
words from her. And so he tore the letter, and flung the pieces at my
head.

So desperate was my case, I was resolved not to stop even at this
repulse. I took my pen, and addressed myself to my uncle Harlowe,
enclosing that which my mother had returned unopened, and the torn
unopened one sent to my father; having first hurried off a transcript
for you.

My uncle was going home, and it was delivered to him just as he stepped
into his chariot. What may be the fate of it therefore I cannot know
till to-morrow.

The following is a copy of it:


TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.

MY DEAR AND EVER-HONOURED UNCLE,

I have nobody now but you, to whom I can apply, with hope, so much as
to have my humble addresses opened and read. My aunt Hervey has given me
commands which I want to have explained; but she has forbid me writing
to her. Hereupon I took the liberty to write to my father and mother.
You will see, Sir, by the torn one, and by the other, (both unopened,)
what has been the result. This, Sir, perhaps you already know: but, as
you know not the contents of the disgraced letters, I beseech you to
read them both, that you may be a witness for me, that they are not
filled with either complaints or expostulations, nor contain any thing
undutiful. Give me leave to say, Sir, that if deaf-eared anger will
neither grant me a hearing, nor, what I write a perusal, some time hence
the hard-heartedness may be regretted. I beseech you, dear, good Sir,
to let me know what is meant by sending me to my uncle Antony's house,
rather than to yours, or to my aunt Hervey's, or else-where? If it be
for what I apprehend it to be, life will not be supportable upon the
terms. I beg also to know, WHEN I am to be turned out of doors!--My
heart strongly gives me, that if once I am compelled to leave this
house, I never shall see it more.

It becomes me, however, to declare, that I write not this through
perverseness, or in resentment. God knows my heart, I do not! But the
treatment I apprehend I shall meet with, if carried to my other uncle's,
will, in all probability, give the finishing stroke to the distresses,
the undeserved distresses I will be bold to call them, of

Your once highly-favoured, but now unhappy, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY MORNING, MARCH 27.


This morning early my uncle Harlowe came hither. He sent up the enclosed
very tender letter. It has made me wish I could oblige him. You will see
how Mr. Solmes's ill qualities are glossed over in it. What blemishes
dies affection hide!--But perhaps they may say to me, What faults does
antipathy bring to light!

Be pleased to send me back this letter of my uncle by the first return.


SUNDAY NIGHT, OR RATHER MINDAY MORNING.

I must answer you, though against my own resolution. Every body loves
you; and you know they do. The very ground you walk upon is dear to most
of us. But how can we resolve to see you? There is no standing against
your looks and language. It is our loves makes us decline to see you.
How can we, when you are resolved not to do what we are resolved you
shall do? I never, for my part, loved any creature, as I loved you from
your infancy till now. And indeed, as I have often said, never was there
a young creature so deserving of our love. But what is come to you now!
Alas! alas! my dear kinswoman, how you fail in the trial!

I have read the letters you enclosed. At a proper time, I may shew them
to my brother and sister: but they will receive nothing from you at
present.

For my part, I could not read your letter to me, without being unmanned.
How can you be so unmoved yourself, yet so able to move every body
else? How could you send such a letter to Mr. Solmes? Fie upon you! How
strangely are you altered!

Then to treat your brother and sister as you did, that they don't care
to write to you, or to see you! Don't you know where it is written, That
soft answers turn away wrath? But if you will trust to you sharp-pointed
wit, you may wound. Yet a club will beat down a sword: And how can you
expect that they who are hurt by you will not hurt you again? Was this
the way you used to take to make us all adore you as we did?--No, it
was your gentleness of heart and manners, that made every body, even
strangers, at first sight, treat you as a lady, and call you a lady,
though not born one, while your elder sister had no such distinctions
paid her. If you were envied, why should you sharpen envy, and file up
its teeth to an edge?--You see I write like an impartial man, and as one
that loves you still.

But since you have displayed your talents, and spared nobody, and moved
every body, without being moved, you have but made us stand the closer
and firmer together. This is what I likened to an embattled phalanx,
once before. Your aunt Hervey forbids your writing for the same reason
that I must not countenance it. We are all afraid to see you, because we
know we shall be made as so many fools. Nay, your mother is so afraid
of you, that once or twice, when she thought you were coming to force
yourself into her presence, she shut the door, and locked herself in,
because she knew she must not see you upon your terms, and you are
resolved you will not see her upon hers.

Resolves but to oblige us all, my dearest Miss Clary, and you shall see
how we will clasp you every one by turns to our rejoicing hearts. If the
one man has not the wit, and the parts, and the person, of the other, no
one breathing has a worse heart than that other: and is not the love
of all your friends, and a sober man (if he be not so polished) to be
preferred to a debauchee, though ever so fine a man to look at? You have
such talents that you will be adored by the one: but the other has as
much advantage in those respects, as you have yourself, and will not set
by them one straw: for husbands are sometimes jealous of their authority
with witty wives. You will have in one, a man of virtue. Had you not
been so rudely affronting to him, he would have made your ears tingle
with what he could have told you of the other.

Come, my dear niece, let me have the honour of doing with you what no
body else yet has been able to do. Your father, mother, and I, will
divide the pleasure, and the honour, I will again call it, between us;
and all past offences shall be forgiven; and Mr. Solmes, we will engage,
shall take nothing amiss hereafter, of what has passed.

He knows, he says, what a jewel that man will have, who can obtain your
favour; and he will think light of all he has suffered, or shall suffer,
in obtaining you.

Dear, sweet creature, oblige us: and oblige us with a grace. It must be
done, whether with a grace or not. I do assure you it must. You must not
conquer father, mother, uncles, every body: depend upon that.

I have set up half the night to write this. You do not know how I
am touched at reading yours, and writing this. Yet will I be at
Harlowe-place early in the morning. So, upon reading this, if you will
oblige us all, send me word to come up to your apartment: and I will
lead you down, and present you to the embraces of every one: and you
will then see, you have more of a brother and sister in them both, than
of late your prejudices will let you think you have. This from one who
used to love to style himself,

Your paternal uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.


*****


In about an hour after this kind letter was given me, my uncle sent up
to know, if he should be a welcome visiter, upon the terms mentioned in
his letter? He bid Betty bring him down a verbal answer: a written one,
he said, would be a bad sign: and he bid her therefore not to bring a
letter. But I had just finished the enclosed transcription of one I had
been writing. She made a difficulty to carry it; but was prevailed upon
to oblige me by a token which these Mrs. Betty's cannot withstand.


DEAR AND HONOURED SIR,

How you rejoice me by your condescending goodness!--So kind, so paternal
a letter!--so soothing to a wounded heart; and of late what I have been
so little used to!--How am I affected with it! Tell me not, dear Sir, of
my way of writing: your letter has more moved me, than I have been able
to move any body!--It has made me wish, with all my heart, that I could
entitle myself to be visited upon your own terms; and to be led down to
my father and mother by so good and so kind an uncle.

I will tell you, dearest Uncle, what I will do to make my peace. I have
no doubt that Mr. Solmes, upon consideration, would greatly prefer my
sister to such a strange averse creature as me. His chief, or one of his
chief motives in his address to me, is, as I have reason to believe, the
contiguity of my grandfather's estate to his own. I will resign it; for
ever I will resign it: and the resignation must be good, because I will
never marry at all. I will make it over to my sister, and her heirs for
ever. I shall have no heirs, but my brother and her; and I will receive,
as of my father's bounty, such an annuity (not in lieu of the estate,
but as of his bounty) as he shall be pleased to grant me, if it be
ever so small: and whenever I disoblige him, he to withdraw it, at his
pleasure.

Will this not be accepted?--Surely it must--surely it will!--I beg of
you, dearest Sir, to propose it; and second it with your interest. This
will answer every end. My sister has a high opinion of Mr. Solmes. I
never can have any in the light he is proposed to me. But as my sister's
husband, he will be always entitled to my respect; and shall have it.

If this be accepted, grant me, Sir, the honour of a visit; and do me
then the inexpressible pleasure of leading me down to the feet of my
honoured parents, and they shall find me the most dutiful of children;
and to the arms of my brother and sister, and they shall find me the
most obliging and most affectionate of sisters.

I wait, Sir, for your answer to this proposal, made with the whole heart
of

Your dutiful and most obliged niece, CL. HARLOWE.


MONDAY NOON.

I hope this will be accepted: for Betty tells me, that my uncle Antony
and my aunt Hervey are sent for; and not Mr. Solmes; which I look upon
as a favourable circumstance. With what cheerfulness will I assign over
this envied estate!--What a much more valuable consideration shall I
part with it for!--The love and favour of all my relations! That love
and favour, which I used for eighteen years together to rejoice in, and
be distinguished by!--And what a charming pretence will this afford me
of breaking with Mr. Lovelace! And how easily will it possibly make him
to part with me!

I found this morning, in the usual place, a letter from him, in answer,
I suppose, to mine of Friday, which I deposited not till Saturday. But
I have not opened it; nor will I, till I see what effect this new offer
will have.

Let me but be permitted to avoid the man I hate; and I will give up with
cheerfulness the man I could prefer. To renounce the one, were I really
to value him as much as you seem to imagine, can give but a temporary
concern, which time and discretion will alleviate. This is a sacrifice
which a child owes to parents and friends, if they insist upon its being
made. But the other, to marry a man one cannot endure, is not only a
dishonest thing, as to the man; but it is enough to make a creature who
wishes to be a good wife, a bad or indifferent one, as I once wrote to
the man himself: and then she can hardly be either a good mistress, or
a good friend; or any thing but a discredit to her family, and a bad
example to all around her.

Methinks I am loth, in the suspense I am in at present, to deposit
this, because it will be leaving you in one as great: but having been
prevented by Betty's officiousness twice, I will now go down to my
little poultry; and, if I have an opportunity, will leave it in the
usual place, where I hope to find something from you.




LETTER XVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 27.


I have deposited my narrative down to this day noon; but I hope soon to
follow it with another letter, that I may keep you as little a while as
possible in that suspense which I am so much affected by at this moment:
for my heart is disturbed at ever foot I hear stir; and at every door
below that I hear open or shut.

They have been all assembled some time, and are in close debate I
believe: But can there be room for long debate upon a proposal, which,
if accepted, will so effectually answer all their views?--Can they
insist a moment longer upon my having Mr. Solmes, when they see what
sacrifices I am ready to make, to be freed from his addresses?--Oh! but
I suppose the struggle is, first, with Bella's nicety, to persuade her
to accept of the estate, and of the husband; and next, with her pride,
to take her sister's refusals, as she once phrased it!--Or, it may
be, my brother is insisting upon equivalents for his reversion in the
estate: and these sort of things take up but too much the attention of
some of our family. To these, no doubt, one or both, it must be owing,
that my proposal admits of so much consideration.

I want, methinks, to see what Mr. Lovelace, in his letter, says. But I
will deny myself this piece of curiosity till that which is raised by my
present suspense is answered.--Excuse me, my dear, that I thus trouble
you with my uncertainties: but I have no employment, nor heart, if I
had, to pursue any other but what my pen affords me.


MONDAY EVENING.

Would you believe it?--Betty, by anticipation, tells me, that I am to be
refused. I am 'a vile, artful creature. Every body is too good to me.
My uncle Harlowe has been taken in, that's the phrase. They know how
it would be, if he either wrote to me, or saw me. He has, however, been
made ashamed to be so wrought upon. A pretty thing truly in the eye of
the world it would be, were they to take me at my word! It would look
as if they had treated me thus hardly, as I think it, for this very
purpose. My peculiars, particularly Miss Howe, would give it that
turn; and I myself could mean nothing by it, but to see if it would be
accepted in order to strengthen my own arguments against Mr. Solmes. It
was amazing, that it could admit of a moment's deliberation: that any
thing could be supposed to be done in it. It was equally against law and
equity: and a fine security Miss Bella would have, or Mr. Solmes, when I
could resume it when I would!--My brother and she my heirs! O the artful
creature!--I to resolve to live single, when Lovelace is so sure of
me--and every where declares as much!--and can whenever he pleases,
if my husband, claim under the will!--Then the insolence--the
confidence--[as Betty mincingly told me, that one said; you may easily
guess who] that she, who was so justly in disgrace for downright
rebellion, should pretend to prescribe to the whole family!--Should name
a husband for her elder sister!--What a triumph would her obstinacy go
away with, to delegate her commands, not as from a prison, as she called
it, but as from her throne, to her elders and betters; and to her father
and mother too!--Amazing, perfectly amazing, that any body could argue
upon such a proposal as this! It was a master-stroke of finesse--It was
ME in perfection!--Surely my uncle Harlowe will never again be so taken
in!'

All this was the readier told me, because it was against me, and would
tease and vex me. But as some of this fine recapitulation implied, that
somebody spoke up for me. I was curious to know who it was. But Betty
would not tell me, for fear I should have the consolation to find that
all were not against me.

But do you not see, my dear, what a sad creature she is whom you honour
with your friendship?--You could not doubt your influence over me: Why
did you not take the friendly liberty I have always taken with you,
and tell me my faults, and what a specious hypocrite I am? For, if my
brother and sister could make such discoveries, how is it possible, that
faults to enormous [you could see others, you thought, of a more secret
nature!] could escape you penetrating eye?

Well, but now, it seems, they are debating how and by whom to answer me:
for they know not, nor are they to know, that Mrs. Betty has told me all
these fine things. One desires to be excused, it seems: another chooses
not to have any thing to say to me: another has enough of me: and of
writing to so ready a scribbler, there will be no end.

Thus are those imputed qualifications, which used so lately to gain me
applause, now become my crimes: so much do disgust and anger alter the
property of things.

The result of their debate, I suppose, will somehow or other be
communicated to me by-and-by. But let me tell you, my dear, that I am
made so desperate, that I am afraid to open Mr. Lovelace's letter,
lest, in the humour I am in, I should do something (if I find it not
exceptionable) that may give me repentance as long as I live.


MONDAY NIGHT.

This moment the following letter is brought me by Betty.


MONDAY, 5 O'CLOCK

MISS CUNNING-ONE,

Your fine new proposal is thought unworthy of a particular answer. Your
uncle Harlowe is ashamed to be so taken in. Have you no new fetch for
your uncle Antony? Go round with us, child, now your hand's in. But I
was bid to write only one line, that you might not complain, as you
did of your worthy sister, for the freedoms you provoked: It is
this--Prepare yourself. To-morrow you go to my uncle Antony's. That's
all, child.

JAMES HARLOWE.


I was vexed to the heart at this: and immediately, in the warmth of
resentment, wrote the enclosed to my uncle Harlowe; who it seems stays
here this night.


TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. MONDAY NIGHT.

HONOURED SIR,

I find I am a very sad creature, and did not know it. I wrote not to my
brother. To you, Sir, I wrote. From you I hope the honour of an answer.
No one reveres her uncle more than I do. Nevertheless, between uncle and
niece, excludes not such a hope: and I think I have not made a proposal
that deserves to be treated with scorn.

Forgive me, Sir--my heart is full. Perhaps one day you may think you
have been prevailed upon (for that is plainly the case!) to join to
treat me--as I do not deserve to be treated. If you are ashamed, as my
brother hints, of having expressed any returning tenderness to me, God
help me! I see I have no mercy to expect from any body! But, Sir, from
your pen let me have an answer; I humbly implore it of you. Till my
brother can recollect what belongs to a sister, I will not take from him
no answer to the letter I wrote to you, nor any commands whatever.

I move every body!--This, Sir, is what you are pleased to mention. But
whom have I moved?--One person in the family has more moving ways than I
have, or he could never so undeservedly have made every body ashamed to
show tenderness to a poor distressed child of the same family.

Return me not this with contempt, or torn, or unanswered, I beseech you.
My father has a title to do that or any thing by his child: but from no
other person in the world of your sex, Sir, ought a young creature of
mine (while she preserves a supplicating spirit) to be so treated.

When what I have before written in the humblest strain has met with such
strange constructions, I am afraid that this unguarded scrawl will be
very ill received. But I beg, Sir, you will oblige me with one line, be
it ever so harsh, in answer to my proposal. I still think it ought to
be attended to. I will enter into the most solemn engagements to make it
valid by a perpetual single life. In a word, any thing I can do, I will
do, to be restored to all your favours. More I cannot say, but that I
am, very undeservedly,

A most unhappy creature.


Betty scrupled again to carry this letter; and said, she should have
anger; and I should have it returned in scraps and bits.

I must take that chance, said I: I only desire that you will deliver it
as directed.

Sad doings! very sad! she said, that young ladies should so violently
set themselves against their duty.

I told her, she should have the liberty to say what she pleased, so she
would but be my messenger that one time: and down she went with it.

I bid her, if she could, slide it into my uncle's hand, unseen; at least
unseen by my brother or sister, for fear it should meet, through their
good office, with the fate she had bespoken for it.

She would not undertake for that, she said.

I am now in expectation of the result. But having so little ground to
hope for their favour or mercy, I opened Mr. Lovelace's letter.

I would send it to you, my dear (as well as those I shall enclose) by
this conveyance; but not being able at present to determine in what
manner I shall answer it, I will give myself the trouble of abstracting
it here, while I am waiting for what may offer from the letter just
carried down.

'He laments, as usual, my ill opinion of him, and readiness to believe
every thing to his disadvantage. He puts into plain English, as I
supposed he would, my hint, that I might be happier, if, by any rashness
he might be guilty of to Solmes, he should come to an untimely end
himself.'

He is concerned, he says, 'That the violence he had expressed on his
extreme apprehensiveness of losing me, should have made him guilty of
any thing I had so much reason to resent.'

He owns, 'That he is passionate: all good-natured men, he says, are so;
and a sincere man cannot hide it.' But appeals to me, 'Whether, if any
occasion in the world could excuse the rashness of his expressions, it
would not be his present dreadful situation, through my indifference,
and the malice of his enemies.'

He says, 'He has more reason than ever, from the contents of my last,
to apprehend, that I shall be prevailed upon by force, if not by fair
means, to fall in with my brother's measures; and sees but too plainly,
that I am preparing him to expect it.

'Upon this presumption, he supplicates, with the utmost earnestness,
that I will not give way to the malice of his enemies.

'Solemn vows of reformation, and everlasting truth and obligingness,
he makes; all in the style of desponding humility: yet calls it a cruel
turn upon him, to impute his protestations to a consciousness of the
necessity there is for making them from his bad character.

'He despises himself, he solemnly protests, for his past follies. He
thanks God he has seen his error; and nothing but my more particular
instructions is wanting to perfect his reformation.

'He promises, that he will do every thing that I shall think he can do
with honour, to bring about a reconciliation with my father; and even
will, if I insist upon it, make the first overtures to my brother, and
treat him as his own brother, because he is mine, if he will not by new
affronts revive the remembrance of the past.

'He begs, in the most earnest and humble manner, for one half-hour's
interview; undertaking by a key, which he owns he has to the
garden-door, leading into the coppice, as we call it, (if I will but
unbolt the door,) to come into the garden at night, and wait till I have
an opportunity to come to him, that he may re-assure me of the truth of
all he writes, and of the affection, and, if needful, protection, of all
his family.

'He presumes not, he says, to write by way of menace to me; but if I
refuse him this favour, he knows not (so desperate have some strokes in
my letter made him) what his despair may make him do.'

He asks me, 'Determined, as my friends are, and far as they have already
gone, and declare they will go, what can I propose to do, to avoid
having Mr. Solmes, if I am carried to my uncle Antony's; unless I
resolve to accept of the protection he has offered to procure me; or
except I will escape to London, or elsewhere, while I can escape?'

He advises me, 'To sue to your mother, for her private reception of
me; only till I can obtain possession of my own estate, and procure my
friends to be reconciled to me; which he is sure they will be desirous
to be, the moment I am out of their power.'

He apprizes me, [It is still my wonder, how he comes by this
intelligence!] 'That my friends have written to my cousin Morden to
represent matters to him in their own partial way; nor doubt they to
influence him on their side of the question.

'That all this shews I have but one way; if none of my friends or
intimates will receive me.

'If I will transport him with the honour of my choice of this one way,
settlements shall be drawn, with proper blanks, which I shall fill up as
I pleased. Let him but have my commands from my own mouth, all my doubts
and scruples from my own lips; and only a repetition, that I will not,
on any consideration, be Solmes's wife; and he shall be easy. But, after
such a letter as I have written, nothing but an interview can make him
so.' He beseeches me therefore, 'To unbolt the door, as that very night;
or, if I receive not this time enough, this night;--and he will, in a
disguise that shall not give suspicion who he is, if he should be seen,
come to the garden door, in hopes to open it with his key; nor will he
have any other lodging than in the coppice both nights; watching every
wakeful hour for the propitious unbolting, unless he has a letter with
my orders to the contrary, or to make some other appointment.'

This letter was dated yesterday: so he was there last night, I suppose;
and will be there this night; and I have not written a line to him: and
now it is too late, were I determined what to write.

I hope he will not go to Mr. Solmes.--I hope he will not come
hither.--If he do either, I will break with him for ever.

What have I to do with these headstrong spirits? I wish I had never--but
what signifies wishing?--I am strangely perplexed: but I need not have
told you this, after such a representation of my situation.




LETTER XVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY MORNING, 7 O'CLOCK

My uncle has vouchsafed to answer me. These that follow are the
contents of his letter; but just now brought me, although written last
night--late I suppose.


MONDAY NIGHT.

MISS CLARY,

Since you are grown such a bold challenger, and teach us all our duty,
though you will not practise your own, I must answer you. Nobody
wants you estate from you. Are you, who refuse ever body's advice,
to prescribe a husband to your sister? Your letter to Mr. Solmes is
inexcusable. I blamed you for it before. Your parents will be obeyed. It
is fit they should. Your mother has nevertheless prevailed to have your
going to your uncle Antony's put off till Thursday: yet owns you deserve
not that, or any other favour from her. I will receive no more of
your letters. You are too artful for me. You are an ungrateful and
unreasonable child: Must you have your way paramount to every body's?
How are you altered.

Your displeased uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.


*****


To be carried away on Thursday--To the moated house--To the chapel--To
Solmes! How can I think of this!--They will make me desperate.


TUESDAY MORNING, 8 O'CLOCK.

I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. I opened it with the
expectation of its being filled with bold and free complaints, on my
not writing to prevent his two nights watching, in weather not extremely
agreeable. But, instead of complaints, he is 'full of tender concern
lest I may have been prevented by indisposition, or by the closer
confinement which he has frequently cautioned me that I may expect.'

He says, 'He had been in different disguises loitering about our garden
and park wall, all the day on Sunday last; and all Sunday night was
wandering about the coppice, and near the back door. It rained; and he
has got a great cold, attended with feverishness, and so hoarse, that he
has almost lost his voice.'

Why did he not flame out in his letter?--Treated as I am treated by my
friends, it is dangerous to be laid under the sense of an obligation to
an addresser's patience; especially when such a one suffers in health
for my sake.

'He had no shelter, he says, but under the great overgrown ivy, which
spreads wildly round the heads of two or three oaklings; and that was
soon wet through.'

You remember the spot. You and I, my dear, once thought ourselves
obliged to the natural shade which those ivy-covered oaklings afforded
us, in a sultry day.

I can't help saying, I am sorry he has suffered for my sake; but 'tis
his own seeking.

His letter is dated last night at eight: 'And, indisposed as he is,
he tells me that he will watch till ten, in hopes of my giving him the
meeting he so earnestly request. And after that, he has a mile to walk
to his horse and servant; and four miles then to ride to his inn.'

He owns, 'That he has an intelligencer in our family; who has failed
him for a day or two past: and not knowing how I do, or how I may be
treated, his anxiety is increased.'

This circumstance gives me to guess who this intelligencer is: Joseph
Leman: the very creature employed and confided in, more than any other,
by my brother.

This is not an honourable way of proceeding in Mr. Lovelace. Did
he learn this infamous practice of corrupting the servants of other
families at the French court, where he resided a good while?

I have been often jealous of this Leman in my little airings and
poultry-visits. Doubly obsequious as he was always to me, I have
thought him my brother's spy upon me; and although he obliged me by
his hastening out of the garden and poultry-yard, whenever I came into
either, have wondered, that from his reports my liberties of those kinds
have not been abridged.* So, possibly, this man may be bribed by both,
yet betray both. Worthy views want not such obliquities as these on
either side. An honest mind must rise into indignation both at the
traitor-maker and the traitor.


     * Mr. Lovelace accounts for this, Vol. I, Letter XXXV.


'He presses with the utmost earnestness for an interview. He would not
presume, he says, to disobey my last personal commands, that he should
not endeavour to attend me again in the wood-house. But says, he can
give me such reasons for my permitting him to wait upon my father
or uncles, as he hopes will be approved by me: for he cannot help
observing, that it is no more suitable to my own spirit than to his,
that he, a man of fortune and family, should be obliged to pursue such a
clandestine address, as would only become a vile fortune-hunter. But, if
I will give my consent for his visiting me like a man, and a gentleman,
no ill treatment shall provoke him to forfeit his temper.

'Lord M. will accompany him, if I please: or Lady Betty Lawrance will
first make the visit to my mother, or to my aunt Hervey, or even to my
uncles, if I choose it. And such terms shall be offered, as shall have
weight upon them.

'He begs, that I will not deny him making a visit to Mr. Solmes. By
all that's good, he vows, that it shall not be with the least intention
either to hurt or affront him; but only to set before him, calmly and
rationally, the consequences that may possibly flow from so fruitless a
perseverance, as well as the ungenerous folly of it, to a mind as noble
as mine. He repeats his own resolution to attend my pleasure, and Mr.
Morden's arrival and advice, for the reward of his own patience.

'It is impossible, he says, but one of these methods must do.
Presence, he observes, even of a disliked person, takes off the edge of
resentments which absence whets, and makes keen.

'He therefore most earnestly repeats his importunities for the
supplicated interview.' He says, 'He has business of consequence in
London: but cannot stir from the inconvenient spot where he has for
some time resided, in disguises unworthy of himself, until he can be
absolutely certain, that I shall not be prevailed upon, either by force
or otherwise; and until he finds me delivered from the insults of my
brother. Nor ought this to be an indifferent point to one, for whose
sake all the world reports me to be used unworthily. But one remark, he
says, he cannot help making: that did my friends know the little favour
I shew him, and the very great distance I keep him at, they would
have no reason to confine me on his account. And another, that they
themselves seem to think him entitled to a different usage, and expect
that he receives it; when, in truth, what he meets with from me is
exactly what they wish him to meet with, excepting in the favour of
my correspondence I honour him with; upon which, he says, he puts the
highest value, and for the sake of which he has submitted to a thousand
indignities.

'He renews his professions of reformation. He is convinced, he says,
that he has already run a long and dangerous course; and that it is high
time to think of returning. It must be from proper conviction, he says,
that a person who has lived too gay a life, resolves to reclaim, before
age or sufferings come upon him.

'All generous spirits, he observes, hate compulsion. Upon this
observation he dwells; but regrets, that he is likely to owe all his
hopes to this compulsion; this injudicious compulsion, he justly calls
it; and none to my esteem for him. Although he presumes upon some
merit--in this implicit regard to my will--in the bearing the daily
indignities offered not only to him, but to his relations, by my
brother--in the nightly watchings, his present indisposition makes him
mention, or he had not debased the nobleness of his passion for me, by
such a selfish instance.'

I cannot but say, I am sorry the man is not well.

I am afraid to ask you, my dear, what you would have done, thus
situated. But what I have done, I have done. In a word, I wrote, 'That
I would, if possible, give him a meeting to-morrow night, between the
hours of nine and twelve, by the ivy summer-house, or in it, or near the
great cascade, at the bottom of the garden; and would unbolt the door,
that he might come in by his own key. But that, if I found the meeting
impracticable, or should change my mind, I would signify as much by
another line; which he must wait for until it were dark.'


TUESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

I am just returned from depositing my billet. How diligent is this man!
It is plain he was in waiting: for I had walked but a few paces, after I
had deposited it, when, my heart misgiving me, I returned, to have taken
it back, in order to reconsider it as I walked, and whether I should or
should not let it go. But I found it gone.

In all probability, there was but a brick wall, of a few inches thick,
between Mr. Lovelace and me, at the very time I put the letter under the
brick!

I am come back dissatisfied with myself. But I think, my dear, there
can be no harm in meeting him. If I do not, he may take some violent
measures. What he knows of the treatment I meet with in malice to him,
and with the view to frustrate all his hopes, may make him desperate.
His behaviour last time I saw him, under the disadvantages of time and
place, and surprised as I was, gives me no apprehension of any thing but
discovery. What he requires is not unreasonable, and cannot affect my
future choice and determination: it is only to assure him from my own
lips, that I never will be the wife of a man I hate. If I have not an
opportunity to meet without hazard or detection, he must once more
bear the disappointment. All his trouble, and mine too, is owing to his
faulty character. This, although I hate tyranny and arrogance in all
shapes, makes me think less of the risques he runs, and the fatigues he
undergoes, than otherwise I should do; and still less, as my sufferings
(derived from the same source) are greater than his.

Betty confirms this intimation, that I must go to my uncle's on
Thursday. She was sent on purpose to direct me to prepare myself for
going, and to help me to get every thing up in order for my removal.




LETTER XIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY, THREE O'CLOCK, MARCH 28.


I have mentioned several times the pertness of Mrs. Betty to me;
and now, having a little time upon my hands, I will give you a short
dialogue that passed just now between us. It may, perhaps, be a little
relief to you from the dull subjects with which I am perpetually teasing
you.

As she attended me at dinner, she took notice, That Nature is satisfied
with a very little nourishment: and thus she complimentally proved
it--For, Miss, said she, you eat nothing; yet never looked more
charmingly in your life.

As to the former part of your speech, Betty, said I, you observe well;
and I have often thought, when I have seen how healthy the children of
the labouring poor look, and are, with empty stomachs, and hardly a good
meal in a week, that God Almighty is very kind to his creatures, in this
respect, as well as in all others in making much not necessary to the
support of life; when three parts in four of His creatures, if it were,
would not know how to obtain it. It puts me in mind of two proverbial
sentences which are full of admirable meaning.

What, pray, Miss, are they? I love to hear you talk, when you are so
sedate as you seem now to be.

The one is to the purpose we are speaking of: Poverty is the mother of
health. And let me tell you, Betty, if I had a better appetite, and
were to encourage it, with so little rest, and so much distress and
persecution, I don't think I should be able to preserve my reason.

There's no inconvenience but has its convenience, said Betty, giving me
proverb for proverb. But what is the other, Madam?

That the pleasures of the mighty are not obtained by the tears of the
poor. It is but reasonable, therefore, methinks, that the plenty of
the one should be followed by distempers; and that the indigence of the
other should be attended with that health, which makes all its other
discomforts light on the comparison. And hence a third proverb, Betty,
since you are an admirer of proverbs: Better a hare-foot than none at
all; that is to say, than not to be able to walk.

She was mightily taken with what I said: See, returned she, what a fine
thing scholarship is!--I, said she, had always, from a girl, a taste for
reading, though it were but in Mother Goose, and concerning the fairies
[and then she took genteelly a pinch of snuff]: could but my parents
have let go as fast as I pulled, I should have been a very happy
creature.

Very likely, you would have made great improvements, Betty: but as it
is, I cannot say, but since I had the favour of your attendance in this
intimate manner, I have heard smarter things from you, than I have heard
at table from some of my brother's fellow-collegians.

Your servant, dear Miss; dropping me one of her best courtesies: so
fine a judge as you are!--It is enough to make one very proud. Then with
another pinch--I cannot indeed but say, bridling upon it, that I have
heard famous scholars often and often say very silly things: things
I should be ashamed myself to say; but I thought they did it out of
humility, and in condescension to those who had not their learning.

That she might not be too proud, I told her, I would observe, that the
liveliness or quickness she so happily discovered in herself, was not
so much an honour to her, as what she owed to her sex; which, as I had
observed in many instances, had great advantages over the other, in all
the powers that related to imagination. And hence, Mrs. Betty, you'll
take notice, as I have of late had opportunity to do, that your own
talent at repartee and smartness, when it has something to work upon,
displays itself to more advantage, than could well be expected from one
whose friends, to speak in your own phrase, could not let go so fast as
you pulled.

The wench gave me a proof of the truth of my observation, in a manner
still more alert than I had expected: If, said she, our sex had so much
advantage in smartness, it is the less to be wondered at, that you,
Miss, who have had such an education, should outdo all the men and women
too, that come near you.

Bless me, Betty, said I, what a proof do you give me of your wit and
your courage at the same time! This is outdoing yourself. It would make
young ladies less proud, and more apprehensive, were they generally
attended by such smart servants, and their mouths permitted to be
unlocked upon them as yours has been lately upon me.--But, take away,
Mrs. Betty.

Why, Miss, you have eat nothing at all--I hope you are not displeased
with your dinner for any thing I have said.

No, Mrs. Betty, I am pretty well used to your freedoms now, you know.--I
am not displeased in the main, to observe, that, were the succession of
modern fine ladies to be extinct, it might be supplied from those whom
they place in the next rank to themselves, their chamber-maids and
confidants. Your young mistress has contributed a great deal to this
quickness of yours. She always preferred your company to mine. As
you pulled, she let go; and so, Mrs. Betty, you have gained by her
conversation what I have lost.

Why, Miss, if you come to that, nobody says better things than Miss
Harlowe. I could tell you one, if I pleased, upon my observing to her,
that you lived of late upon the air, and had no stomach to any thing;
yet looked as charmingly as ever.

I dare say, it was a very good-natured one, Mrs. Betty! Do you then
please that I shall hear it?

Only this, Miss, That your stomachfulness had swallowed up your stomach;
and, That obstinacy was meat, drink, and clothes to you.

Ay, Mrs. Betty; and did she say this?--I hope she laughed when she said
it, as she does at all her good things, as she calls them. It was very
smart, and very witty. I wish my mind were so much at ease, as to aim at
being witty too. But if you admire such sententious sayings, I'll help
you to another; and that is, Encouragement and approbation make people
show talents they were never suspected to have; and this will do both
for mistress and maid. And another I'll furnish you with, the
contrary of the former, that will do only for me: That persecution and
discouragement depress ingenuous minds, and blunt the edge of lively
imaginations. And hence may my sister's brilliancy and my stupidity be
both accounted for. Ingenuous, you must know, Mrs. Betty, and ingenious,
are two things; and I would not arrogate the latter to myself.

Lord, Miss, said the foolish girl, you know a great deal for your
years.--You are a very learned young lady!--What pity--

None of your pitties, Mrs. Betty, I know what you'd say. But tell me, if
you can, Is it resolved that I shall be carried to my uncle Antony's on
Thursday?

I was willing to reward myself for the patience she had made me
exercise, by getting at what intelligence I could from her.

Why, Miss, seating herself at a little distance (excuse my sitting down)
with the snuff-box tapped very smartly, the lid opened, and a
pinch taken with a dainty finger and thumb, the other three fingers
distendedly bent, and with a fine flourish--I cannot but say, that it is
my opinion, you will certainly go on Thursday; and this noless foless,
as I have heard my young lady say in FRENCH.

Whether I am willing or not willing, you mean, I suppose, Mrs. Betty?

You have it, Miss.

Well but, Betty, I have no mind to be turned out of doors so suddenly.
Do you think I could not be permitted to tarry one week longer?

How can I tell, Miss?

O Mrs. Betty, you can tell a great deal, if you please. But here I am
forbid writing to any one of my family; none of it now will come near
me; nor will any of it permit me to see them: How shall I do to make
known my request, to stay here a week or fortnight longer?

Why, Miss, I fancy, if you were to shew a compliable temper, your
friends would shew a compliable one too. But would you expect favours,
and grant none?

Smartly put, Betty! But who knows what may be the result of my being
carried to my uncle Antony's?

Who knows, Miss!--Why any body will guess what may be the result.

As how, Betty?

As how! repeated the pert wench, Why, Miss, you will stand in your own
light, as you have hitherto done: and your parents, as such good parents
ought, will be obeyed.

If, Mrs. Betty, I had not been used to your oughts, and to have my duty
laid down to me by your oraculous wisdom I should be apt to stare at the
liberty of you speech.

You seem angry, Miss. I hope I take no unbecoming liberty.

If thou really thinkest thou dost not, thy ignorance is more to be
pitied, than thy pertness resented. I wish thou wouldst leave me to
myself.

When young ladies fall out with their own duty, it is not much to be
wondered at, that they are angry at any body who do theirs.

That's a very pretty saying, Mrs. Betty!--I see plainly what thy duty is
in thy notion, and am obliged to those who taught it thee.

Every body takes notice, Miss, that you can say very cutting words in a
cool manner, and yet not call names, as I have known some gentlefolks
as well as others do when in a passion. But I wish you had permitted
'Squire Solmes to see you: he would have told you such stories of
'Squire Lovelace, as you would have turned your heart against him for
ever.

And know you any of the particulars of those sad stories?

Indeed I don't; but you'll hear all at your uncle Antony's, I suppose;
and a great deal more perhaps than you will like to hear.

Let me hear what I will, I am determined against Mr. Solmes, were it to
cost me my life.

If you are, Miss, the Lord have mercy on you! For what with this letter
of yours to 'Squire Solmes, whom they so much value, and what with
their antipathy to 'Squire Lovelace, whom they hate, they will have no
patience with you.

What will they do, Betty? They won't kill me? What will they do?

Kill you! No!--But you will not be suffered to stir from thence, till
you have complied with your duty. And no pen and ink will be allowed you
as here; where they are of opinion you make no good use of it: nor would
it be allowed here, only as they intend so soon to send you away to your
uncle's. No-body will be permitted to see you, or to correspond with
you. What farther will be done, I can't say; and, if I could, it may not
be proper. But you may prevent all, by one word: and I wish you would,
Miss. All then would be easy and happy. And, if I may speak my mind, I
see not why one man is not as good as another: why, especially, a sober
man is not as good as a rake.

Well, Betty, said I, sighing, all thy impertinence goes for nothing. But
I see I am destined to be a very unhappy creature. Yet I will venture
upon one request more to them.

And so, quite sick of the pert creature and of myself, I retired to my
closet, and wrote a few lines to my uncle Harlowe, notwithstanding his
prohibition; in order to get a reprieve from being carried away so soon
as Thursday next, if I must go. And this, that I might, if complied
with, suspend the appointment I have made with Mr. Lovelace; for my
heart misgives me as to meeting him; and that more and more; I know not
why. Under the superscription of the letter, I wrote these words: 'Pray,
dear Sir, be pleased to give this a reading.'

This is a copy of what I wrote:


TUESDAY AFTERNOON.

HONOURED SIR,

Let me this once be heard with patience, and have my petition granted.
It is only, that I may not be hurried away so soon as next Thursday.

Why should the poor girl be turned out of doors so suddenly, so
disgracefully? Procure for me, Sir, one fortnight's respite. In that
space of time, I hope you will all relent. My mamma shall not need to
shut her door in apprehension of seeing her disgraceful child. I will
not presume to think of entering her presence, or my papa's without
leave. One fortnight's respite is but a small favour for them to grant,
except I am to be refused every thing I ask; but it is of the highest
import to my peace of mind. Procure it for me, therefore, dearest Sir;
and you will exceedingly oblige

Your dutiful, though greatly afflicted niece, CL. HARLOWE.


I sent this down: my uncle was not gone: and he now stays to know the
result of the question put to me in the enclosed answer which he has
given to mind.


Your going to your uncle's was absolutely concluded upon for next
Thursday. Nevertheless, your mother, seconded by Mr. Solmes, pleaded
so strongly to have you indulged, that your request for a delay will
be complied with, upon one condition; and whether for a fortnight, or
a shorter time, that will depend upon yourself. If you refuse the
condition, your mother declares she will give over all further
intercession for you.--Nor do you deserve this favour, as you put it
upon our yielding to you, not you to us.

This condition is, that you admit of a visit from Mr. Solmes, for one
hour, in company of your brother, your sister, or your uncle Antony,
choose who you will.

If you comply not, go next Thursday to a house which is become strangely
odious to you of late, whether you get ready to go or not. Answer
therefore directly to the point. No evasion. Name your day and hour. Mr.
Solmes will neither eat you, nor drink you. Let us see, whether we are
to be complied with in any thing, or not.

JOHN HARLOWE.


*****


After a very little deliberation, I resolved to comply with this
condition. All I fear is, that Mr. Lovelace's intelligencer may inform
him of it; and that his apprehensions upon it may make him take some
desperate resolution: especially as now (having more time given me here)
I think to write to him to suspend the interview he is possibly so sure
of. I sent down the following to my uncle:


HONOURED SIR,

Although I see not what end the proposed condition can answer, I comply
with it. I wish I could with every thing expected of me. If I must name
one, in whose company I am to see the gentleman, and that one not my
mamma, whose presence I could wish to be honoured by on the occasion,
let my uncle, if he pleases, be the person. If I must name the day, (a
long day, I doubt, will not be permitted me,) let it be next Tuesday.

The hour, four in the afternoon. The place either the ivy summer-house,
or in the little parlour I used to be permitted to call mine.

Be pleased, Sir, nevertheless, to prevail upon my mamma, to vouchsafe me
her presence on the occasion.

I am, Sir, your ever-dutiful CL. HARLOWE.


A reply is just sent me. I thought it became my averseness to this
meeting, to name a distant day: but I did not expect they would have
complied with it. So here is one week gained!

This is the reply:


You have done well to comply. We are willing to think the best of every
slight instance of duty from you. Yet have you seemed to consider the
day as an evil day, and so put if far off. This nevertheless is granted
you, as no time need to be lost, if you are as generous after the day,
as we are condescending before it. Let me advise you, not to harden your
mind; nor take up your resolution beforehand. Mr. Solmes has more awe,
and even terror, at the thought of seeing you, than you can have at the
thoughts of seeing him. His motive is love; let not yours be hatred. My
brother Antony will be present, in hopes you will deserve well of him,
by behaving well to the friend of the family. See you use him as such.
Your mother had permission to be there, if she thought fit: but says,
she would not for a thousand pound, unless you would encourage her
beforehand as she wishes to be encouraged. One hint I am to give you
mean time. It is this: To make a discreet use of your pen and ink.
Methinks a young creature of niceness should be less ready to write to
one man, when she is designed to be another's.

This compliance, I hope, will produce greater, and then the peace of the
family will be restored: which is what is heartily wished by

Your loving uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.

Unless it be to the purpose our hearts are set upon, you need not write
again.


*****


This man have more terror at seeing me, than I can have at seeing
him!--How can that be? If he had half as much, he would not wish to see
me!--His motive love!--Yes, indeed! Love of himself! He knows no other;
for love, that deserves the name, seeks the satisfaction of the beloved
object more than its own. Weighed in this scale, what a profanation is
this man guilty of!

Not to take up my resolution beforehand!--That advice comes too late.

But I must make a discreet use of my pen. That, I doubt, as they have
managed it, in the sense they mean it, is as much out of my power, as
the other.

But write to one man, when I am designed for another!--What a shocking
expression is that!

Repenting of my appointment with Mr. Lovelace before I had this favour
granted me, you may believe I hesitated not a moment to revoke it now
that I had gained such a respite. Accordingly, I wrote, 'That I found
it inconvenient to meet him, as I had intended: that the risque I should
run of a discovery, and the mischiefs that might flow from it, could not
be justified by any end that such a meeting could answer: that I found
one certain servant more in my way, when I took my morning and evening
airings, than any other: that the person who might reveal the secrets
of a family to him, might, if opportunity were given him, betray me, or
him, to those whom it was his duty to serve: that I had not been used to
a conduct so faulty, as to lay myself at the mercy of servants: and was
sorry he had measures to pursue, that made steps necessary in his own
opinion, which, in mine, were very culpable, and which no end could
justify: that things drawing towards a crisis between my friends and me,
an interview could avail nothing; especially as the method by which this
correspondence was carried on was not suspected, and he could write all
that was in his mind to write: that I expected to be at liberty to judge
of what was proper and fit upon this occasion: especially as he might be
assured, that I would sooner choose death, than Mr. Solmes.'


TUESDAY NIGHT.

I have deposited my letter to Mr. Lovelace. Threatening as things look
against me, I am much better pleased with myself for declining the
interview than I was before. I suppose he will be a little out of humour
upon it, however: but as I reserved to myself the liberty of changing my
mind; and as it is easy for him to imagine there may be reasons for it
within-doors, which he cannot judge of without; besides those I have
suggested, which of themselves are of sufficient weight to engage his
acquiescence; I should think it strange, if he acquiesces not on this
occasion, and that with a cheerfulness, which may shew me, that his last
letter is written from his heart: For, if he be really so much concerned
at his past faults, as he pretends, and has for some time pretended,
must he not, of course, have corrected, in some degree, the impetuosity
of his temper? The first step to reformation, as I conceive, is to
subdue sudden gusts of passion, from which frequently the greatest evils
arise, and to learn to bear disappointments. If the irascible passions
cannot be overcome, what opinion can we have of the person's power over
those to which bad habit, joined to greater temptation, gives stronger
force?

Pray, my dear, be so kind as to make inquiry, by some safe hand, after
the disguises Mr. Lovelace assumes at the inn he puts up at in the poor
village of Neale, he calls it. If it be the same I take it to be, I
never knew it was considerable enough to have a name; nor that it has an
inn in it.

As he must, to be so constantly near us, be much there, I would be glad
to have some account of his behaviour; and what the people think of him.
In such a length of time, he must by his conduct either give scandal,
or hope of reformation. Pray, my dear, humour me in this inquiry. I have
reason for it, which you shall be acquainted with another time, if the
result of the inquiry discover them not.




LETTER XX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY MORNING, NINE O'CLOCK.


I am just returned from my morning walk, and already have received a
letter from Mr. Lovelace in answer to mine deposited last night. He
must have had pen, ink, and paper with him; for it was written in the
coppice; with this circumstance: On one knee, kneeling with the other.
Not from reverence to the written to, however, as you'll find!

Well we are instructed early to keep these men at distance. An
undesigning open heart, where it is loth to disoblige, is easily drawn
in, I see, to oblige more than ever it designed. It is too apt to govern
itself by what a bold spirit is encouraged to expect of it. It is very
difficult for a good-natured young person to give a negative where it
disesteems not.

Our hearts may harden and contract, as we gain experience, and when we
have smarted perhaps for our easy folly: and so they ought, or we should
be upon very unequal terms with the world.

Excuse these grave reflections. This man has vexed me heartily. I see
his gentleness was art: fierceness, and a temper like what I have been
too much used to at home, are Nature in him. Nothing, I think, shall
ever make me forgive him; for, surely, there can be no good reason for
his impatience on an expectation given with reserve, and revocable.--I
so much to suffer through him; yet, to be treated as if I were obliged
to bear insults from him--!

But here you will be pleased to read his letter; which I shall enclose.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

GOOD GOD!

What is now to become of me!--How shall I support this
disappointment!--No new cause!--On one knee, kneeling with the other, I
write!--My feet benumbed with midnight wanderings through the heaviest
dews that ever fell: my wig and my linen dripping with the hoar frost
dissolving on them!--Day but just breaking--Sun not risen to exhale--May
it never rise again!--Unless it bring healing and comfort to a benighted
soul! In proportion to the joy you had inspired (ever lovely promiser!)
in such proportion is my anguish!

O my beloved creature!--But are not your very excuses confessions of
excuses inexcusable? I know not what I write!--That servant in your
way!* By the great God of Heaven, that servant was not, dared not, could
not, be in your way!--Curse upon the cool caution that is pleased to
deprive me of an expectation so transporting!


     * See Letter XIX.


And are things drawing towards a crisis between your friends and
you?--Is not this a reason for me to expect, the rather to expect, the
promised interview?

CAN I write all that is in my mind, say you?--Impossible!--Not the
hundredth part of what is in my mind, and in my apprehension, can I
write!

Oh! the wavering, the changeable sex!--But can Miss Clarissa Harlowe--

Forgive me, Madam!--I know not what I write!

Yet, I must, I do, insist upon your promise--or that you will condescend
to find better excuses for the failure--or convince me, that stronger
reasons are imposed upon you, than those you offer.--A promise once
given (upon deliberation given,) the promised only can dispense with;
except in cases of a very apparent necessity imposed upon the promiser,
which leaves no power to perform it.

The first promise you ever made me! Life and death perhaps depending
upon it--my heart desponding from the barbarous methods resolved to be
taken with you in malice to me!

You would sooner choose death than Solmes. (How my soul spurns the
competition!) O my beloved creature, what are these but words?--Whose
words?--Sweet and ever adorable--What?--Promise breaker--must I call
you?--How shall I believe the asseveration, (your supposed duty in the
question! Persecution so flaming!--Hatred to me so strongly avowed!)
after this instance of you so lightly dispensing with your promise?

If, my dearest life! you would prevent my distraction, or, at least,
distracted consequences, renew the promised hope!--My fate is indeed
upon its crisis.

Forgive me, dearest creature, forgive me!--I know I have written in too
much anguish of mind!--Writing this, in the same moment that the just
dawning light has imparted to me the heavy disappointment.

I dare not re-peruse what I have written. I must deposit it. It may
serve to shew you my distracted apprehension that this disappointment is
but a prelude to the greatest of all.--Nor, having here any other paper,
am I able to write again, if I would, on this gloomy spot. (Gloomy is
my soul; and all Nature around me partakes of my gloom!)--I trust it
therefore to your goodness--if its fervour excite your displeasure
rather than your pity, you wrong my passion; and I shall be ready to
apprehend, that I am intended to be the sacrifice of more miscreants
than one! [Have patience with me, dearest creature!--I mean Solmes and
your brother only.] But if, exerting your usual generosity, you will
excuse and re appoint, may that God, whom you profess to serve, and who
is the God of truth and of promises, protect and bless you, for both;
and for restoring to himself, and to hope,

Your ever-adoring, yet almost desponding, LOVELACE!

Ivy Cavern, in the Coppice--Day but just breaking.


*****


This is the answer I shall return:


WEDNESDAY MORNING.

I am amazed, Sir, at the freedom of your reproaches. Pressed and teased,
against convenience and inclination, to give you a private meeting, am I
to be thus challenged and upbraided, and my sex reflected upon, because
I thought it prudent to change my mind?--A liberty I had reserved
to myself, when I made the appointment, as you call it. I wanted not
instances of your impatient spirit to other people: yet may it be happy
for me, that I can have this new one; which shows, that you can as
little spare me, when I pursue the dictates of my own reason, as you do
others, for acting up to theirs. Two motives you must be governed by in
this excess. The one my easiness; the other your own presumption. Since
you think you have found out the first, and have shown so much of the
last upon it, I am too much alarmed, not to wish and desire, that your
letter of this day may conclude all the trouble you had from, or for,

Your humble servant, CL. HARLOWE.


*****


I believe, my dear, I may promise myself your approbation, whenever I
write or speak with spirit, be it to whom it will. Indeed, I find but
too much reason to exert it, since I have to deal with people, who
govern themselves in their conduct to me, not by what is fit or decent,
right or wrong, but by what they think my temper will bear. I have, till
very lately, been praised for mine; but it has always been by those who
never gave me opportunity to return the compliment to them. Some people
have acted, as if they thought forbearance on one side absolutely
necessary for them and me to be upon good terms together; and in this
case have ever taken care rather to owe that obligation than to lay it.
You have hinted to me, that resentment is not natural to my temper, and
that therefore it must soon subside: it may be so with respect to my
relations; but not to Mr. Lovelace, I assure you.


WEDNESDAY NOON, MARCH 29.

We cannot always answer for what we can do: but to convince you, that I
can keep my above resolution, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, angry as my
letter is, and three hours since it was written, I assure you, that I
repent it not; nor will soften it, although I find it is not taken away.
And yet I hardly ever before did any thing in anger, that I did not
repent in half an hour; and question myself in less that that time,
whether I was right or wrong.

In this respite till Tuesday, I have a little time to look about me,
as I may say, and to consider of what I have to do, and can do. And Mr.
Lovelace's insolence will make me go very home with myself. Not that I
think I can conquer my aversion to Mr. Solmes. I am sure I cannot. But,
if I absolutely break with Mr. Lovelace, and give my friends convincing
proofs of it, who knows but they will restore me to their favour, and
let their views in relation to the other man go off by degrees?--Or,
at least, that I may be safe till my cousin Morden arrives: to whom,
I think, I will write; and the rather, as Mr. Lovelace has assured
me, that my friends have written to him to make good their side of the
question.

But, with all my courage, I am exceedingly apprehensive about the
Tuesday next, and about what may result from my steadfastness; for
steadfast I am sure I shall be. They are resolved, I am told, to try
every means to induce me to comply with what they are determined upon.
And I am resolved to do all I can to avoid what they would force me to
do. A dreadful contention between parents and child!--Each hoping to
leave the other without excuse, whatever the consequence may be.

What can I do? Advise me, my dear. Something is strangely wrong
somewhere! to make parents, the most indulgent till now, seem cruel in
a child's eye; and a daughter, till within these few weeks, thought
unexceptionably dutiful, appear, in their judgment, a rebel!--Oh! my
ambitious and violent brother! What may he have to answer for to both!

Be pleased to remember, my dear, that your last favour was dated on
Saturday. This is Wednesday: and none of mine have been taken away
since. Don't let me want you advice. My situation is extremely
difficult.--But I am sure you love me still: and not the less on that
account. Adieu, my beloved friend.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXI

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING, DAY-BREAK, MARCH
30.

An accident, and not remissness, has occasioned my silence.

My mother was sent for on Sunday night by her cousin Larkin, whom I
mentioned in one of my former, and who was extremely earnest to see her.

This poor woman was always afraid of death, and was one of those weak
persons who imagine that the making of their will must be an undoubted
forerunner of it.

She had always said, when urged to the necessary work, That whenever she
made it, she should not live long after; and, one would think, imagined
she was under an obligation to prove her words: for, though she had been
long bed-rid, and was, in a manner, worn out before, yet she thought
herself better, till she was persuaded to make it: and from that moment,
remembering what she used to prognosticate, (her fears, helping on what
she feared, as is often the case, particularly in the small-pox,) grew
worse; and had it in her head once to burn her will, in hopes to grow
better upon it.

She sent my mother word, that the doctors had given her over: but that
she could not die till she saw her. I told my mother, That if she wished
her a chance for recovery, she should not, for that reason, go. But go
she would; and, what was worse, would make me go with her; and that, at
an hour's warning; for she said nothing of it to me, till she was rising
in the morning early, resolving to return again at night. Had there been
more time for argumentation, to be sure I had not gone; but as it was,
there was a kind of necessity that my preparation to obey her, should,
in a manner, accompany her command.--A command so much out of the way,
on such a solemn occasion! And this I represented: but to no purpose:
There never was such a contradicting girl in the world--My wisdom
always made her a fool!--But she would be obliged this time, proper or
improper.

I have but one way of accounting for this sudden whim of my mother; and
that is this--She had a mind to accept of Mr. Hickman's offer to escort
her:--and I verily believe [I wish I were quite sure of it] had a mind
to oblige him with my company--as far as I know, to keep me out of
worse.

For, would you believe it?--as sure as you are alive, she is afraid for
her favourite Hickman, because of the long visit your Lovelace, though
so much by accident, made me in her absence, last time she was at the
same place. I hope, my dear, you are not jealous too. But indeed I
now-and-then, when she teases me with praises which Hickman cannot
deserve, in return fall to praising those qualities and personalities in
Lovelace, which the other never will have. Indeed I do love to tease a
little bit, that I do.--My mamma's girl--I had like to have said.

As you know she is as passionate, as I am pert, you will not wonder to
be told, that we generally fall out on these occasions. She flies from
me, at the long run. It would be undutiful in me to leave her first--and
then I get an opportunity to pursue our correspondence.

For, now I am rambling, let me tell you, that she does not much favour
that;--for two reasons, I believe:--One, that I don't shew her all that
passes between us; the other, that she thinks I harden your mind against
your duty, as it is called. And with her, for a reason at home, as I
have hinted more than once, parents cannot do wrong; children cannot
oppose, and be right. This obliges me now-and-then to steal an hour, as
I may say, and not let her know how I am employed.

You may guess from what I have written, how averse I was to comply with
such an unreasonable stretch of motherly authority. But it came to be a
test of duty; so I was obliged to yield, though with a full persuasion
of being in the right.

I have always your reproofs upon these occasions: in your late letters
stronger than ever. A good reason why, you'll say, because more deserved
than ever. I thank you kindly for your correction. I hope to make
correction of it. But let me tell you, that your stripes, whether
deserved or not, have made me sensible, deeper than the skin--but of
this another time.

It was Monday afternoon before we reached the old lady's house. That
fiddling, parading fellow [you know who I mean] made us wait for him two
hours, and I to go to a journey I disliked! only for the sake of having
a little more tawdry upon his housings; which he had hurried his sadler
to put on, to make him look fine, being to escort his dear Madam Howe,
and her fair daughter. I told him, that I supposed he was afraid, that
the double solemnity in the case (that of the visit to a dying woman,
and that of his own countenance) would give him the appearance of an
undertaker; to avoid which, he ran into as bad an extreme, and I doubted
would be taken for a mountebank.

The man was confounded. He took it as strongly, as if his conscience
gave assent to the justice of the remark: otherwise he would have borne
it better; for he is used enough to this sort of treatment. I thought he
would have cried. I have heretofore observed, that on this side of the
contract, he seems to be a mighty meek sort of creature. And though I
should like it in him hereafter perhaps, yet I can't help despising him
a little in my heart for it now. I believe, my dear, we all love your
blustering fellows best; could we but direct the bluster, and bid it
roar when and at whom we pleased.

The poor man looked at my mother. She was so angry, (my airs upon it,
and my opposition to the journey, have all helped,) that for half the
way she would not speak to me. And when she did, it was, I wish I had
not brought you! You know not what it is to condescend. It is my fault,
not Mr. Hickman's, that you are here so much against your will. Have you
no eyes for this side of the chariot?

And then he fared the better from her, as he always does, for faring
worse from me: for there was, How do you now, Sir? And how do you now,
Mr. Hickman? as he ambled now on this side of the chariot, now on that,
stealing a prim look at me; her head half out of the chariot, kindly
smiling, as if married to the man but a fortnight herself: while I
always saw something to divert myself on the side of the chariot where
the honest man was not, were it but old Robin at a distance, on his roan
Keffel.

Our courtship-days, they say, are our best days. Favour destroys
courtship. Distance increases it. Its essence is distance. And, to see
how familiar these men-wretches grow upon a smile, what an awe they are
struck into when we frown; who would not make them stand off? Who would
not enjoy a power, that is to be short-lived?

Don't chide me one bit for this, my dear. It is in nature. I can't help
it. Nay, for that matter, I love it, and wish not to help it. So spare
your gravity, I beseech you on this subject. I set up not for a perfect
character. The man will bear it. And what need you care? My mother
overbalances all he suffers: And if he thinks himself unhappy, he ought
never to be otherwise.

Then did he not deserve a fit of the sullens, think you, to make us lose
our dinner for his parade, since in so short a journey my mother would
not bait, and lose the opportunity of coming back that night, had the
old lady's condition permitted it? To say nothing of being the cause,
that my mamma was in the glout with her poor daughter all the way.

At our alighting I gave him another dab; but it was but a little one.
Yet the manner, and the air, made up (as I intended they should) for
that defect. My mother's hand was kindly put into his, with a simpering
altogether bridal; and with another How do you now, Sir?--All his plump
muscles were in motion, and a double charge of care and obsequiousness
fidgeted up his whole form, when he offered to me his officious palm.
My mother, when I was a girl, always bid me hold up my head. I just then
remembered her commands, and was dutiful--I never held up my head so
high. With an averted supercilious eye, and a rejecting hand, half
flourishing--I have no need of help, Sir!--You are in my way.

He ran back, as if on wheels; with a face excessively mortified: I had
thoughts else to have followed the too-gentle touch, with a declaration,
that I had as many hands and feet as himself. But this would have been
telling him a piece of news, as to the latter, that I hope he had not
the presumption to guess at.


*****


We found the poor woman, as we thought, at the last gasp. Had we come
sooner, we could not have got away as we intended, that night. You see I
am for excusing the man all I can; and yet, I assure you, I have not so
much as a conditional liking to him. My mother sat up most part of the
night, expecting every hour would have been her poor cousin's last. I
bore her company till two.

I never saw the approaches of death in a grown person before; and was
extremely shocked. Death, to one in health, is a very terrible thing. We
pity the person for what she suffers: and we pity ourselves for what we
must some time hence in like sort suffer; and so are doubly affected.

She held out till Tuesday morning, eleven. As she had told my mother
that she had left her an executrix, and her and me rings and mourning;
we were employed all that day in matters of the will [by which, by the
way, my own cousin Jenny Fynnett is handsomely provided for], so that it
was Wednesday morning early, before we could set out on our return.

It is true, we got home (having no housings to stay for) by noon: but
though I sent Robin away before he dismounted, (who brought me back
a whole packet, down to the same Wednesday noon,) yet was I really so
fatigued, and shocked, as I must own, at the hard death of the old
lady; my mother likewise (who has no reason to dislike this world) being
indisposed from the same occasion; that I could not set about writing
time enough for Robin's return that night.

But having recruited my spirits, my mother having also had a good night,
I arose with the dawn, to write this, and get it dispatched time enough
for your breakfast airing; that your suspense might be as short as
possible.


*****


I will soon follow this with another. I will employ a person directly
to find out how Lovelace behaves himself at his inn. Such a busy spirit
must be traceable.

But, perhaps, my dear, you are indifferent now about him, or his
employments; for this request was made before he mortally offended you.
Nevertheless, I will have inquiry made. The result, it is very probable,
will be of use to confirm you in your present unforgiving temper.--And
yet, if the poor man [shall I pity him for you, my dear?] should be
deprived of the greatest blessing any man on earth can receive, and to
which he has the presumption, with so little merit, to aspire; he will
have run great risks; caught great colds; hazarded fevers; sustained
the highest indignities; braved the inclemencies of skies, and all
for--nothing!--Will not this move your generosity (if nothing else) in
his favour!--Poor Mr. Lovelace--!

I would occasion no throb; nor half-throb; no flash of sensibility, like
lightning darting in, and as soon suppressed by a discretion that no
one of the sex ever before could give such an example of--I would not,
I say; and yet, for such a trial of you to yourself, rather than as an
impertinent overflow of raillery in your friend, as money-takers try a
suspected guinea by the sound, let me on such a supposition, sound you,
by repeating, poor Mr. Lovelace!

And now, my dear, how is it with you? How do you now, as my mother says
to Mr. Hickman, when her pert daughter has made him look sorrowful?




LETTER XXII

MR. HICKMAN, TO MRS. HOWE WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29.


MADAM,

It is with infinite regret that I think myself obliged, by pen and ink,
to repeat my apprehension, that it is impossible for me ever to obtain a
share in the affections of your beloved daughter. O that it were not too
evident to every one, as well as to myself, even to our very servants,
that my love for her, and my assiduities, expose me rather to her scorn
[forgive me, Madam, the hard word!] than to the treatment due to a man
whose proposals have met with your approbation, and who loves her above
all the women in the world!

Well might the merit of my passion be doubted, if, like Mr. Solmes to
the truly-admirably Miss Clarissa Harlowe, I could continue my addresses
to Miss Howe's distaste. Yet what will not the discontinuance cost me!

Give me leave, nevertheless, dearest, worthiest Lady, to repeat, what I
told you, on Monday night, at Mrs. Larkin's, with a heart even bursting
with grief, That I wanted not the treatment of that day to convince
me, that I am not, nor ever can be, the object of Miss Howe's voluntary
favour. What hopes can there be, that a lady will ever esteem, as a
husband, the man, whom, as a lover, she despises? Will not every act
of obligingness from such a one, be construed as an unmanly tameness
of spirit, and entitle him the more to her disdain?--My heart is full:
Forgive me, if I say, that Miss Howe's treatment of me does no credit
either to her education, or fine sense.

Since, then, it is too evident, that she cannot esteem me; and since, as
I have heard it justly observed by the excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe,
that love is not a voluntary passion; would it not be ungenerous to
subject the dear daughter to the displeasure of a mother so justly fond
of her; and you, Madam, while you are so good as to interest yourself in
my favour, to uneasiness? And why, were I even to be sure, at last, of
succeeding by means of your kind partiality to me, should I wish to make
the best-beloved of my soul unhappy; since mutual must be our happiness,
or misery for life the consequence to both?

My best wishes will for ever attend the dear, the ever-dear lady! may
her nuptials be happy! they must be so, if she marry the man she can
honour with her love. Yet I will say, that whoever be the happy, the
thrice-happy man, he can never love her with a passion more ardent and
more sincere than mine.

Accept, dear Madam, of my most grateful thanks for a distinction that
has been the only support of my presumption in an address I am obliged,
as utterly hopeless, to discontinue. A distinction, on which (and not
on my own merits) I had entirely relied; but which, I find, can avail me
nothing. To the last hour of my life, it will give me pleasure to think,
that had your favour, your recommendation, been of sufficient weight to
conquer what seems to be an invincible aversion, I had been the happiest
of men.

I am, dear Madam, with inviolable respect, your ever obliged and
faithful humble servant, CHARLES HICKMAN.




LETTER XXIII

MRS. HOWE, TO CHARLES HICKMAN, ESQ. THURSDAY, MARCH 30.


I cannot but say, Mr. Hickman, but you have cause to be dissatisfied--to
be out of humour--to be displeased--with Nancy--but, upon my word; but
indeed--What shall I say?--Yet this I will say, that you good young
gentlemen know nothing at all of our sex. Shall I tell you--but why
should I? And yet I will, that if Nancy did not think well of you upon
the main, she is too generous to treat you so freely as she does.--Don't
you think she has courage enough to tell me, she would not see you, and
to refuse at any time seeing you, as she knows on what account you come,
if she had not something in her head favourable to you?--Fie! that I am
forced to say thus much in writing, when I have hinted it to you twenty
and twenty times by word of mouth!

But if you are so indifferent, Mr. Hickman--if you think you can part
with her for her skittish tricks--if my interest in your favour--Why,
Mr. Hickman, I must tell you that my Nancy is worth bearing with. If she
be foolish--what is that owing to?--Is it not to her wit? Let me tell
you, Sir, you cannot have the convenience without the inconvenience.
What workman loves not a sharp tool to work with? But is there not more
danger from a sharp tool than from a blunt one? And what workman will
throw away a sharp tool, because it may cut his fingers? Wit may be
likened to a sharp tool. And there is something very pretty in wit, let
me tell you. Often and often have I been forced to smile at her arch
turns upon me, when I could have beat her for them. And, pray, don't I
bear a great deal from her?--And why? because I love her. And would you
not wish me to judge of your love for her by my own? And would not you
bear with her?--Don't you love her (what though with another sort of
love?) as well as I do? I do assure you, Sir, that if I thought you did
not--Well, but it is plain that you don't!--And is it plain that you
don't?--Well, then, you must do as you think best.

Well might the merit of your passion be doubted, you say, if, like Mr.
Solmes--fiddle-faddle!--Why, you are a captious man, I think!--Has Nancy
been so plain in her repulses of you as Miss Clary Harlowe has been to
Mr. Solmes?--Does Nancy love any man better than you, although she may
not shew so much love to you as you wish for?--If she did, let me tell
you, she would have let us all hear of it.--What idle comparisons then!

But it mat be you are tired out. It may be you have seen somebody
else--it may be you would wish to change mistresses with that gay wretch
Mr. Lovelace. It may be too, that, in that case, Nancy would not be
sorry to change lovers--The truly-admirable Miss Clarissa Harlowe!--Good
lack!-but take care, Mr. Hickman, that you do not praise any woman
living, let her be as admirable and as excellent as she will, above your
own mistress. No polite man will do that, surely. And take care
too, that you do not make her or me think you are in earnest in your
anger--just though it may be, as anger only--I would not for a thousand
pounds, that Nancy should know that you can so easily part with her, if
you have the love for her which you declare you have. Be sure, if you
are not absolutely determined, that you do not so much as whisper the
contents of this your letter to your own heart, as I may say.

Her treatment of you, you say, does no credit either to her education
or fine sense. Very home put, truly! Nevertheless, so say I. But is not
hers the disgrace, more than yours? I can assure you, that every body
blames her for it. And why do they blame her?--Why? because they think
you merit better treatment at her hands: And is not this to your credit?
Who but pities you, and blames he? Do the servants, who, as you observe,
see her skittish airs, disrespect you for them? Do they not, at such
times, look concerned for you? Are they not then doubly officious in
their respects and services to you?--I have observed, with pleasure,
that they are.

But you are afraid you shall be thought tame, perhaps, when married.
That you shall not be though manly enough, I warrant!--And this was poor
Mr. Howe's fear. And many a tug did this lordly fear cost us both, God
knows!--Many more than needed, I am sure:--and more than ought to have
been, had he known how to bear and forbear; as is the duty of those who
pretend to have most sense--And, pray, which would you have to have most
sense, the woman or the man?

Well, Sir, and now what remains, if you really love Nancy so well as you
say you do?--Why, I leave that to you. You may, if you please, come to
breakfast with me in the morning. But with no full heart, nor resenting
looks, I advise you; except you can brave it out. That have I, when
provoked, done many a time with my husband, but never did I get any
thing by it with my daughter: much less will you. Of which, for your
observation, I thought fit to advise you. As from

Your friend, Anabella Howe.




LETTER XXIV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING.


I will now take some notice of your last favour. But being so far
behind-hand with you, must be brief.

In the first place, as to your reproofs, thus shall I discharge myself
of that part of my subject. Is it likely, think you, that I should avoid
deserving them now-and-then, occasionally, when I admire the manner in
which you give me your rebukes, and love you the better for them? And
when you are so well entitled to give them? For what faults can you
possibly have, unless your relations are so kind as to find you a few to
keep their many in countenance?--But they are as king to me in this, as
to you; for I may venture to affirm, That any one who should read
your letters, and would say you were right, would not on reading mine,
condemn me for them quite wrong.

Your resolution not to leave your father's house is right--if you can
stay in it, and avoid being Solmes's wife.

I think you have answered Solmes's letter, as I should have answered
it.--Will you not compliment me and yourself at once, by saying, that
was right?

You have, in your letters to your uncle and the rest, done all that you
ought to do. You are wholly guiltless of the consequence, be it what it
will. To offer to give up your estate!--That would not I have done! You
see this offer staggered them: they took time to consider of it. They
made my heart ache in the time they took. I was afraid they would have
taken you at your word: and so, but for shame, and for fear of Lovelace,
I dare say they would. You are too noble for them. This, I repeat, is an
offer I would not have made. Let me beg of you, my dear, never to repeat
the temptation to them.

I freely own to you, that their usage of you upon it, and Lovelace's
different treatment of you* in his letter received at the same time,
would have made me his, past redemption. The duce take the man, I was
going to say, for not having so much regard to his character and morals,
as would have entirely justified such a step in a CLARISSA, persecuted
as she is!


     * See Letter XVIII.


I wonder not at your appointment with him. I may further touch upon some
part of this subject by-and-by.

Pray--pray--I pray you now, my dearest friend, contrive to send your
Betty Banes to me!--Does the Coventry Act extend to women, know ye?--The
least I will do, shall be, to send her home well soused in and dragged
through our deepest horsepond. I'll engage, if I get her hither, that
she will keep the anniversary of her deliverance as long as she lives.

I wonder not at Lovelace's saucy answer, saucy as it really is.* If he
loves you as he ought, he must be vexed at so great a disappointment.
The man must have been a detestable hypocrite, I think, had he not shown
his vexation. Your expectations of such a christian command of temper
in him, in a disappointment of this nature especially, are too early by
almost half a century in a man of his constitution. But nevertheless I
am very far from blaming you for your resentment.


     * See Letter XX.


I shall be all impatience to know how this matter ends between you and
him. But a few inches of brick wall between you so lately; and now such
mountains?--And you think to hold it?--May be so!

You see, you say, that the temper he shewed in his letter was not
natural to him. Wretched creepers and insinuators! Yet when opportunity
serves, as insolent encroachers!--This very Hickman, I make no doubt,
would be as saucy as your Lovelace, if he dared. He has not half the
arrogant bravery of the other, and can better hide his horns; that's
all. But whenever he has the power, depend upon it, he will butt at one
as valiantly as the other.

If ever I should be persuaded to have him, I shall watch how the
obsequious lover goes off; and how the imperative husband comes upon
him; in short, how he ascends, and how I descend, in the matrimonial
wheel, never to take my turn again, but by fits and starts like the
feeble struggles of a sinking state for its dying liberty.

All good-natured men are passionate, says Mr. Lovelace. A pretty plea
to a beloved object in the plenitude of her power! As much as to say,
'Greatly I value you, Madam, I will not take pains to curb my passions
to oblige you'--Methinks I should be glad to hear from Mr. Hickman such
a plea for good nature as this.

Indeed, we are too apt to make allowances for such tempers as early
indulgence has made uncontroulable; and therefore habitually evil. But
if a boisterous temper, when under obligation, is to be thus allowed
for, what, when the tables are turned, will it expect? You know a
husband, who, I fancy, had some of these early allowances made for him:
and you see that neither himself nor any body else is the happier for
it.

The suiting of the tempers of two persons who are to come together, is
a great matter: and there should be boundaries fixed between them, by
consent as it were, beyond which neither should go: and each should hold
the other to it; or there would probably be encroachment in both. To
illustrate my assertion by a very high, and by a more manly (as some
would think it) than womanly instance--if the boundaries of the
three estates that constitute our political union were not known,
and occasionally asserted, what would become of the prerogatives and
privileges of each? The two branches of the legislature would encroach
upon each other; and the executive power would swallow up both.

But if two persons of discretion, you'll say, come together--

Ay, my dear, that's true: but, if none but persons of discretion were
to marry--And would it not surprise you if I were to advance, that the
persons of discretion are generally single?--Such persons are apt
to consider too much, to resolve.--Are not you and I complimented as
such?--And would either of us marry, if the fellows and our friends
would let us alone?

But to the former point;--had Lovelace made his addresses to me, (unless
indeed I had been taken with a liking for him more than conditional,)
I would have forbid him, upon the first passionate instance of his
good-nature, as he calls it, ever to see me more: 'Thou must bear with
me, honest friend, might I have said [had I condescended to say any
thing to him] an hundred times more than this:--Begone, therefore!--I
bear with no passions that are predominant to that thou has pretended
for me!'

But to one of your mild and gentle temper, it would be all one, were
you married, whether the man were a Lovelace or a Hickman in his
spirit.--You are so obediently principled, that perhaps you would have
told a mild man, that he must not entreat, but command; and that it
was beneath him not to exact from you the obedience you had so solemnly
vowed to him at the altar.--I know of old, my dear, your meek regard
to that little piddling part of the marriage-vow which some
prerogative-monger foisted into the office, to make that a duty, which
he knew was not a right.

Our way of training-up, you say, makes us need the protection of the
brave. Very true: And how extremely brave and gallant is it, that this
brave man will free us from all insults but those which will go nearest
to our hearts; that is to say, his own!

How artfully has Lovelace, in the abstract you give me of one of
his letters, calculated to your meridian! Generous spirits hate
compulsion!--He is certainly a deeper creature by much than once we
thought him. He knows, as you intimate, that his own wild pranks cannot
be concealed: and so owns just enough to palliate (because it teaches
you not to be surprised at) any new one, that may come to your ears; and
then, truly, he is, however faulty, a mighty ingenuous man; and by no
means an hypocrite: a character the most odious of all others, to our
sex, in a lover, and the least to be forgiven, were it only because,
when detected, it makes us doubt the justice of those praises which we
are willing to believe he thought to be our due.

By means of this supposed ingenuity, Lovelace obtains a praise, instead
of a merited dispraise; and, like an absolved confessionaire, wipes off
as he goes along one score, to begin another: for an eye favourable
to him will not see his faults through a magnifying glass; nor will a
woman, willing to hope the best, forbear to impute it to ill-will and
prejudice all that charity can make so imputable. And if she even give
credit to such of the unfavourable imputations as may be too flagrant
to be doubted, she will be very apt to take in the future hope, which
he inculcates, and which to question would be to question her own power,
and perhaps merit: and thus may a woman be inclined to make a slight,
even a fancied merit atone for the most glaring vice.

I have a reason, a new one, for this preachment upon a text you have
given me. But, till I am better informed, I will not explain myself.
If it come out, as I shrewdly suspect it will, the man, my dear, is a
devil; and you must rather think of--I protest I had like to have said
Solmes than him.

But let this be as it will, shall I tell you, how, after all his
offences, he may creep in with you again?

I will. Thus then: It is but to claim for himself the good-natured
character: and this, granted, will blot out the fault of passionate
insolence: and so he will have nothing to do, but this hour to
accustom you to insult; the next, to bring you to forgive him, upon
his submission: the consequence must be, that he will, by this teazing,
break your resentment all to pieces: and then, a little more of the
insult, and a little less of the submission, on his part, will go down,
till nothing else but the first will be seen, and not a bit of the
second. You will then be afraid to provoke so offensive a spirit: and
at last will be brought so prettily, and so audibly, to pronounce the
little reptile word OBEY, that it will do one's heart good to hear you.
The Muscovite wife then takes place of the managed mistress. And if
you doubt the progression, be pleased, my dear, to take your mother's
judgment upon it.

But no more of this just now. Your situation is become too critical to
permit me to dwell upon these sort of topics. And yet this is but an
affected levity with me. My heart, as I have heretofore said, is a
sincere sharer in all your distresses. My sun-shine darts but through
a drizly cloud. My eye, were you to see it, when it seems to you so
gladdened, as you mentioned in a former, is more than ready to overflow,
even at the very passages perhaps upon which you impute to me the
archness of exultation.

But now the unheard-of cruelty and perverseness of some of your friends
[relations, I should say--I am always blundering thus!] the as strange
determinedness of others; your present quarrel with Lovelace; and your
approaching interview with Solmes, from which you are right to apprehend
a great deal; are such considerable circumstances in your story, that it
is fit they should engross all my attention.

You ask me to advise you how to behave upon Solmes's visit. I cannot for
my life. I know they expect a great deal from it: you had not else had
your long day complied with. All I will say is, That if Solmes cannot
be prevailed for, now that Lovelace has so much offended you, he never
will. When the interview is over, I doubt not but that I shall have
reason to say, that all you did, that all you said, was right, and could
not be better: yet, if I don't think so, I won't say so; that I promise
you.

Only let me advise you to pull up a spirit, even to your uncle, if there
be occasion. Resent the vile and foolish treatment you meet with, in
which he has taken so large a share, and make him ashamed of it, if you
can.

I know not, upon recollection, but this interview may be a good thing
for you, however designed. For when Solmes sees (if that be to be so)
that it is impossible he should succeed with you; and your relations see
it too; the one must, I think, recede, and the other come to terms with
you, upon offers, that it is my opinion, will go hard enough with you to
comply with; when the still harder are dispensed with.

There are several passages in your last letters, as well as in your
former, which authorize me to say this. But it would be unseasonable to
touch this subject farther just now.

But, upon the whole, I have no patience to see you thus made sport of
your brother's and sister's cruelty: For what, after so much steadiness
on your part, in so many trials, can be their hope? except indeed it be
to drive you to extremity, and to ruin you in the opinion of your uncles
as well as father.

I urge you by all means to send out of their reach all the letters
and papers you would not have them see. Methinks, I would wish you to
deposit likewise a parcel of clothes, linen, and the like, before your
interview with Solmes: lest you should not have an opportunity for it
afterwards. Robin shall fetch it away on the first orders by day or by
night.

I am in hopes to procure from my mother, if things come to extremity,
leave for you to be privately with us.

I will condition to be good-humoured, and even kind, to HER favourite,
if she will shew me an indulgence that shall make me serviceable to
MINE.

This alternative has been a good while in my head. But as your foolish
uncle has so strangely attached my mother to their views, I cannot
promise that I shall succeed as I wish.

Do not absolutely despair, however. What though the contention will be
between woman and woman? I fancy I shall be able to manage it, by the
help of a little female perseverance. Your quarrel with Lovelace, if
it continue, will strengthen my hands. And the offers you made in your
answer to your uncle Harlowe's letter of Sunday night last, duly dwelt
upon, must add force to my pleas.

I depend upon your forgiveness of all the perhaps unseasonable
flippancies of your naturally too lively, yet most sincerely
sympathizing, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, MARCH 31.


You have very kindly accounted for your silence. People in misfortune
are always in doubt. They are too apt to turn even unavoidable accidents
into slights and neglects; especially in those whose favourable opinion
they wish to preserve.

I am sure I ought evermore to exempt my Anna Howe from the supposed
possibility of her becoming one of those who bask only in the sun-shine
of a friend: but nevertheless her friendship is too precious to me, not
to doubt my own merits on the one hand, and not to be anxious for the
preservation of it, on the other.

You so generously gave me liberty to chide you, that I am afraid of
taking it, because I could sooner mistrust my own judgment, than that of
a beloved friend, whose ingenuousness in acknowledging an imputed error
seems to set her above the commission of a wilful one. This makes
me half-afraid to ask you, if you think you are not too cruel, too
ungenerous shall I say? in your behaviour to a man who loves you so
dearly, and is so worthy and so sincere a man?

Only it is by YOU, or I should be ashamed to be outdone in that true
magnanimity, which makes one thankful for the wounds given by a true
friend. I believe I was guilty of a petulance, which nothing but my
uneasy situation can excuse; if that can. I am but almost afraid to beg
of you, and yet I repeatedly do, to give way to that charming spirit,
whenever it rises to your pen, which smiles, yet goes to the quick of my
fault. What patient shall be afraid of a probe in so delicate a hand?--I
say, I am almost afraid to pray you to give way to it, for fear you
should, for that very reason, restrain it. For the edge may be taken
off, if it does not make the subject of its raillery wince a little.
Permitted or desired satire may be apt, in a generous satirist, mending
as it rallies, to turn too soon into panegyric. Yours is intended to
instruct; and though it bites, it pleases at the same time: no fear of a
wound's wrankling or festering by so delicate a point as you carry;
not envenomed by personality, not intending to expose, or ridicule, or
exasperate. The most admired of our moderns know nothing of this art:
Why? Because it must be founded in good nature, and directed by a right
heart. The man, not the fault, is generally the subject of their satire:
and were it to be just, how should it be useful; how should it answer
any good purpose; when every gash (for their weapon is a broad sword,
not a lancet) lets in the air of public ridicule, and exasperates where
it should heal? Spare me not therefore because I am your friend. For
that very reason spare me not. I may feel your edge, fine as it is. I
may be pained: you would lose you end if I were not: but after the first
sensibility (as I have said more than once before) I will love you the
better, and my amended heart shall be all yours; and it will then be
more worthy to be yours.

You have taught me what to say to, and what to think of, Mr. Lovelace.
You have, by agreeable anticipation, let me know how it is probable he
will apply to me to be excused. I will lay every thing before you that
shall pass on the occasion, if he do apply, that I may take your advice,
when it can come in time; and when it cannot, that I may receive your
correction, or approbation, as I may happen to merit either.--Only one
thing must be allowed for me; that whatever course I shall be permitted
or be forced to steer, I must be considered as a person out of her own
direction. Tost to and fro by the high winds of passionate controul,
(and, as I think, unseasonable severity,) I behold the desired port,
the single state, into which I would fain steer; but am kept off by
the foaming billows of a brother's and sister's envy, and by the raging
winds of a supposed invaded authority; while I see in Lovelace, the
rocks on one hand, and in Solmes, the sands on the other; and tremble,
lest I should split upon the former, or strike upon the latter.

But you, my better pilot, to what a charming hope do you bid me aspire,
if things come to extremity!--I will not, as you caution me, too much
depend upon your success with your mother in my favour; for well I know
her high notions of implicit duty in a child: but yet I will hope too;
because her seasonable protection may save me perhaps from a greater
rashness: and in this case, she shall direct me in all my ways: I will
do nothing but by her orders, and by her advice and yours: not see
any body: not write to any body: nor shall any living soul, but by her
direction and yours, know where I am. In any cottage place me, I will
never stir out, unless, disguised as your servant, I am now-and-then
permitted an evening-walk with you: and this private protection to be
granted for no longer time than till my cousin Morden comes; which, as I
hope, cannot be long.

I am afraid I must not venture to take the hint you give me, to deposit
some of my clothes; although I will some of my linen, as well as papers.

I will tell you why--Betty had for some time been very curious about my
wardrobe, whenever I took out any of my things before her.

Observing this, I once, on taking one of my garden-airings, left my keys
in the locks: and on my return surprised the creature with her hand upon
the keys, as if shutting the door.

She was confounded at my sudden coming back. I took no notice: but on
her retiring, I found my cloaths were not in the usual order.

I doubted not, upon this, that her curiosity was owing to the orders she
had received; and being afraid they would abridge me of my airings, if
their suspicions were not obviated, it has ever since been my custom
(among other contrivances) not only to leave my keys in the locks, but
to employ the wench now-and-then in taking out my cloaths, suit by suit,
on pretence of preventing their being rumpled or creased, and to see
that the flowered silver suit did not tarnish: sometimes declaredly to
give myself employment, having little else to do. With which employment
(superadded to the delight taken by the low as well as by the high of
our sex in seeing fine cloaths) she seemed always, I thought, as well
pleased as if it answered one of the offices she had in charge.

To this, and to the confidence they have in a spy so diligent, and
to their knowing that I have not one confidant in a family in which
nevertheless I believe every servant loves me; nor have attempted
to make one; I suppose, I owe the freedom I enjoy of my airings: and
perhaps (finding I make no movements towards going away) they are the
more secure, that I shall at last be prevailed upon to comply with
their measures: since they must think, that, otherwise, they give me
provocation enough to take some rash step, in order to free myself
from a treatment so disgraceful; and which [God forgive me, if I judge
amiss!] I am afraid my brother and sister would not be sorry to drive me
to take.

If, therefore, such a step should become necessary, (which I yet hope
will not,) I must be contented to go away with the clothes I shall
have on at the time. My custom to be dressed for the day, as soon as
breakfast is over, when I have had no household employments to prevent
me, will make such a step (if I am forced to take it) less suspected.
And the linen I shall deposit, in pursuance of your kind hint, cannot be
missed.

This custom, although a prisoner, (as I may too truly say,) and neither
visited nor visiting, I continue. We owe to ourselves, and to our sex,
you know, to be always neat; and never to be surprised in a way we
should be pained to be seen in.

Besides, people in adversity (which is the state of trial of every good
quality) should endeavour to preserve laudable customs, that, if sun
shine return, they may not be losers by their trial.

Does it not, moreover, manifest a firmness of mind, in an unhappy
person, to keep hope alive? To hope for better days, is half to deserve
them: for could we have just ground for such a hope, if we did not
resolve to deserve what that hope bids us aspire to?--Then who shall
befriend a person who forsakes herself?

These are reflections by which I sometimes endeavour to support myself.

I know you don't despise my grave airs, although (with a view no doubt
to irradiate my mind in my misfortunes) you rally me upon them. Every
body has not your talent of introducing serious and important lessons,
in such a happy manner as at once to delight and instruct.

What a multitude of contrivances may not young people fall upon, if the
mind be not engaged by acts of kindness and condescension! I am not used
by my friends of late as I always used their servants.

When I was intrusted with the family-management, I always found it
right, as well in policy as generosity, to repose a trust in them. Not
to seem to expect or depend upon justice from them, is in a manner to
bid them to take opportunities, whenever they offer, to be unjust.

Mr. Solmes, (to expatiate on this low, but not unuseful subject,) in his
more trifling solicitudes, would have had a sorry key-keeper in me. Were
I mistress of a family, I would not either take to myself, or give to
servants, the pain of keeping those I had reason to suspect. People low
in station have often minds not sordid. Nay, I have sometimes thought,
that (even take number for number) there are more honest low people,
than honest high. In the one, honest is their chief pride. In the other,
the love of power, of grandeur, of pleasure, mislead; and that and their
ambition induce a paramount pride, which too often swallows up the more
laudable one.

Many of the former would scorn to deceive a confidence. But I have seen,
among the most ignorant of their class, a susceptibility of resentment,
if their honesty has been suspected: and have more than once been forced
to put a servant right, whom I have heard say, that, although she valued
herself upon her honesty, no master or mistress should suspect her for
nothing.

How far has the comparison I had in my head, between my friends
treatment of me, and my treatment of the servants, carried me!--But we
always allowed ourselves to expatiate on such subjects, whether low
or high, as might tend to enlarge our minds, or mend our management,
whether notional or practical, and whether such expatiating respected
our present, or might respect our probable future situations.

What I was principally leading to, was to tell you how ingenious I am in
my contrivances and pretences to blind my gaoleress, and to take off the
jealousy of her principals on my going down so often into the garden and
poultry-yard. People suspiciously treated are never I believe at a loss
for invention. Sometimes I want air, and am better the moment I am out
of my chamber.--Sometimes spirits; and then my bantams and pheasants or
the cascade divert me; the former, by their inspiring liveliness; the
latter, by its echoing dashes, and hollow murmurs.--Sometimes, solitude
is of all things my wish; and the awful silence of the night, the
spangled element, and the rising and setting sun, how promotive of
contemplation!--Sometimes, when I intend nothing, and expect no letters,
I am officious to take Betty with me; and at others, bespeak her
attendance, when I know she is otherwise employed, and cannot give it
me.

These more capital artifices I branch out into lesser ones, without
number. Yet all have not only the face of truth, but are real truths;
although not my principal motive. How prompt a thing is will!--What
impediments does dislike furnish!--How swiftly, through every
difficulty, do we move with the one!--how tardily with the other!--every
trifling obstruction weighing us down, as if lead were fastened to our
feet!


FRIDAY MORNING, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

I have already made up my parcel of linen. My heart ached all the time
I was employed about it; and still aches, at the thoughts of its being a
necessary precaution.

When the parcel comes to your hands, as I hope it safely will, you will
be pleased to open it. You will find in it two parcels sealed up; one
of which contains the letters you have not yet seen; being those written
since I left you: in the other are all the letters and copies of letters
that have passed between you and me since I was last with you; with some
other papers on subjects so much above me, that I cannot wish them to be
seen by any body whose indulgence I am not so sure of, as I am of yours.
If my judgment ripen with my years, perhaps I may review them.

Mrs. Norton used to say, from her reverend father, that youth was the
time of life for imagination and fancy to work in: then, were a writer
to lay by his works till riper years and experience should direct the
fire rather to glow, than to flame out; something between both might
perhaps be produced that would not displease a judicious eye.

In a third division, folded up separately, are all Mr. Lovelace's
letters written to me since he was forbidden this house, and copies
of my answers to them. I expect that you will break the seals of this
parcel, and when you have perused them all, give me your free opinion of
my conduct.

By the way, not a line from that man!--Not one line! Wednesday I
deposited mine. It remained there on Wednesday night. What time it was
taken away yesterday I cannot tell: for I did not concern myself about
it, till towards night; and then it was not there. No return at ten this
day. I suppose he is as much out of humour as I.--With all my heart.

He may be mean enough perhaps, if ever I should put it into his power,
to avenge himself for the trouble he has had with me.--But that now, I
dare say, I never shall.

I see what sort of a man the encroacher is. And I hope we are equally
sick of one another.--My heart is vexedly easy, if I may so describe
it.--Vexedly--because of the apprehended interview with Solmes, and the
consequences it may be attended with: or else I should be quite easy;
for why? I have not deserved the usage I receive: and could I be rid of
Solmes, as I presume I am of Lovelace, their influence over my father,
mother, and uncles, against me, could not hold.

The five guineas tied up in one corner of a handkerchief under the
linen, I beg you will let pass as an acknowledgement for the trouble
I give your trusty servant. You must not chide me for this. You know I
cannot be easy unless I have my way in these little matters.

I was going to put up what little money I have, and some of my
ornaments; but they are portable, and I cannot forget them. Besides,
should they (suspecting me) desire to see any of the jewels, and were
I not able to produce them, it would amount to a demonstration of an
intention which would have a guilty appearance to them.


FRIDAY, ONE O'CLOCK, IN THE WOOD-HOUSE.

No letter yet from this man! I have luckily deposited my parcel, and
have your letter of last night. If Robert take this without the parcel,
pray let him return immediately for it. But he cannot miss it, I think:
and must conclude that it is put there for him to take away. You may
believe, from the contents of yours, that I shall immediately write
again.--

CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXVI

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 30.


The fruits of my inquiry after your abominable wretch's behaviour and
baseness at the paltry alehouse, which he calls an inn, prepare to hear.

Wrens and sparrows are not too ignoble a quarry for this villainous
gos-hawk!--His assiduities; his watchings; his nightly risques; the
inclement weather he journeys in; must not be all placed to your
account. He has opportunities of making every thing light to him of
that sort. A sweet pretty girl, I am told--innocent till he went
thither--Now! (Ah! poor girl!) who knows what?

But just turned of seventeen!--His friend and brother-rake (a man of
humour and intrigue) as I am told, to share the social bottle with.
And sometimes another disguised rake or two. No sorrow comes near their
hearts. Be not disturbed, my dear, at his hoarsenesses! his pretty,
Betsey, his Rosebud, as the vile wretch calls her, can hear all he says.

He is very fond of her. They say she is innocent even yet--her father,
her grandmother, believe her to be so. He is to fortune her out to a
young lover!--Ah! the poor young lover!--Ah! the poor simple girl!

Mr. Hickman tells me, that he heard in town, that he used to be often
at plays, and at the opera, with women; and every time with a different
one--Ah! my sweet friend!--But I hope he is nothing to you, if all this
were truth.--But this intelligence, in relation to this poor girl, will
do his business, if you had been ever so good friends before.

A vile wretch! Cannot such purity in pursuit, in view, restrain him? but
I leave him to you!--There can be no hope of him. More of a fool,
than of such a man. Yet I wish I may be able to snatch the poor young
creature out of his villainous paws. I have laid a scheme to do so; if
indeed she be hitherto innocent and heart-free.

He appears to the people as a military man, in disguise, secreting
himself on account of a duel fought in town; the adversary's life in
suspense. They believe he is a great man. His friend passes for an
inferior officer; upon a footing of freedom with him. He, accompanied by
a third man, who is a sort of subordinate companion to the second. The
wretch himself with but one servant.

O my dear! how pleasantly can these devils, as I must call them, pass
their time, while our gentle bosoms heave with pity for their supposed
sufferings for us!


*****


I have sent for this girl and her father; and am just now informed, that
I shall see them. I will sift them thoroughly. I shall soon find out
such a simple thing as this, if he has not corrupted her already--and if
he has, I shall soon find out that too.--If more art than nature appears
either in her or her father, I shall give them both up--but depend upon
it, the girl's undone.

He is said to be fond of her. He places her at the upper end of his
table. He sets her a-prattling. He keeps his friends at a distance from
her. She prates away. He admires for nature all she says. Once was heard
to call her charming little creature! An hundred has he called so no
doubt. He puts her upon singing. He praises her wild note--O my dear,
the girl's undone!--must be undone!--The man, you know, is LOVELACE.

Let 'em bring Wyerley to you, if they will have you married--any body
but Solmes and Lovelace be yours!--So advises

Your ANNA HOWE.

My dearest friend, consider this alehouse as his garrison: him as an
enemy: his brother-rakes as his assistants and abettors. Would not your
brother, would not your uncles, tremble, if they knew how near them he
is, as they pass to and fro?--I am told, he is resolved you shall not be
carried to your uncle Antony's.--What can you do, with or without such
an enterprising--

Fill up the blank I leave.--I cannot find a word bad enough




LETTER XXVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, THREE O'CLOCK.


You incense, alarm, and terrify me, at the same time.--Hasten, my
dearest friend, hasten to me what further intelligence you can gather
about this vilest of men.

But never talk of innocence, of simplicity, and this unhappy girl,
together! Must she not know, that such a man as that, dignified in his
very aspect; and no disguise able to conceal his being of condition;
must mean too much, when he places her at the upper end of his table,
and calls her by such tender names? Would a girl, modest as simple,
above seventeen, be set a-singing at the pleasure of such a man as
that? a stranger, and professedly in disguise!--Would her father and
grandmother, if honest people, and careful of their simple girl, permit
such freedoms?

Keep his friend at a distance from her!--To be sure his designs are
villainous, if they have not been already effected.

Warn, my dear, if not too late, the unthinking father, of his child's
danger. There cannot be a father in the world, who would sell his
child's virtue. Nor mother!--The poor thing!

I long to hear the result of your intelligence. You shall see the simple
creature, you tell me.--Let me know what sort of a girl she is.--A sweet
pretty girl! you say. A sweet pretty girl, my dear!--They are sweet
pretty words from your pen. But are they yours or his of her?--If she be
so simple, if she have ease and nature in her manner, in her speech, and
warbles prettily her wild notes, why, such a girl as that must
engage such a profligate wretch, (as now indeed I doubt this man is,)
accustomed, perhaps, to town women, and their confident ways.--Must
deeply and for a long season engage him: since perhaps when her
innocence is departed, she will endeavour by art to supply the loss of
the natural charms which now engage him.

Fine hopes of such a wretch's reformation! I would not, my dear, for the
world, have any thing to say--but I need not make resolutions. I have
not opened, nor will I open, his letter.--A sycophant creature!--With
his hoarsenesses--got perhaps by a midnight revel, singing to his wild
note singer, and only increased in the coppice!

To be already on a footing!--In his esteem, I mean: for myself, I
despise him. I hate myself almost for writing so much about him, and of
such a simpleton as this sweet pretty girl as you call her: but no one
can be either sweet or pretty, that is not modest, that is not virtuous.

And now, my dear, I will tell you how I came to put you upon this
inquiry.

This vile Joseph Leman had given a hint to Betty, and she to me, as if
Lovelace would be found out to be a very bad man, at a place where he
had been lately seen in disguise. But he would see further, he said,
before he told her more; and she promised secrecy, in hope to get at
further intelligence. I thought it could be no harm, to get you to
inform yourself, and me, of what could be gathered.* And now I see, his
enemies are but too well warranted in their reports of him: and, if the
ruin of this poor young creature be his aim, and if he had not known her
but for his visits to Harlowe-place, I shall have reason to be doubly
concerned for her; and doubly incensed against so vile a man.


     * It will be seen in Vol.I.Letter XXXIV. that Mr. Lovelace's
     motive for sparing his Rosebud was twofold. First, Because
     his pride was gratified by the grandmother's desiring him to
     spare her grand-daughter. Many a pretty rogue, say he, had I
     spared, whom I did not spare, had my power been
     acknowledged, and my mercy in time implored. But the
     debellare superbos should be my motto, were I to have a new
     one.

     His other motive will be explained in the following passage,
     in the same. I never was so honest, for so long together,
     says he, since my matriculation. It behoves me so to be.
     Some way or other my recess [at the little inn] may be found
     out, and it then will be thought that my Rosebud has
     attracted me. A report in my favour, from simplicities so
     amiable, may establish me, &c.

     Accordingly, as the reader will hereafter see, Mr. Lovelace
     finds by the effects, his expectations from the contrivance
     he set on foot by means of his agent Joseph Leman (who
     plays, as above, upon Betty Barnes) fully answered, though
     he could not know what passed on the occasion between the
     two ladies.

     This explanation is the more necessary to be given, as
     several of our readers (through want of due attention) have
     attributed to Mr. Lovelace, on his behaviour to his Rosebud,
     a greater merit than was due to him; and moreover imagined,
     that it was improbable, that a man, who was capable of
     acting so generously (as they supposed) in this instance,
     should be guilty of any atrocious vileness. Not considering,
     that love, pride, and revenge as he owns in Vol.I.Letter
     XXXI. were ingredients of equal force in his composition;
     and that resistance was a stimulus to him.


I think I hate him worse than I do Solmes himself.

But I will not add one more word about hi,; and after I have told you,
that I wish to know, as soon as possible what further occurs from your
inquiry. I have a letter from him; but shall not open it till I do:
and then, if it come out as I dare say it will, I will directly put the
letter unopened into the place I took it from, and never trouble myself
more about him. Adieu, my dearest friend.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXVIII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE. FRIDAY NOON, MARCH 31.


Justice obliges me to forward this after my last on the wings of the
wind, as I may say. I really believe the man is innocent. Of this
one accusation, I think he must be acquitted; and I am sorry I was so
forward in dispatching away my intelligence by halves.

I have seen the girl. She is really a very pretty, a very neat, and,
what is still a greater beauty, a very innocent young creature. He who
could have ruined such an undersigned home-bred, must have been
indeed infernally wicked. Her father is an honest simple man; entirely
satisfied with his child, and with her new acquaintance.

I am almost afraid for your heart, when I tell you, that I find, now I
have got to the bottom of this inquiry, something noble come out in this
Lovelace's favour.

The girl is to be married next week; and this promoted and brought about
by him. He is resolved, her father says, to make one couple happy,
and wishes he could make more so [There's for you, my dear!] And she
professes to love, he has given her an hundred pounds: the grandmother
actually has it in her hands, to answer to the like sum given to the
youth by one of his own relation: while Mr. Lovelace's companion,
attracted by the example, has given twenty-five guineas to the father,
who is poor, towards clothes to equip the pretty rustic.

Mr. Lovelace and his friend, the poor man says, when they first came to
his house, affected to appear as persons of low degree; but now he knows
the one (but mentioned it in confidence) to be Colonel Barrow, the other
Captain Sloane. The colonel he owns was at first very sweet upon his
girl: but her grandmother's begging of him to spare her innocence, he
vowed, that he never would offer any thing but good counsel to her. He
kept his word; and the pretty fool acknowledged, that she never
could have been better instructed by the minister himself from the
bible-book!--The girl pleased me so well, that I made her visit to me
worth her while.

But what, my dear, will become of us now?--Lovelace not only reformed,
but turned preacher!--What will become of us now?--Why, my sweet friend,
your generosity is now engaged in his favour!--Fie upon this generosity!
I think in my heart, that it does as much mischief to the noble-minded,
as love to the ignobler.--What before was only a conditional liking, I
am now afraid will turn to liking unconditional.

I could not endure to change my invective into panegyric all at once,
and so soon. We, or such as I at least, love to keep ourselves in
countenance for a rash judgment, even when we know it to be rash.
Everybody has not your generosity in confessing a mistake. It requires
a greatness of soul frankly to do it. So I made still further inquiry
after his life and manner, and behaviour there, in hopes to find
something bad: but all uniform!

Upon the whole, Mr. Lovelace comes out with so much advantage from this
inquiry, that were there the least room for it, I should suspect the
whole to be a plot set on foot to wash a blackamoor white. Adieu, my
dear.

ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SATURDAY, APRIL 1.


Hasty censures do indeed subject themselves to the charge of
variableness and inconsistency in judgment: and so they ought; for,
if you, even you, my dear, were so loth to own a mistake, as in the
instance before us you pretend you were, I believe I should not have
loved you so well as I really do love you. Nor could you, in that case,
have so frankly thrown the reflection I hint at upon yourself, have not
your mind been one of the most ingenuous that ever woman boasted.

Mr. Lovelace has faults enow to deserve very severe censure, although
he be not guilty of this. If I were upon such terms with him as he could
wish me to be, I should give him such a hint, that this treacherous
Joseph Leman cannot be so much attached to him, as perhaps he thinks
him to be. If it were, he would not have been so ready to report to his
disadvantage (and to Betty Barnes too) this slight affair of the pretty
rustic. Joseph has engaged Betty to secrecy; promising to let her, and
her young master, to know more, when he knows the whole of the matter:
and this hinders her from mentioning it, as she is nevertheless agog to
do, to my sister or brother. And then she does not choose to disoblige
Joseph; for although she pretends to look above him, she listens, I
believe, to some love-stories he tells her.

Women having it not in their power to begin a courtship, some of them
very frequently, I believe, lend an ear where their hearts incline not.

But to say no more of these low people, neither of whom I think
tolerably of; I must needs own, that as I should for ever have despised
this man, had he been capable of such a vile intrigue in his way to
Harlowe-place, and as I believe he was capable of it, it has indeed [I
own it has] proportionably engaged my generosity, as you call it, in his
favour: perhaps more than I may have reason to wish it had. And, rally
me as you will, pray tell me fairly, my dear, would it not have had such
an effect upon you?

Then the real generosity of the act.--I protest, my beloved friend,
if he would be good for the rest of his life from this time, I would
forgive him a great many of his past errors, were it only for the
demonstration he has given in this, that he is capable of so good and
bountiful a manner of thinking.

You may believe I made no scruple to open his letter, after the receipt
of your second on this subject: nor shall I of answering it, as I have
no reason to find fault with it: an article in his favour, procured
him, however, so much the easier, (I must own,) by way of amends for the
undue displeasure I took against him; though he knows it not.

Is it lucky enough that this matter was cleared up to me by your
friendly diligence so soon: for had I written before it was, it would
have been to reinforce my dismission of him; and perhaps I should have
mentioned the very motive; for it affected me more than I think it
ought: and then, what an advantage would that have given him, when he
could have cleared up the matter so happily for himself!

When I send you this letter of his, you will see how very humble he is:
what acknowledgements of natural impatience: what confession of faults,
as you prognosticated.

A very different appearance, I must own, all these make, now the story
of the pretty rustic is cleared up, to what they would have made, had it
not.

You will see how he accounts to me, 'That he could not, by reason of
indisposition, come for my letter in person: and the forward creature
labours the point, as if he thought I should be uneasy that he did not.'
I am indeed sorry he should be ill on my account; and I will allow, that
the suspense he has been in for some time past, must have been vexatious
enough to so impatient a spirit. But all is owing originally to himself.

You will find him (in the presumption of being forgiven) 'full of
contrivances and expedients for my escaping my threatened compulsion.'

I have always said, that next to being without fault, is the
acknowledgement of a fault; since no amendment can be expected where an
error is defended: but you will see in this very letter, an haughtiness
even in his submissions. 'Tis true, I know not where to find fault as
to the expression; yet cannot I be satisfied, that his humility is
humility; or even an humility upon such conviction as one should be
pleased with.

To be sure, he is far from being a polite man: yet is not directly and
characteristically, as I may say, unpolite. But his is such a sort of
politeness, as has, by a carelessness founded on very early indulgence,
and perhaps on too much success in riper years, and an arrogance built
upon both, grown into assuredness, and, of course, I may say, into
indelicacy.

The distance you recommend at which to keep these men, is certainly
right in the main: familiarity destroys reverence: But with whom?--Not
with those, surely, who are prudent, grateful, and generous.

But it is very difficult for persons, who would avoid running into one
extreme, to keep clear of another. Hence Mr. Lovelace, perhaps, thinks
it the mark of a great spirit to humour his pride, though at the expense
of his politeness: but can the man be a deep man, who knows not how to
make such distinctions as a person of but moderate parts cannot miss?

He complains heavily of my 'readiness to take mortal offence at him, and
to dismiss him for ever: it is a high conduct, he says, he must be frank
enough to tell me; a conduct that must be very far from contributing to
allay his apprehensions of the possibility that I may be prosecuted into
my relations' measures in behalf of Mr. Solmes.'

You will see how he puts his present and his future happiness, 'with
regard to both worlds, entirely upon me.' The ardour with which he vows
and promises, I think the heart only can dictate: how else can one guess
at a man's heart?

You will also see, 'that he has already heard of the interview I am to
have with Mr. Solmes;' and with what vehemence and anguish he expresses
himself on the occasion. I intend to take proper notice of the ignoble
means he stoops to, to come at his early intelligence of our family.
If persons pretending to principle, bear not their testimony against
unprincipled actions, what check can they have?

You will see, 'how passionately he presses me to oblige him with a few
lines, before the interview between Mr. Solmes and me takes place, (if,
as he says, it must take place,) to confirm his hope, that I have no
view, in my present displeasure against him, to give encouragement to
Solmes. An apprehension, he says, that he must be excused for repeating;
especially as the interview is a favour granted to that man, which
I have refused to him; since, as he infers, were it not with such an
expectation, why should my friends press it?'


*****


I have written; and to this effect: 'That I had never intended to write
another line to a man, who could take upon himself to reflect upon my
sex and myself, for having thought fit to make use of my own judgment.

'I tell him, that I have submitted to the interview with Mr. Solmes,
purely as an act of duty, to shew my friends, that I will comply with
their commands as far as I can; and that I hope, when Mr. Solmes himself
shall see how determined I am, he will cease to prosecute a suit, in
which it is impossible he should succeed with my consent.

'I assure him, that my aversion to Mr. Solmes is too sincere to permit
me to doubt myself on this occasion. But, nevertheless, he must not
imagine, that my rejecting of Mr. Solmes is in favour to him. That I
value my freedom and independency too much, if my friends will but leave
me to my own judgment, to give them up to a man so uncontroulable, and
who shews me beforehand what I have to expect from him, were I in his
power.

'I express my high disapprobation of the methods he takes to come
at what passes in a private family. The pretence of corrupting other
people's servants, by way of reprisal for the spies they have set upon
him, I tell him, is a very poor excuse; and no more than an attempt to
justify one meanness by another.

'There is, I observe to him, a right and a wrong in every thing, let
people put what glosses they please upon their action. To condemn a
deviation, and to follow it by as great a one, what, I ask him, is this,
but propagating a general corruption?--A stand must be made somebody,
turn round the evil as many as may, or virtue will be lost: And shall it
not be I, a worthy mind would ask, that shall make this stand?

'I leave him to judge, whether his be a worthy one, tried by this rule:
And whether, knowing the impetuosity of his own disposition, and the
improbability there is that my father and family will ever be reconciled
to him, I ought to encourage his hopes?

'These spots and blemishes, I further tell him, give me not earnestness
enough for any sake but his own, to wish him in a juster and nobler
train of thinking and acting; for that I truly despised many of the ways
he allows himself in: our minds are therefore infinitely different:
and as to his professions of reformation, I must tell him, that
profuse acknowledgements, without amendment, are but to me as so many
anticipating concessions, which he may find much easier to make, thane
either to defend himself, or amend his errors.

'I inform him, that I have been lately made acquainted' [and so I have
by Betty, and she by my brother] 'with the weak and wanton airs he gives
himself of declaiming against matrimony. I severely reprehend him on
this occasion: and ask him, with what view he can take so witless, so
despicable a liberty, in which only the most abandoned of men allow
themselves, and yet presume to address me?


'I tell him, that if I am obliged to go to my uncle Antony's, it is not
to be inferred, that I must therefore necessarily be Mr. Solmes's wife:
since I must therefore so sure perhaps that the same exceptions lie
so strongly against my quitting a house to which I shall be forcibly
carried, as if I left my father's house: and, at the worst, I may be
able to keep them in suspense till my cousin Morden comes, who will have
a right to put me in possession of my grandfather's estate, if I insist
upon it.'

This, I doubt, is somewhat of an artifice; which can only be excusable,
as it is principally designed to keep him out of mischief. For I have
but little hope, if carried thither, whether sensible or senseless,
absolutely if I am left to the mercy of my brother and sister, but they
will endeavour to force the solemn obligation upon me. Otherwise, were
there but any prospect of avoiding this, by delaying (or even by taking
things to make me ill, if nothing else would do,) till my cousin comes,
I hope I should not think of leaving even my uncle's house. For I should
not know how to square it to my own principles, to dispense with the
duty I owe to my father, wherever it shall be his will to place me.

But while you give me the charming hope, that, in order to avoid one
man, I shall not be under the necessity of throwing myself upon the
friends of the other; I think my case not desperate.


*****


I see not any of my family, nor hear from them in any way of kindness.
This looks as if they themselves expected no great matters from the
Tuesday's conference which makes my heart flutter every time I think of
it.

My uncle Antony's presence on the occasion I do not much like: but I
had rather meet him than my brother or sister: yet my uncle is very
impetuous. I can't think Mr. Lovelace can be much more so; at least he
cannot look angry, as my uncle, with his harder features, can. These
sea-prospered gentlemen, as my uncle has often made me think, not used
to any but elemental controul, and even ready to buffet that, bluster
often as violently as the winds they are accustomed to be angry at.

I believe Mr. Solmes will look as much like a fool as I shall do, if it
be true, as my uncle Harlowe writes, and as Betty often tells me, that
he is as much afraid of seeing me, as I am of seeing him.

Adieu, my happy, thrice-happy Miss Howe, who have no hard terms fixed
to your duty!--Who have nothing to do, but to fall in with a choice your
mother has made for you, to which you have not, nor can have, a just
objection: except the frowardness of our sex, as our free censurers
would perhaps take the liberty to say, makes it one, that the choice was
your mother's, at first hand. Perverse nature, we know, loves not to
be prescribed to; although youth is not so well qualified, either by
sedateness or experience, to choose for itself.

To know your own happiness, and that it is now, nor to leave it to after
reflection to look back upon the preferable past with a heavy and self
accusing heart, that you did not choose it when you might have chosen
it, is all that is necessary to complete your felicity!--And this power
is wished you by

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXX

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SATURDAY, APRIL 2.


I ought yesterday to have acknowledged the receipt of your parcel. Robin
tells me, that the Joseph Leman, whom you mention as the traitor, saw
him. He was in the poultry-yard, and spoke to Robin over the bank
which divides that from the green-lane. 'What brings you hither, Mr.
Robert?--But I can tell. Hie away, as fast as you can.'

No doubt but their dependence upon this fellow's vigilance, and upon
Betty's, leaves you more at liberty in your airings, than you would
otherwise be. But you are the only person I ever heard of, who in such
circumstances had not some faithful servant to trust little offices to.
A poet, my dear, would not have gone to work for an Angelica, without
giving her her Violetta, her Cleante, her Clelia, or some such
pretty-named confidant--an old nurse at the least.

I read to my mother several passages of your letters. But your last
paragraph, in your yesterday's quite charmed her. You have won her heart
by it, she told me. And while her fit of gratitude for it lasted, I was
thinking to make my proposal, and to press it with all the earnestness
I could give it, when Hickman came in, making his legs, and stroking his
cravat and ruffles.

I could most freely have ruffled him for it. As it was--Sir, said I, saw
you not some of the servants?--Could not one of them have come in before
you?

He begged pardon: looked as if he knew not whether he had best keep his
ground, or withdraw:--Till my mother, his fast friend, interposed--Why,
Nancy, we are not upon particulars.--Pray, Mr. Hickman, sit down.

By your le--ave, good Madam, to me. You know his drawl, when his muscles
give him the respectful hesitation.--

Ay, ay, pray sit down, honest man, if you are weary--but by mamma,
if you please. I desire my hoop may have its full circumference. All
they're good for, that I know, is to clean dirty shoes, and to keep
fellows at a distance.

Strange girl! cried my mother, displeased; but with a milder turn, ay,
ay, Mr. Hickman, sit down by me: I have no such forbidding folly in my
dress.

I looked serious; and in my heart was glad this speech of hers was not
made to your uncle Antony.

My mother, with the true widow's freedom, would mighty prudently have
led into the subject we had been upon; and would have had read to him, I
question not, that very paragraph in your letter which is so much in
his favour. He was highly obliged to dear Miss Harlowe, she would assure
him; that she did say--

But I asked him, if he had any news by his last letters from London?--A
question which he always understands to be a subject changer; for
otherwise I never put it. And so if he be but silent, I am not angry
with him that he answers it not.

I choose not to mention my proposal before him, till I know how it will
be relished by my mother. If it be not well received, perhaps I may
employ him on the occasion. Yet I don't like to owe him an obligation,
if I could help it. For men who have his views in their heads, do so
parade it, so strut about, if a woman condescend to employ them in her
affairs, that one has no patience with them.

However, if I find not an opportunity this day, I will make one
to-morrow.

I shall not open either of your sealed-up parcels, but in your presence.
There is no need. Your conduct is out of all question with me: and by
the extracts you have given me from his letters and your own, I know all
that relates to the present situation of things between you.

I was going to give you a little flippant hint or two. But since you
wish to be thought superior to all our sex in the command of yourself;
and since indeed you deserve to be thought so; I will spare you. You
are, however, at times, more than half inclined to speak out. That
you do not, is only owing to a little bashful struggle between you and
yourself, as I may say. When that is quite got over, I know you will
favour me undisguisedly with the result.

I cannot forgive your taking upon me (at so extravagant a rate too) to
pay my mother's servants. Indeed I am, and I will be, angry with you for
it. A year's wages at once well nigh! only as, unknown to my mother, I
make it better for the servants according to their merits--how it made
the man stare!--And it may be his ruin too, as far as I know. If he
should buy a ring, and marry a sorry body in the neighbourhood with the
money, one would be loth, a twelvemonth hence, that the poor old fellow
should think he had reason to wish the bounty never conferred.

I MUST give you your way in these things, you say.--And I know there is
no contradicting you: for you were ever putting too great a value upon
little offices done for you, and too little upon the great ones you do
for others. The satisfaction you have in doing so, I grant it, repays
you. But why should you, by the nobleness of your mind, throw reproaches
upon the rest of the world? particularly, upon your own family--and upon
ours too?

If, as I have heard you say, it is a good rule to give WORDS the
hearing, but to form our judgment of men and things by DEEDS ONLY;
what shall we think of one, who seeks to find palliatives in words, for
narrowness of heart in the very persons her deeds so silently, yet so
forcibly, reflect upon? Why blush you not, my dear friend, to be thus
singular?--When you meet with another person whose mind is like your
own, then display your excellencies as you please: but till then,
for pity's sake, let your heart and your spirit suffer a little
contradiction.

I intended to write but a few lines; chiefly to let you know your
parcels are come safe. And accordingly I began in a large hand; and I
am already come to the end of my second sheet. But I could write a quire
without hesitation upon a subject so copious and so beloved as is your
praise. Not for this single instance of your generosity; since I am
really angry with you for it; but for the benevolence exemplified in
the whole tenor of your life and action; of which this is but a common
instance. Heaven direct you, in your own arduous trials, is all I have
room to add; and make you as happy, as you think to be

Your own ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY NIGHT, APRIL 2.


I have many new particulars to acquaint you with, that shew a great
change in the behaviour of my friends as I find we have. I will give
these particulars to you as they offered.

All the family was at church in the morning. They brought good Dr. Lewen
with them, in pursuance of a previous invitation. And the doctor sent up
to desire my permission to attend me in my own apartment.

You may believe it was easily granted.

So the doctor came up.

We had a conversation of near an hour before dinner: but, to my
surprise, he waved every thing that would have led me to the subject I
supposed he wanted to talk about. At last, I asked him, if it were not
thought strange I should be so long absent from church? He made me some
handsome compliments upon it: but said, for his part, he had ever made
it a rule to avoid interfering in the private concerns of families,
unless desired to do so.

I was prodigiously disappointed; but supposing that he was thought too
just a man to be made a judge of in this cause; I led no more to it:
nor, when he was called down to dinner, did he take the least notice of
leaving me behind him there.

But this was not the first time since my confinement that I thought it a
hardship not to dine below. And when I parted with him on the stairs, a
tear would burst its way; and he hurried down; his own good-natured eyes
glistening; for he saw it.--Nor trusted he his voice, lest the accent I
suppose should have discovered his concern; departing in silence; though
with his usual graceful obligingness.

I hear that he praised me, and my part in the conversation that
passed between us. To shew them, I suppose, that it was not upon the
interesting subjects which I make no doubt he was desired not to enter
upon.

He left me so dissatisfied, yet so perplexed with this new way of
treatment, that I never found myself so much disconcerted, and out of my
train.

But I was to be more so. This was to be a day of puzzle to me. Pregnant
puzzle, if I may say so: for there must great meaning lie behind it.

In the afternoon, all but my brother and sister went to church with
the good doctor; who left his compliments for me. I took a walk in the
garden. My brother and sister walked in it too, and kept me in their
eye a good while, on purpose, as I thought, that I might see how gay and
good-humoured they were together. At last they came down the walk that I
was coming up, hand-in-hand, lover-like.

Your servant, Miss--your servant, Sir--passed between my brother and me.

Is it not coldish, Clary! in a kinder voice than usual, said my sister,
and stopped.--I stopped and courtesied low to her half-courtesy.--I
think not, Sister, said I.

She went on. I courtesied without return; and proceeded, turning to my
poultry-yard.

By a shorter turn, arm-in-arm, they were there before me.

I think, Clary, said my brother, you must present me with some of this
breed, for Scotland.

If you please, Brother.

I'll choose for you, said my sister.

And while I fed them, they pointed to half a dozen: yet intending
nothing by it, I believe, but to shew a deal of love and good-humour to
each other before me.

My uncles next, (at their return from church) were to do me the honour
of their notice. They bid Betty tell me, they would drink tea with me
in my own apartment. Now, thought I, shall I have the subject of next
Tuesday enforced upon me.

But they contradicted the order for tea, and only my uncle Harlowe came
up to me.

Half-distant, half-affectionate, at his entering my chamber, was the
air he put on to his daughter-niece, as he used to call me; and I threw
myself at his feet, and besought his favour.

None of these discomposures, Child. None of these apprehensions. You
will now have every body's favour. All is coming about, my dear. I was
impatient to see you. I could no longer deny myself this satisfaction.
He then raised me, and kissed me, and called me charming creature!

But he waved entering into any interesting subject. All will be well
now. All will be right!--No more complainings! every body loves you!--I
only came to make my earliest court to you! [were his condescending
words] and to sit and talk of twenty and twenty fond things, as I used
to do. And let every past disagreeable thing be forgotten; as if nothing
had happened.

He understood me as beginning to hint at the disgrace of my
confinement--No disgrace my dear can fall to your lot: your reputation
is too well established.--I longed to see you, repeated me--I have seen
nobody half so amiable since I saw you last.

And again he kissed my cheek, my glowing cheek; for I was impatient,
I was vexed, to be thus, as I thought, played upon: And how could I be
thankful for a visit, that (it was now evident) was only a too humble
artifice, to draw me in against the next Tuesday, or to leave me
inexcusable to them all?

O my cunning brother!--This is his contrivance. And then my anger made
me recollect the triumph in his and my sister's fondness for each other,
as practised before me; and the mingled indignation flashing from their
eyes, as arm-in-arm they spoke to me, and the forced condescension
playing upon their lips, when they called me Clary, and Sister.

Do you think I could, with these reflections, look upon my uncle
Harlowe's visit as the favour he seemed desirous I should think it
to be?--Indeed I could not; and seeing him so studiously avoid all
recrimination, as I may call it, I gave into the affectation; and
followed him in his talk of indifferent things: while he seemed to
admire this thing and that, as if he had never seen them before; and
now-and then condescendingly kissed the hand that wrought some of the
things he fixed his eyes upon; not so much to admire them, as to find
subjects to divert what was most in his head, and in my heart.

At his going away--How can I leave you here by yourself, my dear? you,
whose company used to enliven us all. You are not expected down indeed:
but I protest I had a good mind to surprise your father and mother!--If
I thought nothing would arise that would be disagreeable--My dear!
my love! [O the dear artful gentleman! how could my uncle Harlowe so
dissemble?] What say you? Will you give me your hands? Will you see your
father? Can you stand his displeasure, on first seeing the dear creature
who has given him and all of us so much disturbance? Can you promise
future--

He saw me rising in my temper--Nay, my dear, interrupting himself, if
you cannot be all resignation, I would not have you think of it.

My heart, struggling between duty and warmth of temper, was full. You
know, my dear, I never could bear to be dealt meanly with!--How--how can
you, Sir! you my Papa-uncle--How can you, Sir!--The poor girl!--for I
could not speak with connexion.

Nay, my dear, if you cannot be all duty, all resignation--better stay
where you are.--But after the instance you have given--

Instance I have given!--What instance, Sir?

Well, well, Child, better stay where you are, if your past confinement
hangs so heavy upon you--but now there will be a sudden end to
it--Adieu, my dear!--Three words only--Let your compliance be
sincere!--and love me, as you used to love me--your Grandfather did not
do so much for you, as I will do for you.

Without suffering me to reply, he hurried away, as I thought, like one
who has been employed to act a part against his will, and was glad it
was over.


Don't you see, my dear Miss Howe, how they are all determined?--Have I
not reason to dread next Tuesday?


Up presently after came my sister:--to observe, I suppose, the way I was
in.

She found me in tears.

Have you not a Thomas a Kempis, Sister? with a stiff air.

I have, Madam.

Madam!--How long are we to be at this distance, Clary?

No longer, my dear Bella, if you allow me to call you sister. And I took
her hand.

No fawning neither, Girl!

I withdrew my hand as hastily, as you may believe I should have done,
had I, in feeling for one of your parcels under the wood, been bitten by
a viper.

I beg pardon, said I,--Too-too ready to make advances, I am always
subjecting myself to contempts.

People who know not how to keep a middle behaviour, said she, must ever
do so.

I will fetch you the Kempis, Sister. I did. Here it is. You will find
excellent things, Bella, in that little book.

I wish, retorted she, you had profited by them.

I wish you may, said I. Example from a sister older than one's self is a
fine thing.

Older! saucy little fool!--And away she flung.

What a captious old woman will my sister make, if she lives to be
one!--demanding the reverence, perhaps, yet not aiming at the merit; and
ashamed of the years that can only entitle her to the reverence.

It is plain, from what I have related, that they think they have got me
at some advantage by obtaining my consent to the interview: but if it
were not, Betty's impertinence just now would make it evident. She has
been complimenting me upon it; and upon the visit of my uncle Harlowe.
She says, the difficulty now is more than half over with me. She is
sure I would not see Mr. Solmes, but to have him. Now shall she be soon
better employed than of late she has been. All hands will be at work.
She loves dearly to have weddings go forward!--Who knows, whose turn
will be next?

I found in the afternoon a reply to my answer to Mr. Lovelace's letter.
It is full of promises, full of vows of gratitude, of eternal gratitude,
is his word, among others still more hyperbolic. Yet Mr. Lovelace, the
least of any man whose letters I have seen, runs into those elevated
absurdities. I should be apt to despise him for it, if he did. Such
language looks always to me, as if the flatterer thought to find a woman
a fool, or hoped to make her one.

'He regrets my indifference to him; which puts all the hope he has in my
favour upon the shocking usage I receive from my friends.

'As to my charge upon him of unpoliteness and uncontroulableness--What
[he asks] can he say? since being unable absolutely to vindicate
himself, he has too much ingenuousness to attempt to do so: yet is
struck dumb by my harsh construction, that his acknowledging temper
is owing more to his carelessness to defend himself, than to his
inclination to amend. He had never before met with the objections
against his morals which I had raised, justly raised: and he was
resolved to obviate them. What is it, he asks, that he has promised, but
reformation by my example? And what occasion for the promise, if he
had not faults, and those very great ones, to reform? He hopes
acknowledgement of an error is no bad sign; although my severe virtue
has interpreted it into one.

'He believes I may be right (severely right, he calls it) in my judgment
against making reprisals in the case of the intelligence he receives
from my family: he cannot charge himself to be of a temper that leads
him to be inquisitive into any body's private affairs; but hopes, that
the circumstances of the case, and the strange conduct of my friends,
will excuse him; especially when so much depends upon his knowing the
movements of a family so violently bent, by measures right or wrong, to
carry their point against me, in malice to him. People, he says, who act
like angels, ought to have angels to deal with. For his part, he has not
yet learned the difficult lesson of returning good for evil: and shall
think himself the less encouraged to learn it by the treatment I have
met with from the very persons who would trample upon him, as they do
upon me, were he to lay himself under their feet.

'He excuses himself for the liberties he owns he has heretofore taken in
ridiculing the marriage-state. It is a subject, he says, that he has not
of late treated so lightly. He owns it to be so trite, so beaten a
topic with all libertines and witlings; so frothy, so empty, so nothing
meaning, so worn-out a theme, that he is heartily ashamed of himself,
ever to have made it his. He condemns it as a stupid reflection upon the
laws and good order of society, and upon a man's own ancestors: and
in himself, who has some reason to value himself upon his descent
and alliances, more censurable, than in those who have not the same
advantages to boast of. He promises to be more circumspect than ever,
both in his words and actions, that he may be more and more worthy of
my approbation; and that he may give an assurance before hand, that a
foundation is laid in his mind for my example to work upon with equal
reputation and effect to us both;--if he may be so happy to call me his.

'He gives me up, as absolutely lost, if I go to my uncle Antony's; the
close confinement; the moated house; the chapel; the implacableness of
my brother and sister; and their power over the rest of the family,
he sets forth in strong lights; and plainly says, that he must have a
struggle to prevent my being carried thither.'

Your kind, your generous endeavours to interest your mother in my
behalf, will, I hope, prevent those harsher extremities to which I might
be otherwise driven. And to you I will fly, if permitted, and keep all
my promises, of not corresponding with any body, not seeing any body,
but by your mother's direction and yours.

I will close and deposit at this place. It is not necessary to say, how
much I am

Your ever affectionate and obliged CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


I am glad my papers are safe in your hands. I will make it my endeavour
to deserve your good opinion, that I may not at once disgrace your
judgment, and my own heart.

I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. He is extremely apprehensive of
the meeting I am to have with Mr. Solmes to-morrow. He says, 'that the
airs that wretch gives himself on the occasion add to his concern; and
it is with infinite difficulty that he prevails upon himself not to make
him a visit to let him know what he may expect, if compulsion be used
towards me in his favour. He assures me, that Solmes has actually talked
with tradesmen of new equipages, and names the people in town with whom
he has treated: that he has even' [Was there ever such a horrid wretch!]
'allotted this and that apartment in his house, for a nursery, and other
offices.'

How shall I bear to hear such a creature talk of love to me? I shall be
out of all patience with him. Besides, I thought that he did not dare
to make or talk of these impudent preparations.--So inconsistent as such
are with my brother's views--but I fly the subject.

Upon this confidence of Solmes, you will less wonder at that of
Lovelace, 'in pressing me in the name of all his family, to escape
from so determined a violence as is intended to be offered to me at my
uncle's: that the forward contriver should propose Lord M.'s chariot and
six to be at the stile that leads up to the lonely coppice adjoining to
our paddock. You will see how audaciously he mentions settlements ready
drawn; horsemen ready to mount; and one of his cousins Montague to be
in the chariot, or at the George in the neighbouring village, waiting
to accompany me to Lord M.'s, or to Lady Betty's or Lady Sarah's, or to
town, as I please; and upon such orders, or conditions, and under such
restrictions, as to himself, as I shall prescribe.'

You will see how he threatens, 'To watch and waylay them, and to rescue
me as he calls it, by an armed force of friends and servants, if they
attempt to carry me against my will to my uncle's; and this, whether I
give my consent to the enterprise, or not:--since he shall have no hopes
if I am once there.'

O my dear friend! Who can think of these things, and not be extremely
miserable in her apprehensions!

This mischievous sex! What had I to do with any of them; or they
with me?--I had deserved this, were it by my own seeking, by my own
giddiness, that I had brought myself into this situation--I wish with
all my heart--but how foolish we are apt to wish when we find ourselves
unhappy, and know not how to help ourselves!

On your mother's goodness, however, is my reliance. If I can but avoid
being precipitated on either hand, till my cousin Morden arrives, a
reconciliation must follow; and all will be happy.

I have deposited a letter for Mr. Lovelace; in which 'I charge him, as
he would not disoblige me for ever, to avoid any rash step, any visit to
Mr. Solmes, which may be followed by acts of violence.'

I re-assure him, 'That I will sooner die than be that man's wife.

'Whatever be my usage, whatever shall be the result of the apprehended
interview, I insist upon it that he presume not to offer violence to
any of my friends: and express myself highly displeased, that he should
presume upon such an interest in my esteem, as to think himself entitled
to dispute my father's authority in my removal to my uncle's; although I
tell him, that I will omit neither prayers nor contrivance, even to the
making myself ill, to avoid going.'

To-morrow is Tuesday! How soon comes upon us the day we dread!--Oh that
a deep sleep of twenty four hours would seize my faculties!--But then
the next day would be Tuesday, as to all the effects and purposes for
which I so much dread it. If this reach you before the event of the so
much apprehended interview can be known, pray for

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY MORNING, SIX O'CLOCK.


The day is come!--I wish it were happily over. I have had a wretched
night. Hardly a wink have I slept, ruminating upon the approaching
interview. The very distance of time to which they consented, has added
solemnity to the meeting, which otherwise it would not have had.

A thoughtful mind is not a blessing to be coveted, unless it had such a
happy vivacity with it as yours: a vivacity, which enables a person to
enjoy the present, without being over-anxious about the future.


TUESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

I have had a visit from my aunt Hervey. Betty, in her alarming way, told
me, I should have a lady to breakfast with me, whom I little expected;
giving me to believe it was my mother. This fluttered me so much, on
hearing a lady coming up-stairs, supposing it was she, (and not knowing
how to account for her motives in such a visit, after I had been so long
banished from her presence,) that my aunt, at her entrance, took notice
of my disorder; and, after her first salutation,

Why, Miss, said she, you seem surprised.--Upon my word, you thoughtful
young ladies have strange apprehensions about nothing at all. What,
taking my hand, can be the matter with you?--Why, my dear, tremble,
tremble, tremble, at this rate? You'll not be fit to be seen by any
body. Come, my love, kissing my cheek, pluck up a courage. By this
needless flutter on the approaching interview, when it is over you will
judge of your other antipathies, and laugh at yourself for giving way to
so apprehensive an imagination.

I said, that whatever we strongly imagined, was in its effect at the
time more than imaginary, although to others it might not appear so:
that I had not rested one hour all night: that the impertinent set over
me, by giving me room to think my mother was coming up, had so much
disconcerted me, that I should be very little qualified to see any body
I disliked to see.

There was no accounting for these things, she said. Mr. Solmes last
night supposed he should be under as much agitation as I could be.

Who is it, then, Madam, that so reluctant an interview on both sides, is
to please?

Both of you, my dear, I hope, after the first flurries are over. The
most apprehensive beginnings, I have often known, make the happiest
conclusions.

There can be but one happy conclusion to the intended visit; and that
is, That both sides may be satisfied it will be the last.

She then represented how unhappy it would be for me, if I did not suffer
myself to be prevailed upon: she pressed me to receive Mr. Solmes
as became my education: and declared, that his apprehensions on the
expectation he had of seeing me, were owing to his love and his awe;
intimating, That true love is ever accompanied by fear and reverence;
and that no blustering, braving lover could deserve encouragement.

To this I answered, That constitution was to be considered: that a
man of spirit would act like one, and could do nothing meanly: that
a creeping mind would creep into every thing, where it had a view to
obtain a benefit by it; and insult, where it had power, and nothing to
expect: that this was not a point now to be determined with me: that
I had said as much as I could possibly say on the subject: that this
interview was imposed upon me: by those, indeed, who had a right to
impose it: but that it was sorely against my will complied with: and for
this reason, that there was aversion, not wilfulness, in the case; and
so nothing could come of it, but a pretence, as I much apprehended, to
use me still more severely than I had been used.

She was then pleased to charge me with prepossession and prejudice. She
expatiated upon the duty of a child. She imputed to me abundance of fine
qualities; but told me, that, in this case, that of persuadableness was
wanting to crown all. She insisted upon the merit of obedience, although
my will were not in it. From a little hint I gave of my still greater
dislike to see Mr. Solmes, on account of the freedom I had treated him
with, she talked to me of his forgiving disposition; of his infinite
respect for me; and I cannot tell what of this sort.

I never found myself so fretful in my life: and so I told my aunt; and
begged her pardon for it. But she said, it was well disguised then; for
she saw nothing but little tremors, which were usual with young ladies
when they were to see their admirers for the first time; and this might
be called so, with respect to me; since it was the first time I had
consented to see Mr. Solmes in that light--but that the next--

How, Madam, interrupted I--Is it then imagined, that I give this meeting
on that footing?

To be sure it is, Child.

To be sure it is, Madam! Then I do yet desire to decline it.--I will
not, I cannot, see him, if he expects me to see him upon those terms.

Niceness, punctilio, mere punctilio, Niece!--Can you think that your
appointment, (day, place, hour,) and knowing what the intent of it was,
is to be interpreted away as a mere ceremony, and to mean nothing?--Let
me tell you, my dear, your father, mother, uncles, every body, respect
this appointment as the first act of your compliance with their wills:
and therefore recede not, I desire you; but make a merit of what cannot
be avoided.

O the hideous wretch!--Pardon me, Madam.--I to be supposed to meet
such a man as that, with such a view! and he to be armed with such an
expectation!--But it cannot be that he expects it, whatever others may
do.--It is plain he cannot, by the fears he tell you all he shall have
to see me. If his hope were so audacious, he could not fear so much.

Indeed, he has this hope; and justly founded too. But his fear arises
from his reverence, as I told you before.

His reverence!--his unworthiness!--'Tis so apparent, that even he
himself sees it, as well as every body else. Hence his offers
to purchase me! Hence it is, that settlements are to make up for
acknowledged want of merit!

His unworthiness, say you!--Not so fast, my dear. Does not this look
like setting a high value upon yourself?--We all have exalted notions of
your merit, Niece; but nevertheless, it would not be wrong, if you were
to arrogate less to yourself; though more were to be your due than your
friends attribute to you.

I am sorry, Madam, it should be thought arrogance in me, to suppose I am
not worthy of a better man than Mr. Solmes, both as to person and mind:
and as to fortune, I thank God I despise all that can be insisted upon
in his favour from so poor a plea.

She told me, It signified nothing to talk: I knew the expectation of
every one.

Indeed I did not. It was impossible I could think of such a strange
expectation, upon a compliance made only to shew I would comply in all
that was in my power to comply with.

I might easily, she said, have supposed, that every one thought I was
beginning to oblige them all, by the kind behaviour of my brother and
sister to me in the garden, last Sunday; by my sister's visit to me
afterwards in my chamber (although both more stiffly received by me,
than were either wished or expected); by my uncle Harlowe's affectionate
visit to me the same afternoon, not indeed so very gratefully received
as I used to receive his favours:--but this he kindly imputed to the
displeasure I had conceived at my confinement, and to my intention to
come off by degrees, that I might keep myself in countenance for my past
opposition.

See, my dear, the low cunning of that Sunday-management, which then
so much surprised me! And see the reason why Dr. Lewen was admitted to
visit me, yet forbore to enter upon a subject about which I thought he
came to talk to me!--For it seems there was no occasion to dispute with
me on the point I was to be supposed to have conceded to.--See, also,
how unfairly my brother and sister must have represented their pretended
kindness, when (though the had an end to answer by appearing kind) their
antipathy to me seems to have been so strong, that they could not help
insulting me by their arm-in-arm lover-like behaviour to each other; as
my sister afterwards likewise did, when she came to borrow my Kempis.

I lifted up my hands and eyes! I cannot, said I, give this treatment a
name! The end so unlikely to be answered by means so low! I know whose
the whole is! He that could get my uncle Harlowe to contribute his part,
and to procure the acquiescence of the rest of my friends to it, must
have the power to do any thing with them against me.

Again my aunt told me, that talking and invective, now I had given the
expectation, would signify nothing. She hoped I would not shew every
one, that they had been too forward in their constructions of my desire
to oblige them. She could assure me, that it would be worse for me, if
now I receded, than if I had never advanced.

Advanced, Madam! How can you say advanced? Why, this is a trick upon
me! A poor low trick! Pardon me, Madam, I don't say you have a hand in
it.--But, my dearest Aunt, tell me, Will not my mother be present at
this dreaded interview? Will she not so far favour me? Were it but to
qualify--

Qualify, my dear, interrupted she--your mother, and your uncle Harlowe
would not be present on this occasion for the world--

O then, Madam, how can they look upon my consent to this interview as an
advance?

My aunt was displeased at this home-push. Miss Clary, said she, there is
no dealing with you. It would be happy for you, and for every body else,
were your obedience as ready as your wit. I will leave you--

Not in anger, I hope, Madam, interrupted I--all I meant was, to observe,
that let the meeting issue as it may, and as it must issue, it cannot be
a disappointment to any body.

O Miss! you seem to be a very determined young creature. Mr. Solmes
will be here at your time: and remember once more, that upon the coming
afternoon depend upon the peace of your whole family, and your own
happiness.

And so saying, down she hurried.

Here I will stop. In what way I shall resume, or when, is not left to
me to conjecture; much less determine. I am excessively uneasy!--No good
news from your mother, I doubt!--I will deposit thus far, for fear of
the worst.

Adieu, my best, rather, my only friend! CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY EVENING; AND CONTINUED
THROUGH THE NIGHT.

Well, my dear, I am alive, and here! but how long I shall be either
here, or alive, I cannot say. I have a vast deal to write; and perhaps
shall have little time for it. Nevertheless, I must tell you how the
saucy Betty again discomposed me, when she came up with this Solmes's
message; although, as you will remember from my last, I was in a way
before that wanted no additional surprises.

Miss! Miss! Miss! cried she, as fast as she could speak, with her arms
spread abroad, and all her fingers distended, and held up, will you be
pleased to walk down into your own parlour?--There is every body, I will
assure you in full congregation!--And there is Mr. Solmes, as fine as a
lord, with a charming white peruke, fine laced shirt and ruffles, coat
trimmed with silver, and a waistcoat standing on end with lace!--Quite
handsome, believe me!--You never saw such an alteration!--Ah! Miss,
shaking her head, 'tis pity you have said so much against him! but you
will know how to come off for all that!--I hope it will not be too late!

Impertinence! said I--Wert thou bid to come up in this fluttering
way?--and I took up my fan, and fanned myself.

Bless me! said she, how soon these fine young ladies will be put into
flusterations!--I mean not either to offend or frighten you, I am
sure.--

Every body there, do you say?--Who do you call every body?

Why, Miss, holding out her left palm opened, and with a flourish, and
a saucy leer, patting it with the fore finger of the other, at every
mentioned person, there is your papa!--there is your mamma!--there is
your uncle Harlowe!--there is your uncle Antony!--your aunt Hervey!--my
young lady!--and my young master!--and Mr. Solmes, with the air of a
great courtier, standing up, because he named you:--Mrs. Betty, said he,
[then the ape of a wench bowed and scraped, as awkwardly as I suppose
the person did whom she endeavoured to imitate,] pray give my humble
service to Miss, and tell her, I wait her commands.

Was not this a wicked wench?--I trembled so, I could hardly stand. I was
spiteful enough to say, that her young mistress, I supposed, bid her put
on these airs, to frighten me out of a capacity of behaving so calmly as
should procure me my uncles' compassion.

What a way do you put yourself in, Miss, said the insolent!--Come, dear
Madam, taking up my fan, which I had laid down, and approaching me with
it, fanning, shall I--

None of thy impertinence!--But say you, all my friends are below with
him? And am I to appear before them all?

I can't tell if they'll stay when you come. I think they seemed to be
moving when Mr. Solmes gave me his orders.--But what answer shall I
carry to the 'squire?

Say, I can't go!--but yet when 'tis over, 'tis over!--Say, I'll wait
upon--I'll attend--I'll come presently--say anything; I care not
what--but give me my fan, and fetch me a glass of water--

She went, and I fanned myself all the time; for I was in a flame; and
hemmed, and struggled with myself all I could; and, when she returned,
drank my water; and finding no hope presently of a quieter heart, I sent
her down, and followed her with precipitation; trembling so, that, had
I not hurried, I question if I could have got down at all.--Oh my dear,
what a poor, passive machine is the body when the mind is disordered!

There are two doors to my parlour, as I used to call it. As I entered
one, my friends hurried out the other. I just saw the gown of my sister,
the last who slid away. My uncle Antony went out with them: but he staid
not long, as you shall hear; and they all remained in the next parlour,
a wainscot partition only parting the two. I remember them both in one:
but they were separated in favour of us girls, for each to receive her
visitors in at her pleasure.

Mr. Solmes approached me as soon as I entered, cringing to the ground,
a visible confusion in every feature of his face. After half a dozen
choaked-up Madams,--he was very sorry--he was very much concerned--it
was his misfortune--and there he stopped, being unable presently to
complete a sentence.

This gave me a little more presence of mind. Cowardice in a foe begets
courage in one's self--I see that plainly now--yet perhaps, at bottom,
the new-made bravo is a greater coward than the other.

I turned from him, and seated myself in one of the fireside chairs,
fanning myself. I have since recollected, that I must have looked
very saucily. Could I have had any thoughts of the man, I should have
despised myself for it. But what can be said in the case of an aversion
so perfectly sincere?

He hemmed five or six times, as I had done above; and these produced a
sentence--that I could not but see his confusion. This sentence produced
two or three more. I believe my aunt had been his tutoress; for it was
his awe, his reverence for so superlative a Lady [I assure you!] And he
hoped--he hoped--three times he hoped, before he told me what--at
last it came out, that I was too generous (generosity, he said, was my
character) to despise him for such--for such--for such--true tokens of
his love.

I do indeed see you under some confusion, Sir; and this gives me hope,
that although I have been compelled, as I may call it, to give way
to this interview, it may be attended with happier effects than I had
apprehended from it.

He had hemmed himself into more courage.

You could not, Madam, imagine any creature so blind to your merits,
and so little attracted by them, as easily to forego the interest and
approbation he was honoured with by your worthy family, while he had
any hope given him, that one day he might, by his perseverance and zeal,
expect your favour.

I am but too much aware, Sir, that it is upon the interest and
approbation you mention, that you build such hope. It is impossible
otherwise, that a man, who has any regard for his own happiness, would
persevere against such declarations as I have made, and think myself
obliged to make, in justice to you, as well as to myself.

He had seen many instances, he told me, and had heard of more, where
ladies had seemed as averse, and yet had been induced, some by motives
of compassion, others by persuasion of friends, to change their minds;
and had been very happy afterwards: and he hoped this might be the case
here.

I have no notion, Sir, of compliment, in an article of such importance
as this: yet I am sorry to be obliged to speak my mind so plainly as I
am going to do.--Know then, that I have invincible objections, Sir, to
your address. I have avowed them with an earnestness that I believe is
without example: and why?--because I believe it is without example that
any young creature, circumstanced as I am, was ever treated as I have
been treated on your account.

It is hoped, Madam, that your consent may in time be obtained--that is
the hope; and I shall be a miserable man if it cannot.

Better, Sir, give me leave to say, you were miserable by yourself, than
that you should make two so.

You may have heard, Madam, things to my disadvantage. No man is without
enemies. Be pleased to let me know what you have heard, and I will
either own my faults, and amend; or I will convince you that I am basely
bespattered: and once I understand you overheard something that I should
say, that gave you offence: unguardedly, perhaps; but nothing but what
shewed my value, and that I would persist so long as I have hope.

I have indeed heard many things to your disadvantage:--and I was far
from being pleased with what I overheard fall from your lips: but as you
were not any thing to me, and never could be, it was not for me to be
concerned about the one or the other.

I am sorry, Madam, to hear this. I am sure you should not tell me of my
fault, that I would be unwilling to correct in myself.

Then, Sir, correct this fault--do not wish to have a young creature
compelled in the most material article of her life, for the sake of
motives she despises; and in behalf of a person she cannot value: one
that has, in her own right, sufficient to set her above all your offers,
and a spirit that craves no more than what it has, to make itself easy
and happy.

I don't see, Madam, how you would be happy, if I were to discontinue my
address: for--

That is nothing to you, Sir, interrupted I: do you but withdraw your
pretensions: and if it will be thought fit to start up another man for
my punishment, the blame will not lie at your door. You will be entitled
to my thanks, and most heartily will I thank you.

He paused, and seemed a little at a loss: and I was going to give him
still stronger and more personal instances of my plain-dealing; when in
came my uncle Antony.

So, Niece, so!--sitting in state like a queen, giving audience! haughty
audience!--Mr. Solmes, why stand you thus humbly?--Why this distance,
man? I hope to see you upon a more intimate footing before we part.

I arose, as soon as he entered--and approached him with a bend knee: Let
me, Sir, reverence my uncle, whom I have not for so long time seen!--Let
me, Sir, bespeak your favour and compassion.

You will have the favour of every body, Niece, when you know how to
deserve it.

If ever I deserved it, I deserve it now.--I have been hardly used!--I
have made proposals that ought to be accepted, and such as would not
have been asked of me. What have I done, that I must be banished and
confined thus disgracefully? that I must not be allowed to have any
free-will in an article that concerns my present and future happiness?--

Miss Clary, replied my uncle, you have had your will in every thing till
now; and this makes your parents' will sit so heavy upon you.

My will, Sir! be pleased to allow me to ask, what was my will till now,
but my father's will, and yours and my uncle Harlowe's will?--Has it not
been my pride to obey and oblige?--I never asked a favour, that I did
not first sit down and consider, if it were fit to be granted. And now,
to shew my obedience, have I not offered to live single?--Have I not
offered to divest myself of my grandfather's bounty, and to cast myself
upon my father's! and that to be withdrawn, whenever I disoblige him?
Why, dear, good Sir, am I to be made unhappy in a point so concerning my
happiness?

Your grandfather's estate is not wished from you. You are not desired
to live a single life. You know our motives, and we guess at yours. And,
let me tell you, well as we love you, we should much sooner choose to
follow you to the grave, than that yours should take place.

I will engage never to marry any man, without my father's consent, and
yours, Sir, and every body's. Did I ever give you cause to doubt my
word?--And here I will take the solemnest oath that can be offered me--

That is the matrimonial one, interrupted he, with a big voice--and to
this gentleman.--It shall, it shall, cousin Clary!--And the more you
oppose it, the worse it shall be for you.

This, and before the man, who seemed to assume courage upon it, highly
provoked me.

Then, Sir, you shall sooner follow me to the grave indeed.--I will
undergo the cruelest death--I will even consent to enter into that awful
vault of my ancestors, and have that bricked up upon me, rather than
consent to be miserable for life. And, Mr. Solmes, turning to him, take
notice of what I say: This or any death, I will sooner undergo [that
will quickly be over] than be yours, and for ever unhappy!

My uncle was in a terrible rage upon this. He took Mr. Solmes by the
hand, shocked as the man seemed to be, and drew him to the window--Don't
be surprised, Mr. Solmes, don't be concerned at this. We know, and rapt
out a sad oath, what women will say in their wrath: the wind is not more
boisterous, nor more changeable; and again he swore to that.--If you
think it worthwhile to wait for such an ungrateful girl as this, I'll
engage she'll veer about; I'll engage she shall. And a third time
violently swore to it.

Then coming up to me (who had thrown myself, very much disordered by my
vehemence, into the most distant window) as if he would have beat me;
his face violently working, his hands clinched, and his teeth set--Yes,
yes, yes, you shall, Cousin Clary, be Mr. Solmes's wife; we will see
that you shall; and this in one week at farthest.--And then a fourth
time he confirmed it!--Poor gentleman! how he swore!

I am sorry, Sir, said I, to see you in such a passion. All this, I am
but too sensible, is owing to my brother's instigation; who would not
himself give the instance of duty that is sought to be exacted from me.
It is best for me to withdraw. I shall but provoke you farther, I fear:
for although I would gladly obey you if I could, yet this is a point
determined with me; and I cannot so much as wish to get over it.

How could I avoid making these strong declarations, the man in presence?

I was going out at the door I came in at; the gentlemen looking upon one
another, as if referring to each other what to do, or whether to engage
my stay, or suffer me to go; and whom should I meet at the door but my
brother, who had heard all that had passed!

He bolted upon me so unexpectedly, that I was surprised. He took my
hand, and grasped it with violence: Return, pretty Miss, said he;
return, if you please. You shall not yet be bricked up. Your instigating
brother shall save you from that!--O thou fallen angel, said he, peering
up to my downcast face--such a sweetness here!--and such an obstinacy
there! tapping my neck--O thou true woman--though so young!--But you
shall not have your rake: remember that; in a loud whisper, as if he
would be decently indecent before the man. You shall be redeemed, and
this worthy gentleman, raising his voice, will be so good as to redeem
you from ruin--and hereafter you will bless him, or have reason to bless
him, for his condescension; that was the brutal brother's word!

He had led me up to meet Mr. Solmes, whose hand he took, as he held
mine. Here, Sir, said he, take the rebel daughter's hand: I give it you
now: she shall confirm the gift in a week's time; or will have neither
father, mother, nor uncles, to boast of.

I snatched my hand away.

How now, Miss--!

And how now, Sir!--What right have you to dispose of my hand?--If you
govern every body else, you shall not govern me; especially in a point
so immediately relative to myself, and in which you neither have, nor
ever shall have, any thing to do.

I would have broken from him; but he held my hand too fast.

Let me go, Sir!--Why am I thus treated?--You design, I doubt not, with
your unmanly gripings, to hurt me, as you do: But again I ask, wherefore
is it that I am to be thus treated by you?

He tossed my hand from him with a whirl, that pained my very shoulder. I
wept, and held my other hand to the part.

Mr. Solmes blamed him. So did my uncle.

He had no patience, he said, with such a perverse one; and to think of
the reflections upon himself, before he entered. He had only given me
back the hand I had not deserved he should touch. It was one of my arts
to pretend to be so pained.

Mr. Solmes said, he would sooner give up all his hopes of me, than that
I should be used unkindly.--And he offered to plead in my behalf to them
both; and applied himself with a bow, as if for my approbation of his
interposition.

Interpose not, Mr. Solmes, said I, to save me from my brother's
violence. I cannot wish to owe an obligation to a man whose ungenerous
perseverance is the occasion of that violence, and of all my disgraceful
sufferings.

How generous in you, Mr. Solmes, said my brother, to interpose so kindly
in behalf of such an immovable spirit! I beg of you to persist in your
address--the unnatural brother called it address!--For all our family's
sake, and for her sake too, if you love her, persist!--Let us save her,
if possible, from ruining herself. Look at her person! [and he gazed at
me, from head to foot, pointing at me, as he referred to Mr. Solmes,]
think of her fine qualities!--all the world confesses them, and we all
gloried in her till now. She is worth saving; and, after two or three
more struggles, she will be yours, and take my word for it, will reward
your patience. Talk not, therefore, of giving up your hopes, for a
little whining folly. She has entered upon a parade, which she knows
not how to quit with a female grace. You have only her pride and her
obstinacy to encounter: and depend upon it, you will be as happy a man
in a fortnight, as a married man can be.

You have heard me say, my dear, that my brother has always taken a
liberty to reflect upon our sex, and upon matrimony!--He would not, if
he did not think it wit to do so!--Just as poor Mr. Wyerley, and others,
whom we both know, profane and ridicule scripture; and all to evince
their pretensions to the same pernicious talent, and to have it thought
they are too wise to be religious.

Mr. Solmes, with a self-satisfied air, presumptuously said, he would
suffer every thing, to oblige my family, and to save me: and doubted not
to be amply rewarded, could he be so happy as to succeed at last.

Mr. Solmes, said I, if you have any regard for your own happiness, (mine
is out of the question with you, you have not generosity enough to make
that any part of your scheme,) prosecute no father your address, as my
brother calls it. It is but too just to tell you, that I could not bring
my heart so much as to think of you, without the utmost disapprobation,
before I was used as I have been:--And can you think I am such a slave,
such a poor slave, as to be brought to change my mind by the violent
usage I have met with?

And you, Sir, turning to my brother, if you think that meekness always
indicates tameness; and that there is no magnanimity without bluster;
own yourself mistaken for once: for you shall have reason to judge from
henceforth, that a generous mind is not to be forced; and that--

No more, said the imperious wretch, I charge you, lifting up his hands
and eyes. Then turning to my uncle, Do you hear, Sir? this is your once
faultless niece! This is your favourite!

Mr. Solmes looked as if he know not what to think of the matter; and had
I been left alone with him, I saw plainly I could have got rid of him
easily enough.

My uncle came to me, looking up also to my face, and down to my feet:
and is it possible this can be you? All this violence from you, Miss
Clary?

Yes, it is possible, Sir--and, I will presume to say, this vehemence on
my side is but the natural consequence of the usage I have met with, and
the rudeness I am treated with, even in your presence, by a brother, who
has no more right to controul me, than I have to controul him.

This usage, cousin Clary, was not till all other means were tried with
you.

Tried! to what end, Sir?--Do I contend for any thing more than a mere
negative? You may, Sir, [turning to Mr. Solmes,] possibly you may be
induced the rather to persevere thus ungenerously, as the usage I have
met with for your sake, and what you have now seen offered to me by my
brother, will shew you what I can bear, were my evil destiny ever to
make me yours.

Lord, Madam, cried Solmes, [all this time distorted into twenty
different attitudes, as my brother and my uncle were blessing
themselves, and speaking only to each other by their eyes, and by their
working features; Lord, Madam,] what a construction is this!

A fair construction, Sir, interrupted I: for he that can see a person,
whom he pretends to value, thus treated, and approve of it, must be
capable of treating her thus himself. And that you do approve of it,
is evident by your declared perseverance, when you know I am confined,
banished, and insulted, in order to make me consent to be what I never
can be: and this, let me tell you, as I have often told others, not from
motives of obstinacy, but aversion.

Excuse me, Sir, turning to my uncle--to you, as to my father's brother,
I owe duty. I beg your pardon, but my brother; he shall not constrain
me.--And [turning to the unnatural wretch--I will call him wretch] knit
your brows, Sir, and frown all you will, I will ask you, would you, in
my case, make the sacrifices I am willing to make, to obtain every one's
favour? If not, what right have you to treat me thus; and to procure me
to be treated as I have been for so long a time past?

I had put myself by this time into great disorder: they were silent, and
seemed by their looks to want to talk to one another (walking about in
violent disorders too) between whiles. I sat down fanning myself, (as
it happened, against the glass,) and I could perceive my colour go and
come; and being sick to the very heart, and apprehensive of fainting, I
rung.

Betty came in. I called for a glass of water, and drank it: but nobody
minded me. I heard my brother pronounce the words, Art! Female Art!
to Solmes; which, together with the apprehension that he would not be
welcome, I suppose kept him back. Else I could see the man was affected.
And (still fearing I should faint) I arose, and taking hold of Betty's
arm, let me hold by you, Betty, said I: let me withdraw. And moved
with trembling feet towards the door, and then turned about, and made a
courtesy to my uncle--Permit me, Sir, said I, to withdraw.

Whither go you, Niece? said my uncle: we have not done with you yet.
I charge you depart not. Mr. Solmes has something to open to you, that
will astonish you--and you shall hear it.

Only, Sir, by your leave, for a few minutes into the air. I will return,
if you command it. I will hear all that I am to hear; that it may be
over now and for ever.--You will go with me, Betty?

And so, without any farther prohibition, I retired into the garden; and
there casting myself upon the first seat, and throwing Betty's apron
over my face, leaning against her side, my hands between hers, I gave
way to a violent burst of grief, or passion, or both; which, as it
seemed, saved my heart from breaking, for I was sensible of an immediate
relief.

I have already given you specimens of Mrs. Betty's impertinence. I shall
not, therefore, trouble you with more: for the wench, notwithstanding
this my distress, took great liberties with me, after she saw me a
little recovered, and as I walked farther into the garden; insomuch
that I was obliged to silence her by an absolute prohibition of saying
another word to me; and then she dropped behind me sullen and gloomy.

It was near an hour before I was sent for in again. The messenger was
my cousin Dolly Hervey, who, with an eye of compassion and respect, (for
Miss Hervey always loved me, and calls herself my scholar, as you know,)
told my company was desired.

Betty left us.

Who commands my attendance, Miss? said I--Have you not been in tears, my
dear?

Who can forbid tears? said she.

Why, what is the matter, cousin Dolly?--Sure, nobody is entitled to weep
in this family, but me!

Yes, I am, Madam, said she, because I love you.

I kissed her: And is it for me, my sweet Cousin, that you shed
tears?--There never was love lost between us: but tell me, what is
designed to be done with me, that I have this kind instance of your
compassion for me?

You must take no notice of what I tell you, said the dear girl: but my
mamma has been weeping for you, too, with me; but durst not let any body
see it: O my Dolly, said my mamma, there never was so set a malice
in man as in your cousin James Harlowe. They will ruin the flower and
ornament of their family.

As how, Miss Dolly?--Did she not explain herself?--As how, my dear?

Yes; she said, Mr. Solmes would have given up his claim to you; for he
said, you hated him, and there were no hopes; and your mamma was willing
he should; and to have you taken at your word, to renounce Mr. Lovelace
and to live single. My mamma was for it too; for they heard all that
passed between you and uncle Antony, and cousin James; saying, it was
impossible to think of prevailing upon you to have Mr. Solmes. Uncle
Harlowe seemed in the same way of thinking; at least, my mamma says he
did not say any thing to the contrary. But your papa was immovable, and
was angry at your mamma and mine upon it.--And hereupon your brother,
your sister, and my uncle Antony, joined in, and changed the scene
entirely. In short, she says, that Mr. Solmes had great matters engaged
to him. He owned, that you were the finest young lady in England, and
he would be content to be but little beloved, if he could not, after
marriage, engage your heart, for the sake of having the honour to call
you his but for one twelvemonth--I suppose he would break your heart the
next--for he is a cruel-hearted man, I am sure.

My friends may break my heart, cousin Dolly; but Mr. Solmes will never
have it in his power to break it.

I do not know that, Miss: you will have good luck to avoid having him,
by what I can find; for my mamma says, they are all now of one mind,
herself excepted; and she is forced to be silent, your papa and brother
are both so outrageous.

I am got above minding my brother, cousin Dolly:--he is but my brother.
But to my father I owe duty and obedience, if I could comply.

We are apt to be fond of any body that will side with us, when oppressed
or provoked. I always loved my cousin Dolly; but now she endeared
herself to me ten times more, by her soothing concern for me. I asked
what she would do, were she in my case?

Without hesitation, she replied, have Mr. Lovelace out of hand, and take
up her own estate, if she were me; and there would be an end to it.--And
Mr. Lovelace, she said, was a fine gentleman:--Mr. Solmes was not worthy
to buckle his shoes.

Miss Hervey told me further, that her mother was desired to come to me,
to fetch me in; but she excused herself. I should have all my friends,
she said, she believed, sit in judgment upon me.

I wish it had been so. But, as I have been told since, neither my father
for my mother would trust themselves with seeing me: the one it seems
for passion sake; my mother for tender considerations.

By this time we entered the house. Miss accompanied me into the parlour,
and left me, as a person devoted, I then thought.

Nobody was there. I sat down, and had leisure to weep; reflecting upon
what my cousin Dolly had told me.

They were all in my sister's parlour adjoining: for I heard a confused
mixture of voices, some louder than others, which drowned the more
compassionating accents.

Female accents I could distinguish the drowned ones to be. O my dear!
what a hard-hearted sex is the other! Children of the same parents, how
came they by their cruelty?--Do they get it by travel?--Do they get
it by conversation with one another?--Or how do they get it?--Yet my
sister, too, is as hard-hearted as any of them. But this may be no
exception neither: for she has been thought to be masculine in her air
and her spirit. She has then, perhaps, a soul of the other sex in a body
of ours. And so, for the honour of our own, will I judge of every
woman for the future, who imitating the rougher manners of men, acts
unbeseeming the gentleness of her own sex.

Forgive me, my dear friend, for breaking into my story by these
reflections. Were I rapidly to pursue my narration, without thinking,
without reflecting, I believe I should hardly be able to keep in my
right mind: since vehemence and passion would then be always uppermost;
but while I think as I write, I cool, and my hurry of spirits is
allayed.

I believe I was about a quarter of an hour enjoying my own comfortless
contemplations, before any body came in to me; for they seemed to be
in full debate. My aunt looked in first; O my dear, said she, are you
there? and withdrew hastily to apprize them of it.

And then (as agreed upon I suppose) in came my uncle Antony, crediting
Mr. Solmes with the words, Let me lead you in, my dear friend, having
hold of his hand; while the new-made beau awkwardly followed, but more
edgingly, as I may say, setting his feet mincingly, to avoid treading
upon his leader's heels. Excuse me, my dear, this seeming levity; but
those we do not love, appear in every thing ungraceful to us.

I stood up. My uncle looked very surly.--Sit down!--Sit down, Girl,
said he.--And drawing a chair near me, he placed his dear friend in it,
whether he would or not, I having taken my seat. And my uncle sat on the
other side of me.

Well, Niece, taking my hand, we shall have very little more to say to
you than we have already said, as to the subject that is so distasteful
to you--unless, indeed, you have better considered of the matter--And
first let me know if you have?

The matter wants no consideration, Sir.

Very well, very well, Madam! said my uncle, withdrawing his hands from
mine: Could I ever have thought of this from you?

For God's sake, dearest Madam, said Mr. Solmes, folding his hands--And
there he stopped.

For God's sake, what, Sir?--How came God's sake, and your sake, I pray
you, to be the same?

This silenced him. My uncle could only be angry; and that he was before.

Well, well, well, Mr. Solmes, said my uncle, no more of supplication.
You have not confidence enough to expect a woman's favour.

He then was pleased to hint what great things he had designed to do for
me; and that it was more for my sake, after he returned from the Indies,
than for the sake of any other of the family, that he had resolved
to live a single life.--But now, concluded he, that the perverse girl
despises all the great things it was once as much in my will, as it is
in my power, to do for her, I will change my measures.

I told him, that I most sincerely thanked him for all his kind
intentions to me: but that I was willing to resign all claim to any
other of his favours than kind looks and kind words.

He looked about him this way and that.

Mr. Solmes looked pitifully down.

But both being silent, I was sorry, I added, that I had too much reason
to say a very harsh thing, as I might be thought; which was, That if
he would but be pleased to convince my brother and sister, that he was
absolutely determined to alter his generous purposes towards me,
it might possibly procure me better treatment from both, than I was
otherwise likely to have.

My uncle was very much displeased. But he had not the opportunity to
express his displeasure, as he seemed preparing to do; for in came my
brother in exceeding great wrath; and called me several vile names. His
success hitherto, in his device against me, had set him above keeping
even decent measures.

Was this my spiteful construction? he asked--Was this the interpretation
I put upon his brotherly care of me, and concern for me, in order to
prevent my ruining myself?

It is, indeed it is, said I: I know no other way to account for your
late behaviour to me: and before your face, I repeat my request to my
uncle, and I will make it to my other uncle whenever I am permitted to
see him, that they will confer all their favours upon you, and upon my
sister; and only make me happy (it is all I wish for!) in their kind
looks, and kind words.

How they all gazed upon one another!--But could I be less peremptory
before the man?

And, as to your care and concern for me, Sir, turning to my brother;
once more I desire it not. You are but my brother. My father and mother,
I bless God, are both living; and were they not, you have given me
abundant reason to say, that you are the very last person I would wish
to have any concern for me.

How, Niece! And is a brother, an only brother, of so little
consideration with you, as this comes to? And ought he to have no
concern for his sister's honour, and the family's honour.

My honour, Sir!--I desire none of his concern for that! It never was
endangered till it had his undesired concern!--Forgive me, Sir--but when
my brother knows how to act like a brother, or behave like a gentleman,
he may deserve more consideration from me than it is possible for me now
to think he does.

I thought my brother would have beat me upon this: but my uncle stood
between us.

Violent girl, however, he called me--Who, said he, who would have
thought it of her?

Then was Mr. Solmes told, that I was unworthy of his pursuit.

But Mr. Solmes warmly took my part: he could not bear, he said, that I
should be treated so roughly.

And so very much did he exert himself on this occasion, and so patiently
was his warmth received by my brother, that I began to suspect, that it
was a contrivance to make me think myself obliged to him; and that this
might perhaps be one end of the pressed-for interview.

The very suspicion of this low artifice, violent as I was thought to be
before, put me still more out of patience; and my uncle and my brother
again praising his wonderful generosity, and his noble return of good
for evil, You are a happy man, Mr. Solmes, said I, that you can
so easily confer obligations upon a whole family, except upon one
ungrateful person of it, whom you seem to intend most to oblige; but
who being made unhappy by your favour, desires not to owe to you any
protection from the violence of a brother.

Then was I a rude, an ungrateful, and unworthy creature.

I own it all--all, all you can call me, or think me, Brother, do I own.
I own my unworthiness with regard to this gentleman. I take your word
for his abundant merit, which I have neither leisure nor inclination to
examine into--it may perhaps be as great as your own--but yet I cannot
thank him for his great mediation: For who sees not, looking at my
uncle, that this is giving himself a merit with every body at my
expense?

Then turning to my brother, who seemed surprised into silence by my
warmth, I must also acknowledge, Sir, the favour of your superabundant
care for me. But I discharge you of it; at least, while I have the
happiness of nearer and dearer relations. You have given me no reason to
think better of your prudence, than of my own. I am independent of you,
Sir, though I never desire to be so of my father: and although I wish
for the good opinion of my uncles, it is all I wish for from them: and
this, Sir, I repeat, to make you and my sister easy.

Instantly almost came in Betty, in a great hurry, looking at me as
spitefully as if she were my sister: Sir, said she to my brother, my
master desires to speak with you this moment at the door.

He went to that which led into my sister's parlour; and this sentence
I heard thundered from the mouth of one who had a right to all my
reverence: Son James, let the rebel be this moment carried away to my
brother's--this very moment--she shall not stay one hour more under my
roof!

I trembled; I was ready to sink. Yet, not knowing what I did, or said, I
flew to the door, and would have opened it: but my brother pulled it to,
and held it close by the key--O my Papa!--my dear Papa! said I, falling
upon my knees, at the door--admit your child to your presence!--Let me
but plead my cause at your feet!--Oh! reprobate not thus your distressed
daughter!

My uncle put his handkerchief to his eyes. Mr. Solmes made a still more
grievous face than he had before. But my brother's marble heart was
untouched.

I will not stir from my knees, continued I, without admission; at this
door I beg it!--Oh! let it be the door of mercy! and open it to me,
honoured Sir, I beseech you!--But this once, this once! although you
were afterwards to shut it against me for ever!

The door was endeavoured to be opened on the inside, which made my
brother let go the key on a sudden; and I pressing against it, (all
the time remaining on my knees,) fell flat on my face into the other
parlour; however without hurting myself. But every body was gone, except
Betty, who I suppose was the person that endeavoured to open the door.
She helped to raise me up; and when I was on my feet, I looked round
that apartment, and seeing nobody there, re-entered the other, leaning
upon her; and then threw myself into the chair which I had sat in
before; and my eyes overflowed, to my great relief: while my uncle
Antony, my brother, and Mr. Solmes, left me, and went to my other
relations.

What passed among them, I know not: but my brother came in by the time
I had tolerably recovered myself, with a settled and haughty gloom upon
his brow--Your father and mother command you instantly to prepare for
your uncle Antony's. You need not be solicitous about what you shall
take with you: you may give Betty your keys--Take them, Betty, if the
perverse one has them about her, and carry them to her mother. She will
take care to send every thing after you that you shall want--but another
night you will not be permitted to stay in this house.

I don't choose to give my keys to any body, except to my mother, and
into her own hands.--You see how much I am disordered. It may cost me
my life, to be hurried away so suddenly. I beg to be indulged till next
Monday at least.

That will not be granted you. So prepare for this very very night.
And give up your keys. Give them to me, Miss. I'll carry them to your
mother.

Excuse me, Brother. Indeed I won't.

Indeed you must. Have you any thing you are afraid should be seen by
your mother?

Not if I be permitted to attend her.

I'll make a report accordingly.

He went out.

In came Miss Dolly Hervey: I am sorry, Madam, to be the messenger--but
your mamma insists upon your sending up all the keys of your cabinet,
library, and drawers.

Tell my mother, that I yield them up to her commands: tell her, I
make no conditions with my mother: but if she finds nothing she shall
disapprove of, I beg that she will permit me to tarry here a few days
longer.--Try, my Dolly, [the dear girl sobbing with grief;] try if your
gentleness cannot prevail for me.

She wept still more, and said, It is sad, very sad, to see matters thus
carried!

She took the keys, and wrapped her arms about me; and begged me to
excuse her for her message; and would have said more; but Betty's
presence awed her, as I saw.

Don't pity me, my dear, said I. It will be imputed to you as a fault.
You see who is by.

The insolent wench scornfully smiled: One young lady pitying another
in things of this nature, looks promising in the youngest, I must needs
say.

I bid her begone from my presence.

She would most gladly go, she said, were she not to stay about me by my
mother's order.

It soon appeared for what she staid; for I offering to go up stairs to
my apartment when my cousin went from me with the keys, she told me she
was commanded (to her very great regret, she must own) to desire me not
to go up at present.

Such a bold face, as she, I told her, should not hinder me.

She instantly rang the bell, and in came my brother, meeting me at the
door.

Return, return, Miss--no going up yet.

I went in again, and throwing myself upon the window-seat, wept
bitterly.

Shall I give you the particulars of a ridiculously-spiteful conversation
that passed between my brother and me, in the time that he (with
Betty) was in office to keep me in the parlour while my closet was
searching!--But I think I will not. It can answer no good end.

I desired several times, while he staid, to have leave to retire to my
apartment; but was denied. The search, I suppose, was not over.

Bella was one of those employed in it. They could not have a more
diligent searcher. How happy it was they were disappointed!

But when my sister could not find the cunning creature's papers, I was
to stand another visit from Mr. Solmes--preceded now by my aunt Hervey,
solely against her will, I could see that; accompanied by my uncle
Antony, in order to keep her steady, I suppose.

But being a little heavy (for it is now past two in the morning) I
will lie down in my clothes, to indulge the kind summons, if it will be
indulged.


THREE O'CLOCK, WEDNESDAY MORNING.

I could not sleep--Only dozed away one half-hour.

My aunt Hervey accosted me thus:--O my dear child, what troubles do you
give to your parents, and to every body!--I wonder at you!

I am sorry for it, Madam.

Sorry for it, child!--Why then so very obstinate?--Come, sit down, my
dear. I will sit next to you; taking my hand.

My uncle placed Mr. Solmes on the other side of me: himself over-against
me, almost close to me. Was I not finely beset, my dear?

Your brother, child, said my aunt, is too passionate--his zeal for your
welfare pushes him on a little too vehemently.

Very true, said my uncle: but no more of this. We would now be glad to
see if milder means will do with you--though, indeed, they were tried
before.

I asked my aunt, If it were necessary, that the gentleman should be
present?

There is a reason that he should, said my aunt, as you will hear by-and
by.--But I must tell you, first, that, thinking you was a little too
angrily treated by your brother, your mother desired me to try what
gentler means would do upon a spirit so generous as we used to think
yours.

Nothing can be done, Madam, I must presume to say, if this gentleman's
address be the end.

She looked upon my uncle, who bit his lip; and looked upon Mr. Solmes,
who rubbed his cheek; and shaking her head, Good, dear creature, said
she, be calm. Let me ask you, If something would have been done, had you
been more gently used, than you seem to think you have been?

No, Madam, I cannot say it would, in this gentleman's favour. You
know, Madam, you know, Sir, to my uncle, I ever valued myself upon my
sincerity: and once indeed had the happiness to be valued for it.

My uncle took Mr. Solmes aside. I heard him say, whispering, She must,
she shall, still be yours.--We'll see, who'll conquer, parents or child,
uncles or niece. I doubt not to be witness to all this being got over,
and many a good-humoured jest made of this high phrensy!

I was heartily vexed.

Though we cannot find out, continued he, yet we guess, who puts her upon
this obstinate behaviour. It is not natural to her, man. Nor would I
concern myself so much about her, but that I know what I say to be true,
and intend to do great things for her.

I will hourly pray for that happy time, whispered as audibly Mr. Solmes.
I never will revive the remembrance of what is now so painful to me.

Well, but, Niece, I am to tell you, said my aunt, that the sending up
of the keys, without making any conditions, has wrought for you what
nothing else could have done. That, and the not finding any thing that
could give them umbrage, together with Mr. Solmes's interposition--

O Madam, let me not owe an obligation to Mr. Solmes. I cannot repay it,
except by my thanks; and those only on condition that he will decline
his suit. To my thanks, Sir, [turning to him,] if you have a heart
capable of humanity, if you have any esteem for me for my own sake, I
beseech you to entitle yourself!--I beseech you, do--!

O Madam, cried he, believe, believe, believe me, it is impossible. While
you are single, I will hope. While that hope is encouraged by so many
worthy friends, I must persevere. I must not slight them, Madam, because
you slight me.

I answered him only with a look; but it was of high disdain; and turning
from him,--But what favour, dear Madam, [to my aunt,] has the instance
of duty you mention procured me?

Your mother and Mr. Solmes, replied my aunt, have prevailed, that your
request to stay here till Monday next shall be granted, if you will
promise to go cheerfully then.

Let me but choose my own visiters, and I will go to my uncle's house
with pleasure.

Well, Niece, said my aunt, we must wave this subject, I find. We will
now proceed to another, which will require your utmost attention. It
will give you the reason why Mr. Solmes's presence is requisite--

Ay, said my uncle, and shew you what sort of a man somebody is. Mr.
Solmes, pray favour us, in the first place, with the letter you received
from your anonymous friend.

I will, Sir. And out he pulled a letter-case, and taking out a letter,
it is written in answer to one, sent to the person. It is superscribed,
To Roger Solmes, Esq. It begins thus: Honoured Sir--

I beg your pardon, Sir, said I: but what, pray, is the intent of reading
this letter to me?

To let you know what a vile man you are thought to have set your heart
upon, said my uncle, in an audible whisper.

If, Sir, it be suspected, that I have set my heart upon any other, why
is Mr. Solmes to give himself any further trouble about me?

Only hear, Niece, said my aunt; only hear what Mr. Solmes has to read
and to say to you on this head.

If, Madam, Mr. Solmes will be pleased to declare, that he has no view
to serve, no end to promote, for himself, I will hear any thing he shall
read. But if the contrary, you must allow me to say, that it will abate
with me a great deal of the weight of whatever he shall produce.

Hear it but read, Niece, said my aunt--

Hear it read, said my uncle. You are so ready to take part with--

With any body, Sir, that is accused anonymously, and from interested
motives.

He began to read; and there seemed to be a heavy load of charges in this
letter against the poor criminal: but I stopped the reading of it,
and said, It will not be my fault, if this vilified man be not as
indifferent to me, as one whom I never saw. If he be otherwise at
present, which I neither own, nor deny, it proceed from the strange
methods taken to prevent it. Do not let one cause unite him and me, and
we shall not be united. If my offer to live single be accepted, he shall
be no more to me than this gentleman.

Still--Proceed, Mr. Solmes--Hear it out, Niece, was my uncle's cry.

But to what purpose, Sir! said I--Had not Mr. Solmes a view in this?
And, besides, can any thing worse be said of Mr. Lovelace, than I have
heard said for several months past?

But this, said my uncle, and what Mr. Solmes can tell you besides,
amounts to the fullest proof--

Was the unhappy man, then, so freely treated in his character before,
without full proof? I beseech you, Sir, give me not too good an opinion
of Mr. Lovelace; as I may have, if such pains be taken to make him
guilty, by one who means not his reformation by it; nor to do good, if I
may presume to say so in this case, to any body but himself.

I see very plainly, girl, said my uncle, your prepossession, your fond
prepossession, for the person of a man without morals.

Indeed, my dear, said my aunt, you too much justify all your
apprehension. Surprising! that a young creature of virtue and honour
should thus esteem a man of a quite opposite character!

Dear Madam, do not conclude against me too hastily. I believe Mr.
Lovelace is far from being so good as he ought to be: but if every man's
private life was searched into by prejudiced people, set on for that
purpose, I know not whose reputation would be safe. I love a virtuous
character, as much in man as in woman. I think it is requisite, and as
meritorious, in the one as in the other. And, if left to myself, I would
prefer a person of such a character to royalty without it.

Why then, said my uncle--

Give me leave, Sir--but I may venture to say, that many of those who
have escaped censure, have not merited applause.

Permit me to observe further, That Mr. Solmes himself may not be
absolutely faultless. I never head of his virtues. Some vices I have
heard of--Excuse me, Mr. Solmes, I speak to your face--The text about
casting the first stone affords an excellent lesson.

He looked down; but was silent.

Mr. Lovelace may have vices you have not. You may have others, which
he has not. I speak not this to defend him, or to accuse you. No man is
bad, no one is good, in every thing. Mr. Lovelace, for example, is said
to be implacable, and to hate my friends: that does not make me value
him the more: but give me leave to say, that they hate him as much. Mr.
Solmes has his antipathies, likewise; very strong ones, and those to his
own relations; which I don't find to be the other's fault; for he lives
well with his--yet he may have as bad:--worse, pardon me, he cannot
have, in my poor opinion: for what must be the man, who hates his own
flesh?

You know not, Madam; You know not, Niece; all in one breath. You know
not, Clary;

I may not, nor do I desire to know Mr. Solmes's reasons. It concerns not
me to know them: but the world, even the impartial part of it, accuses
him. If the world is unjust or rash, in one man's case, why may it not
be so in another's? That's all I mean by it. Nor can there by a greater
sign of want of merit, than where a man seeks to pull down another's
character, in order to build up his own.

The poor man's face was all this time overspread with confusion,
twisted, as it were, and all awry, neither mouth nor nose standing in
the middle of it. He looked as if he were ready to cry: and had he been
capable of pitying me, I had certainly tried to pity him.

They all three gazed upon one another in silence.

My aunt, I saw (at least I thought so) looked as if she would have been
glad she might have appeared to approve of what I said. She but feebly
blamed me, when she spoke, for not hearing what Mr. Solmes had to say.
He himself seemed not now very earnest to be heard. My uncle said,
There was no talking to me. And I should have absolutely silenced both
gentlemen, had not my brother come in again to their assistance.

This was the strange speech he made at his entrance, his eyes flaming
with anger; This prating girl, has struck you all dumb, I perceive.
Persevere, however, Mr. Solmes. I have heard every word she has said:
and I know of no other method of being even with her, than after she is
yours, to make her as sensible of your power, as she now makes you of
her insolence.

Fie, cousin Harlowe! said my aunt--Could I have thought a brother would
have said this, to a gentleman, of a sister?

I must tell you, Madam, said he, that you give the rebel courage.
You yourself seem to favour too much the arrogance of her sex in
her; otherwise she durst not have thus stopped her uncle's mouth by
reflections upon him; as well as denied to hear a gentleman tell her
the danger she is in from a libertine, whose protection, as she plainly
hinted, she intends to claim against her family.

Stopped my uncle's mouth, by reflections upon him, Sir! said I, how can
that be! how dare you to make such an application as this!

My aunt wept at his reflection upon her.--Cousin, said she to him, if
this be the thanks I have for my trouble, I have done: your father
would not treat me thus--and I will say, that the hint you gave was an
unbrotherly one.

Not more unbrotherly than all the rest of his conduct to me, of late,
Madam, said I. I see by this specimen of his violence, how every body
has been brought into his measures. Had I any the least apprehension of
ever being in Mr. Solmes's power, this might have affected me. But you
see, Sir, to Mr. Solmes, what a conduct is thought necessary to enable
you to arrive at your ungenerous end. You see how my brother courts for
you.

I disclaim Mr. Harlowe's violence, Madam, with all my soul. I will never
remind you--

Silence, worthy Sir, said I; I will take care you never shall have the
opportunity.

Less violence, Clary, said my uncle. Cousin James, you are as much to
blame as your sister.

In then came my sister. Brother, said she, you kept not your promise.
You are thought to be to blame within, as well as here. Were not Mr.
Solmes's generosity and affection to the girl well known, what you said
would have been inexcusable. My father desires to speak with you; and
with you, Mr. Solmes, if you please.

They all four withdrew into the next apartment.

I stood silent, as not knowing presently how to take this intervention
of my sister's. But she left me not long at a loss--O thou perverse
thing, said she [poking out her angry face at me, when they were all
gone, but speaking spitefully low]--what trouble do you give to us all!

You and my brother, Bella, said I, give trouble to yourselves; yet
neither you nor he have any business to concern yourselves about me.

She threw out some spiteful expressions, still in a low voice, as if she
chose not to be heard without; and I thought it best to oblige her to
raise her tone a little, if I could. If I could, did I say? It is easy
to make a passionate spirit answer all one's views upon it.

She accordingly flamed out in a raised tone: and this brought my cousin
Dolly in to us. Miss Harlowe, your company is desired.

I will come presently, cousin Dolly.

But again provoking a severity from me which she could not bear, and
calling me names! in once more come Dolly, with another message, that
her company was desired.

Not mine, I doubt, Miss Dolly, said I.

The sweet-tempered girl burst out into tears, and shook her head.

Go in before me, child, said Bella, [vexed to see her concern for me,]
with thy sharp face like a new moon: What dost thou cry for? is it to
make thy keen face look still keener?

I believe Bella was blamed, too, when she went in; for I heard her say,
the creature was so provoking, there was no keeping a resolution.

Mr. Solmes, after a little while, came in again by himself, to take
leave of me: full of scrapes and compliments; but too well tutored and
encouraged, to give me hope of his declining his suit. He begged me
not to impute to him any of the severe things to which he had been a
sorrowful witness. He besought my compassion, as he called it.

He said, the result was, that he still had hopes given him; and,
although discouraged by me, he was resolved to persevere, while I
remained single.--And such long and such painful services he talked of,
as never before were heard of.

I told him in the strongest manner, what he had to trust to.

Yet still he determined to persist.--While I was no man's else, he must
hope.

What! said I, will you still persist, when I declare, as I do now, that
my affections are engaged?--And let my brother make the most of it.

He knew my principles, and adored me for them. He doubted not, that it
was in his power to make me happy: and he was sure I would not want the
will to be so.

I assured him, that were I to be carried to my uncle's, it should answer
no end; for I would never see him; nor receive a line from him; nor hear
a word in his favour, whoever were the person who should mention him to
me.

He was sorry for it. He must be miserable, were I to hold in that mind.
But he doubted not, that I might be induced by my father and uncles to
change it--

Never, never, he might depend upon it.

It was richly worth his patience, and the trial.

At my expense?--At the price of all my happiness, Sir?

He hoped I should be induced to think otherwise.

And then would he have run into his fortune, his settlements, his
affection--vowing, that never man loved a woman with so sincere a
passion as he loved me.

I stopped him, as to the first part of his speech: and to the second,
of the sincerity of his passion, What then, Sir, said I, is your love to
one, who must assure you, that never young creature looked upon man with
a more sincere disapprobation, than I look upon you? And tell me,
what argument can you urge, that this true declaration answers not
before-hand?

Dearest Madam, what can I say?--On my knees I beg--

And down the ungraceful wretch dropped on his knees.

Let me not kneel in vain, Madam: let me not be thus despised.--And he
looked most odiously sorrowful.

I have kneeled too, Mr. Solmes: often have I kneeled: and I will kneel
again--even to you, Sir, will I kneel, if there be so much merit in
kneeling; provided you will not be the implement of my cruel brother's
undeserved persecution.

If all the services, even to worship you, during my whole life--You,
Madam, invoke and expect mercy; yet shew none--

Am I to be cruel to myself, to shew mercy to you; take my estate, Sir,
with all my heart, since you are such a favourite in this house!--only
leave me myself--the mercy you ask for, do you shew to others.

If you mean to my relations, Madam--unworthy as they are, all shall be
done that you shall prescribe.

Who, I, Sir, to find you bowels you naturally have not? I to purchase
their happiness by the forfeiture of my own? What I ask you for,
is mercy to myself: that, since you seem to have some power over my
relations, you will use it in my behalf. Tell them, that you see I
cannot conquer my aversion to you: tell them, if you are a wise man,
that you too much value your own happiness, to risk it against such a
determined antipathy: tell them that I am unworthy of your offers: and
that in mercy to yourself, as well as to me, you will not prosecute a
suit so impossible to be granted.

I will risque all consequences, said the fell wretch, rising, with a
countenance whitened over, as if with malice, his hollow eyes flashing
fire, and biting his under lip, to shew he could be manly. Your hatred,
Madam, shall be no objection with me: and I doubt not in a few days to
have it in my power to shew you--

You have it in your power, Sir--

He came well off--To shew you more generosity than, noble as you are
said to be to others, you shew to me.

The man's face became his anger: it seems formed to express the passion.

At that instant, again in came my brother--Sister, Sister, Sister, said
he, with his teeth set, act on the termagant part you have so newly
assumed--most wonderfully well does it become you. It is but a
short one, however. Tyraness in your turn, accuse others of your own
guilt--But leave her, leaver her, Mr. Solmes: her time is short. You'll
find her humble and mortified enough very quickly. Then, how like a
little tame fool will she look, with her conscience upbraiding her, and
begging of you [with a whining voice, the barbarous brother spoke] to
forgive and forget!

More he said, as he flew out, with a glowing face, upon Shorey's coming
in to recall him on his violence.

I removed from chair to chair, excessively frighted and disturbed at
this brutal treatment.

The man attempted to excuse himself, as being sorry for my brother's
passion.

Leave me, leave me, Sir, fanning--or I shall faint. And indeed I thought
I should.

He recommended himself to my favour with an air of assurance; augmented,
as I thought, by a distress so visible in me; for he even snatched my
trembling, my struggling hand; and ravished it to his odious mouth.

I flung from him with high disdain: and he withdrew, bowing and
cringing; self-gratified, and enjoying, as I thought, the confusion he
saw me in.

The wretch is now, methinks, before me; and now I see him awkwardly
striding backward, as he retired, till the edge of the opened door,
which he ran against, remembered him to turn his welcome back upon me.

Upon his withdrawing, Betty brought me word, that I was permitted to
go up to my own chamber: and was bid to consider of every thing: for my
time was short. Nevertheless, she believed I might be permitted to stay
till Saturday.

She tells me, that although my brother and sister were blamed for being
so hasty with me, yet when they made their report, and my uncle Antony
his, of my provocations, they were all more determined than ever in Mr.
Solmes's favour.

The wretch himself, she tells me, pretends to be more in love with
me than before; and to be rather delighted than discouraged with the
conversation that passed between us. He ran on, she says, in raptures,
about the grace wherewith I should dignify his board; and the like sort
of stuff, either of his saying, or of her making.

She closed all with a Now is your time, Miss, to submit with a grace,
and to make your own terms with him:--else, I can tell you, were I Mr.
Solmes, it should be worse for you: And who, Miss, of our sex, proceeded
the saucy creature, would admire a rakish gentleman, when she might be
admired by a sober one to the end of the chapter?

She made this further speech to me on quitting my chamber--You have
had amazing good luck, Miss. I must tell you, to keep your writings
concealed so cunningly. You must needs think I know that you are always
at your pen: and as you endeavour to hide that knowledge from me, I
do not think myself obliged to keep your secret. But I love not to
aggravate. I had rather reconcile by much. Peace-making is my talent,
and ever was. And had I been as much your foe, as you imagine, you had
not perhaps been here now. But this, however, I do not say to make a
merit with you, Miss: for, truly, it will be the better for you the
sooner every thing is over with you. And better for me, and for every
one else; that's certain. Yet one hint I must conclude with; that your
pen and ink (soon as you are to go away) will not be long in your power,
I do assure you, Miss. And then, having lost that amusement, it will be
seen, how a mind so active as yours will be able to employ itself.

This hint alarms me so much, that I shall instantly begin to conceal, in
different places, pens, inks, and paper; and to deposit some in the ivy
summer-house, if I can find a safe place there; and, at the worst, I
have got a pencil of black, and another of red lead, which I use in my
drawings; and my patterns shall serve for paper, if I have no other.

How lucky it was, that I had got away my papers! They made a strict
search for them; that I can see, by the disorderly manner they have left
all things in: for you know that I am such an observer of method, that
I can go to a bit of ribband, or lace, or edging, blindfold. The same in
my books; which they have strangely disordered and mismatched; to look
behind them, and in some of them, I suppose. My clothes too are rumpled
not a little. No place has escaped them. To your hint, I thank you, are
they indebted for their disappointment.

The pen, through heaviness and fatigue, dropt out of my fingers, at the
word indebted. I resumed it, to finish the sentence; and to tell you,
that I am,

Your for ever obliged and affectionate CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK, APRIL 5.


I must write as I have opportunity; making use of my concealed stores:
for my pens and ink (all of each that they could find) are taken from
me; as I shall tell you about more particularly by and by.

About an hour ago, I deposited my long letter to you; as also, in the
usual place, a billet to Mr. Lovelace, lest his impatience should put
him upon some rashness; signifying, in four lines, 'That the interview
was over; and that I hoped my steady refusal of Mr. Solmes would
discourage any further applications to me in his favour.'

Although I was unable (through the fatigue I had undergone, and by
reason of sitting up all night, to write to you, which made me lie
longer than ordinary this morning) to deposit my letter to you sooner,
yet I hope you will have it in such good time, as that you will be able
to send me an answer to it this night, or in the morning early; which,
if ever so short, will inform me, whether I may depend upon your
mother's indulgence or not. This it behoves me to know as soon as
possible; for they are resolved to hurry me away on Saturday next at
farthest; perhaps to-morrow.

I will now inform you of all that has happened previous to their taking
away my pen and ink, as well as of the manner in which that act of
violence was committed; and this as briefly as I can.

My aunt, who (as well as Mr. Solmes, and my two uncles) lives here, I
think, came up to me, and said, she would fain have me hear what Mr.
Solmes had to say of Mr. Lovelace--only that I may be apprized of
some things, that would convince me what a vile man he is, and what a
wretched husband he must make. I might give them what degree of credit
I pleased; and take them with abatement for Mr. Solmes's interestedness,
if I thought fit. But it might be of use to me, were it but to question
Mr. Lovelace indirectly upon some of them, that related to myself.

I was indifferent, I said, about what he could say of me; and I was sure
it could not be to my disadvantage; and as he had no reason to impute to
me the forwardness which my unkind friends had so causelessly taxed me
with.

She said, That he gave himself high airs on account of his family; and
spoke as despicably of ours as if an alliance with us were beneath him.

I replied, That he was a very unworthy man, if it were true, to speak
slightingly of a family, which was as good as his own, 'bating that
it was not allied to the peerage: that the dignity itself, I thought,
conveyed more shame than honour to descendants, who had not merit to
adorn, as well as to be adorned by it: that my brother's absurd pride,
indeed, which made him every where declare, he would never marry but to
quality, gave a disgraceful preference against ours: but that were I
to be assured, that Mr. Lovelace was capable of so mean a pride as to
insult us or value himself on such an accidental advantage, I should
think as despicably of his sense, as every body else did of his morals.

She insisted upon it, that he had taken such liberties, it would be but
common justice (so much hated as he was by all our family, and so
much inveighed against in all companies by them) to inquire into the
provocation he had to say what was imputed to him; and whether the value
some of my friends put upon the riches they possess (throwing perhaps
contempt upon every other advantage, and even discrediting their own
pretensions to family, in order to depreciate his) might not provoke him
to like contempts. Upon the whole, Madam, said I, can you say, that the
inveteracy lies not as much on our side, as on his? Can he say any thing
of us more disrespectful than we say of him?--And as to the suggestion,
so often repeated, that he will make a bad husband, Is it possible for
him to use a wife worse than I am used; particularly by my brother and
sister?

Ah, Niece! Ah, my dear! how firmly has this wicked man attached you!

Perhaps not, Madam. But really great care should be taken by fathers and
mothers, when they would have their daughters of their minds in these
particulars, not to say things that shall necessitate the child, in
honour and generosity, to take part with the man her friends are averse
to. But, waving all this, as I have offered to renounce him for ever, I
see now why he should be mentioned to me, nor why I should be wished to
hear any thing about him.

Well, but still, my dear, there can be no harm to let Mr. Solmes tell
you what Mr. Lovelace has said of you. Severely as you have treated Mr.
Solmes, he is fond of attending you once more: he begs to be heard on
this head.

If it be proper for me to hear it, Madam--

It is, eagerly interrupted she, very proper.

Has what he has said of me, Madam, convinced you of Mr. Lovelace's
baseness?

It has, my dear: and that you ought to abhor him for it.

Then, dear Madam, be pleased to let me hear it from your mouth: there
is no need that I should see Mr. Solmes, when it will have double the
weight from you. What, Madam, has the man dared to say of me?

My aunt was quite at a loss.

At last, Well, said she, I see how you are attached. I am sorry for it,
Miss. For I do assure you, it will signify nothing. You must be Mrs.
Solmes; and that in a very few days.

If consent of heart, and assent of voice, be necessary to a marriage, I
am sure I never can, nor ever will, be married to Mr. Solmes. And what
will any of my relations be answerable for, if they force my hand into
his, and hold it there till the service be read; I perhaps insensible,
and in fits, all the time!

What a romantic picture of a forced marriage have you drawn, Niece!
Some people would say, you have given a fine description of your own
obstinacy, child.

My brother and sister would: but you, Madam, distinguish, I am sure,
between obstinacy and aversion.

Supposed aversion may owe its rise to real obstinacy, my dear.

I know my own heart, Madam. I wish you did.

Well, but see Mr. Solmes once more, Niece. It will oblige and make for
you more than you imagine.

What should I see him for, Madam?--Is the man fond of hearing me declare
my aversion to him?--Is he desirous of having me more and more incense
my friends against myself?--O my cunning, my ambitious brother!

Ah, my dear! with a look of pity, as if she understood the meaning of my
exclamation--But must that necessarily be the case?

It must, Madam, if they will take offence at me for declaring my
steadfast detestation of Mr. Solmes, as a husband.

Mr. Solmes is to be pitied, said she. He adores you. He longs to see
you once more. He loves you the better for your cruel usage of him
yesterday. He is in raptures about you.

Ugly creature, thought I!--He in raptures!

What a cruel wretch must he be, said I, who can enjoy the distress to
which he so largely contributes!--But I see, I see, Madam, that I am
considered as an animal to be baited, to make sport for my brother
and sister, and Mr. Solmes. They are all, all of them, wanton in their
cruelty.--I, Madam, see the man! the man so incapable of pity!--Indeed I
will not see him, if I can help it--indeed I will not.

What a construction does your lively wit put upon the admiration
Mr. Solmes expresses of you!--Passionate as you were yesterday, and
contemptuously as you treated him, he dotes upon you for the very
severity by which he suffers. He is not so ungenerous a man as you think
him: nor has he an unfeeling heart.--Let me prevail upon you, my dear,
(as your father and mother expect it of you,) to see him once more, and
hear what he has to say to you.

How can I consent to see him again, when yesterday's interview
was interpreted by you, Madam, as well as by every other, as an
encouragement to him? when I myself declared, that if I saw him a second
time by my own consent, it might be so taken? and when I am determined
never to encourage him?

You might spare your reflections upon me, Miss. I have no thanks either
from one side or the other.

And away she flung.

Dearest Madam! said I, following her to the door--

But she would not hear me further; and her sudden breaking from me
occasioned a hurry to some mean listener; as the slipping of a foot from
the landing-place on the stairs discovered to me.

I had scarcely recovered myself from this attack, when up came
Betty--Miss, said she, your company is desired below-stairs in your own
parlour.

By whom, Betty?

How can I tell, Miss?--perhaps by your sister, perhaps by your
brother--I know they wont' come up stairs to your apartment again.

Is Mr. Solmes gone, Betty?

I believe he is, Miss--Would you have him sent for back? said the bold
creature.

Down I went: and to whom should I be sent for, but to my brother and Mr.
Solmes! the latter standing sneaking behind the door, so that I saw him
not, till I was mockingly led by the hand into the room by my brother.
And then I started as if I had beheld a ghost.

You are to sit down, Clary.

And what then, Brother?

Why then, you are to put off that scornful look, and hear what Mr.
Solmes has to say to you.

Sent down for to be baited again, thought I!

Madam, said Mr. Solmes, as if in haste to speak, lest he should not have
an opportunity given him, [and indeed he judged right,] Mr. Lovelace is
a declared marriage hater, and has a design upon your honour, if ever--

Base accuser! said I, in a passion, snatching my hand from my brother,
who was insolently motioning to give it to Mr. Solmes; he has not!--he
dares not!--But you have, if endeavouring to force a free mind be to
dishonour it!

O thou violent creature! said my brother--but not gone yet--for I was
rushing away.

What mean you, Sir, [struggling vehemently to get away,] to detain me
thus against my will?

You shall not go, Violence; clasping his unbrotherly arms about me.

Then let not Mr. Solmes stay.--Why hold you me thus? he shall not for
your own sake, if I can help it, see how barbarously a brother can treat
a sister who deserves not evil treatment.

And I struggled so vehemently to get from him, that he was forced to
quit my hand; which he did with these words--Begone then, Fury!--how
strong is will!--there is no holding her.

And up I flew to my chamber, and locked myself in, trembling and out of
breath.

In less than a quarter of an hour, up came Betty. I let her in upon her
tapping, and asking (half out of breath too) for admittance.

The Lord have mercy upon us! said she.--What a confusion of a house is
this! [hurrying up and down, fanning herself with her handkerchief,]
Such angry masters and mistresses!--such an obstinate young lady!--such
a humble lover!--such enraged uncles!--such--O dear!--dear! what a
topsy-turvy house is this!--And all for what, trow?--only because a
young lady may be happy, and will not?--only because a young lady will
have a husband, and will not have a husband? What hurlyburlies are here,
where all used to be peace and quietness!

Thus she ran on to herself; while I sat as patiently as I could (being
assured that her errand was not designed to be a welcome one to me) to
observe when her soliloquy would end.

At last, turning to me--I must do as I am bid. I can't help it--don't
be angry with me, Miss. But I must carry down your pen and ink: and that
this moment.

By whose order?

By your papa's and mamma's.

How shall I know that?

She offered to go to my closet: I stept in before her: touch it, if you
dare.

Up came my cousin Dolly--Madam!--Madam! said the poor weeping,
good natured creature, in broken sentences--you must--indeed you
must--deliver to Betty--or to me--your pen and ink.

Must I, my sweet Cousin? then I will to you; but not to this bold body.
And so I gave my standish to her.

I am sorry, very sorry, said she, Miss, to be the messenger: but your
papa will not have you in the same house with him: he is resolved you
shall be carried away to-morrow, or Saturday at farthest. And therefore
your pen and ink are taken away, that you may give nobody notice of it.

And away went the dear girl, very sorrowful, carrying down with her my
standish, and all its furniture, and a little parcel of pens beside,
which having been seen when the great search was made, she was bid to
ask for.

As it happened, I had not diminished it, having hid half a dozen crow
quills in as many different places. It was lucky; for I doubt not they
had numbered how many were in the parcel.

Betty ran on, telling me, that my mother was now as much incensed
against me as any body--that my doom was fixed--that my violent
behaviour had not left one to plead for me--that Mr. Solmes bit his lip,
and muttered, and seemed to have more in his head, than could come out
at his mouth; that was her phrase.

And yet she also hinted to me, that the cruel wretch took pleasure
in seeing me; although so much to my disgust--and so wanted to see me
again.--Must he not be a savage, my dear?

The wench went on--that my uncle Harlowe said, That now he gave me
up--that he pitied Mr. Solmes--yet hoped he would not think of this
to my detriment hereafter: that my uncle Antony was of opinion, that
I ought to smart for it: and, for her part--and then, as one of the
family, she gave her opinion of the same side.

As I have no other way of hearing any thing that is said or intended
below, I bear sometimes more patiently than I otherwise should do with
her impertinence. And indeed she seems to be in all my brother's and
sister's counsels.

Miss Hervey came up again, and demanded an half-pint ink-bottle which
they had seen in my closet.

I gave it her without hesitation.

If they have no suspicion of my being able to write, they will perhaps
let me stay longer than otherwise they would.

This, my dear, is now my situation.

All my dependence, all my hopes, are in your mother's favour. But for
that, I know not what I might do: For who can tell what will come next?




LETTER XXXVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE
AFTERNOON


I am just returned from depositing the letter I so lately finished, and
such of Mr. Lovelace's letters as I had not sent you. My long letter I
found remaining there--so you will have both together.

I am convinced, methinks, it is not with you.--But your servant cannot
always be at leisure. However, I will deposit as fast as I write. I must
keep nothing by me now; and when I write, lock myself in, that I may not
be surprised now they think I have no pen and ink.

I found in the usual place another letter from this diligent man: and,
by its contents, a confirmation that nothing passes in this house but
he knows it; and that almost as soon as it passes. For this letter
must have been written before he could have received my billet; and
deposited, I suppose, when that was taken away; yet he compliments me in
it upon asserting myself (as he calls it) on that occasion to my uncle
and to Mr. Solmes.

'He assures me, however, that they are more and more determined to
subdue me.

'He sends me the compliments of his family; and acquaints me with their
earnest desire to see me amongst them. Most vehemently does he press for
my quitting this house, while it is in my power to get away: and again
craves leave to order his uncle's chariot-and-six to attend my commands
at the stile leading to the coppice adjoining to the paddock.

'Settlements to my own will he again offers. Lord M. and Lady Sarah and
Lady Betty to be guarantees of his honour and justice. But, if I choose
not to go to either of those ladies, nor yet to make him the happiest of
men so soon as it is nevertheless his hope that I will, he urges me to
withdraw to my own house, and to accept of Lord M. for my guardian and
protector till my cousin Morden arrives. He can contrive, he says,
to give me easy possession of it, and will fill it with his female
relations on the first invitation from me; and Mrs. Norton, or Miss
Howe, may be undoubtedly prevailed upon to be with me for a time. There
can be no pretence for litigation, he says, when I am once in it. Nor,
if I choose to have it so, will he appear to visit me; nor presume to
mention marriage to me till all is quiet and easy; till every method I
shall prescribe for a reconciliation with my friends is tried; till my
cousin comes; till such settlements are drawn as he shall approve of for
me; and that I have unexceptionable proofs of his own good behaviour.'

As to the disgrace a person of my character may be apprehensive of upon
quitting my father's house, he observes (too truly I doubt) 'That the
treatment I meet with is in every one's mouth: yet, he says, that the
public voice is in my favour. My friends themselves, he says, expect
that I will do myself what he calls, this justice: why else do they
confine me? He urges, that, thus treated, the independence I have a
right to will be my sufficient excuse, going but from their house to my
own, if I choose that measure; or in order to take possession of my
own, if I do not: that all the disgrace I can receive, they have already
given me: that his concern and his family's concern in my honour, will
be equal to my own, if he may be so happy ever to call me his: and he
presumes, he says, to aver, that no family can better supply the loss
of my own friends to me than his, in whatever way I shall do them the
honour to accept of his and their protection.

'But he repeats, that, in all events, he will oppose my being carried to
my uncle's; being well assured, that I shall be lost to him for ever, if
once I enter into that house.' He tells me, 'That my brother and sister,
and Mr. Solmes, design to be there to receive me: that my father and
mother will not come near me till the ceremony is actually over: and
that then they will appear, in order to try to reconcile me to my odious
husband, by urging upon me the obligations I shall be supposed to be
under from a double duty.'

How, my dear, am I driven on one side, and invited on the other!--This
last intimation is but a too probable one. All the steps they take seem
to tend to this! And, indeed, they have declared almost as much.

He owns, 'That he has already taken his measures upon this
intelligence:--but that he is so desirous for my sake (I must suppose,
he says, that he owes them no forbearance for their own) to avoid coming
to extremities, that he has suffered a person, whom they do not suspect,
to acquaint them with his resolutions, as if come at by accident, if
they persist in their design to carry me by violence to my uncle's;
in hopes, that they may be induced from the fear of mischief which
may ensue, to change their measures: and yet he is aware, that he has
exposed himself to the greatest risques by having caused this intimation
to be given them; since, if he cannot benefit himself by their fears,
there is no doubt but they will doubly guard themselves against him upon
it.'

What a dangerous enterpriser, however, is this man!

'He begs a few lines from me by way of answer to this letter, either
this evening, or to-morrow morning. If he be not so favoured, he shall
conclude, from what he knows of the fixed determination of my relations,
that I shall be under a closer restraint than before: and he shall be
obliged to take his measures according to that presumption.'

You will see by this abstract, as well by his letter preceding this,
(for both run in the same strain,) how strangely forward the difficulty
of my situation has brought him in his declarations and proposals; and
in his threatenings too: which, but for that, I would not take from him.

Something, however, I must speedily resolve upon, or it will be out of
my power to help myself.

Now I think of it, I will enclose his letter, (so might have spared the
abstract of it,) that you may the better judge of all his proposals, and
intelligence; and les it should fall into other hands. I cannot forgive
the contents, although I am at a loss what answer to return.*


     * She accordingly encloses Mr. Lovelace's letter. But as the
     most material contents of it are given in her abstract, it
     is omitted.


I cannot bear the thoughts of throwing myself upon the protection of his
friends:--but I will not examine his proposals closely till I hear from
you. Indeed, I have no eligible hope, but in your mother's goodness Hers
is a protection I could more reputably fly to, than to that of any other
person: and from hers should be ready to return to my father's (for the
breach then would not be irreparable, as it would be, if I fled to
his family): to return, I repeat, on such terms as shall secure but my
negative; not my independence: I do not aim at that (so shall lay your
mother under the less difficulty); though I have a right to be put
into possession of my grandfather's estate, if I were to insist upon
it:--such a right, I mean, as my brother exerts in the bid, that I
should ever think myself freed from my father's reasonable controul,
whatever right my grandfather's will has given me! He, good gentleman,
left me that estate, as a reward of my duty, and not to set me above
it, as has been justly hinted to me: and this reflection makes me more
fearful of not answering the intention of so valuable a bequest.--Oh!
that my friends knew but my heart!--Would but think of it as they used
to do!--For once more, I say, If it deceive me not, it is not altered,
although theirs are!

Would but your mother permit you to send her chariot, or chaise, to the
bye-place where Mr. Lovelace proposes Lord M.'s shall come, (provoked,
intimidated, and apprehensive, as I am,) I would not hesitate a moment
what to do. Place me any where, as I have said before--in a cot, in a
garret; any where--disguised as a servant--or let me pass as a servant's
sister--so that I may but escape Mr. Solmes on one hand, and the
disgrace of refuging with the family of a man at enmity with my own,
on the other; and I shall be in some measure happy!--Should your
good mother refuse me, what refuge, or whose, can I fly to?--Dearest
creature, advise your distressed friend.


*****


I broke off here--I was so excessively uneasy, that I durst not trust
myself with my own reflections. I therefore went down to the garden, to
try to calm my mind, by shifting the scene. I took but one turn upon the
filbert-walk, when Betty came to me. Here, Miss, is your papa--here
is your uncle Antony--here is my young master--and my young mistress,
coming to take a walk in the garden; and your papa sends me to see where
you are, for fear he should meet you.

I struck into an oblique path, and got behind the yew-hedge, seeing my
sister appear; and there concealed myself till they were gone past me.

My mother, it seems is not well. My poor mother keeps her
chamber--should she be worse, I should have an additional unhappiness,
in apprehension that my reputed undutifulness had touched her heart.

You cannot imagine what my emotions were behind the yew-hedge, on seeing
my father so near me. I was glad to look at him through the hedge as he
passed by: but I trembled in every joint, when I heard him utter these
words: Son James, to you, and to you Bella, and to you, Brother, do I
wholly commit this matter. That I was meant, I cannot doubt. And yet,
why was I so affected; since I may be said to have been given up to the
cruelty of my brother and sister for many days past?


*****


While my father remained in the garden, I sent my dutiful compliments
to my mother, with inquiry after her health, by Shorey, whom I met
accidentally upon the stairs; for none of the servants, except my
gaoleress, dare to throw themselves in my way. I had the mortification
of such a return, as made me repent my message, though not my concern
for her health. 'Let her not inquire after the disorders she occasions,'
was her harsh answer. 'I will not receive any compliments from her.'

Very, very hard, my dear! Indeed it is very hard.


*****



I have the pleasure to hear that my mother is already better. A colicky
disorder, to which she is too subject. It is hoped it is gone off--God
send it may!--Every evil that happens in this house is owing to me!

This good news was told me, with a circumstance very unacceptable; for
Betty said, she had orders to let me know, that my garden-walks and
poultry-visits were suspected; and that both will be prohibited, if I
stay here till Saturday or Monday.

Possibly this is said by order, to make me go with less reluctance to my
uncle's.

My mother bid her say, if I expostulated about these orders, and about
my pen and ink, 'that reading was more to the purpose, at present, than
writing: that by the one, I might be taught my duty; that the other,
considering whom I was believed to write to, only stiffened my will:
that my needle-works had better be pursued than my airings; which were
observed to be taken in all weathers.'

So, my dear, if I do not resolve upon something soon, I shall neither be
able to avoid the intended evil, nor have it in my power to correspond
with you.


*****

WEDNESDAY NIGHT.

All is in a hurry below-stairs. Betty is in and out like a spy.
Something is working, I know not what. I am really a good deal
disordered in body as well as in mind. Indeed I am quite heart-sick.

I will go down, though 'tis almost dark, on pretence of getting a little
air and composure. Robert has my two former, I hope, before now: and
I will deposit this, with Lovelace's enclosed, if I can, for fear of
another search.

I know not what I shall do!--All is so strangely busy!--Doors clapt
to--going out of one apartment, hurryingly, as I may say, into another.
Betty in her alarming way, staring, as if of frighted importance; twice
with me in half an hour; called down in haste by Shorey the last time;
leaving me with still more meaning in her looks and gestures--yet
possibly nothing in all this worthy of my apprehensions--

Here again comes the creature, with her deep-drawn affected sighs, and
her O dear's! O dear's!


*****


More dark hints thrown out by the saucy creature. But she will not
explain herself. 'Suppose this pretty business ends in murder! she says.
I may rue my opposition as long as I live, for aught she knows. Parents
will not be baffled out of their children by imprudent gentlemen; nor is
it fit they should. It may come home to me when I least expect it.'

These are the gloomy and perplexing hints this impertinent throws
out. Probably they arose from the information Mr. Lovelace says he has
secretly permitted them to have (from this vile double-faced agent, I
suppose!) of his resolution to prevent my being carried to my uncle's.

How justly, if so, may this exasperate them!--How am I driven to and
fro, like a feather in the wind, at the pleasure of the rash, the
selfish, the headstrong! and when I am as averse to the proceedings of
the one, as I am to those of the other! For although I was induced to
carry on this unhappy correspondence, as I think I ought to call it, in
hopes to prevent mischief; yet indiscreet measures are fallen upon by
the rash man, before I, who am so much concerned in the event of the
present contentions, can be consulted: and between his violence on one
hand, and that of my relations on the other, I find myself in danger
from both.

O my dear! what is worldly wisdom but the height of folly!--I, the
meanest, at least youngest, of my father's family, to thrust myself
in the gap between such uncontroulable spirits!--To the intercepting
perhaps of the designs of Providence, which may intend to make those
hostile spirits their own punishers.--If so, what presumption!--Indeed,
my dear friend, I am afraid I have thought myself of too much
consequence. But, however this be, it is good, when calamities befal us,
that we should look into ourselves, and fear.

If I am prevented depositing this and the enclosed, (as I intend to try
to do, late as it is,) I will add to it as occasion shall offer. Mean
time, believe me to be

Your ever-affectionate and grateful CL. HARLOWE.

Under the superscription, written with a pencil, after she went down.

'My two former are not yet taken away--I am surprised--I hope you are
well--I hope all is right betwixt your mother and you.'




LETTER XXXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.

I have your three letters. Never was there a creature more impatient on
the most interesting uncertainty than I was, to know the event of the
interview between you and Solmes.

It behoves me to account to my dear friend, in her present unhappy
situation, for every thing that may have the least appearance of
negligence or remissness on my part. I sent Robin in the morning early,
in hopes of a deposit. He loitered about the place till near ten to
no purpose; and then came away; my mother having given him a letter to
carry to Mr. Hunt's, which he was to deliver before three, when only, in
the day-time, that gentleman is at home; and to bring back an answer to
it. Mr. Hunt's house, you know, lies wide from Harlowe-place. Robin but
just saved his time; and returned not till it was too late to send him
again. I only could direct him to set out before day this morning; and
if he got any letter, to ride as for his life to bring it to me.

I lay by myself: a most uneasy night I had through impatience; and being
discomposed with it, lay longer than usual. Just as I was risen, in came
Kitty, from Robin, with your three letters. I was not a quarter dressed;
and only slipt on my morning sack; proceeding no further till I had
read them all through, long as they are: and yet I often stopped to rave
aloud (though by myself) at the devilish people you have to deal with.

How my heart rises at them all! How poorly did they design to trick
you into an encouragement of Solmes, from the extorted interview!--I
am very, very angry at your aunt Hervey--to give up her own judgment so
tamely!--and, not content to do so, to become such an active instrument
in their hands!--But it is so like the world!--so like my mother
too!--Next to her own child, there is not any body living she values so
much as you:--Yet it is--Why should we embroil ourselves, Nancy, with
the affairs of other people?

Other people!--How I hate the poor words, where friendship is concerned,
and where the protection to be given may be of so much consequence to a
friend, and of so little detriment to one's self?

I am delighted with your spirit, however. I expected it not from you
Nor did they, I am sure. Nor would you, perhaps, have exerted it, if
Lovelace's intelligence of Solmes's nursery-offices had not set you up.
I wonder not that the wretch is said to love you the better for it. What
an honour would it be to him to have such a wife? And he can be even
with you when you are so. He must indeed be a savage, as you say.--Yet
he is less to blame for his perseverance, than those of your own family,
whom most you reverence for theirs.

It is well, as I have often said, that I have not such provocations
and trials; I should perhaps long ago have taken your cousin Dolly's
advice--yet dare I not to touch that key.--I shall always love the good
girl for her tenderness to you.

I know not what to say of Lovelace; nor what to think of his promises,
nor of his proposals to you. 'Tis certain that you are highly esteemed
by all his family. The ladies are persons of unblemished honour. My Lord
M. is also (as men and peers go) a man of honour. I could tell what to
advise any other person in the world to do but you. So much expected
from you!--Such a shining light!--Your quitting your father's house, and
throwing yourself into the protection of a family, however honourable,
that has a man in it, whose person, parts, declarations, and
pretensions, will be thought to have engaged your warmest
esteem;--methinks I am rather for advising that you should get privately
to London; and not to let either him, or any body else but me, know
where you are, till your cousin Morden comes.

As to going to your uncle's, that you must not do, if you can help
it. Nor must you have Solmes, that's certain: Not only because of his
unworthiness in every respect, but because of the aversion you have so
openly avowed to him; which every body knows and talks of; as they do
of your approbation of the other. For your reputation sake therefore,
as well as to prevent mischief, you must either live single, or have
Lovelace.

If you think of going to London, let me know; and I hope you will have
time to allow me a further concert as to the manner of your getting
away, and thither, and how to procure proper lodgings for you.

To obtain this time, you must palliate a little, and come into some
seeming compromise, if you cannot do otherwise. Driven as you are
driven, it will be strange if you are not obliged to part with a few of
your admirable punctilio's.

You will observe from what I have written, that I have not succeeded
with my mother.

I am extremely mortified and disappointed. We have had very strong
debates upon it. But, besides the narrow argument of embroiling
ourselves with other people's affairs, as above-mentioned, she will have
it, that it is your duty to comply. She says, she was always of opinion
that daughters should implicitly submit to the will of their parents in
the great article of marriage; and that she governed herself accordingly
in marrying my father; who at first was more the choice of her parents
than her own.

This is what she argues in behalf of her favourite Hickman, as well as
for Solmes in your case.

I must not doubt, but my mother always governed herself by this
principle--because she says she did. I have likewise another reason to
believe it; which you shall have, though it may not become me to give
it--that they did not live so happily together, as one would hope people
might do who married preferring each other at the time to the rest of
the world.

Somebody shall fare never the better for this double-meant policy of my
mother, I do assure you. Such a retrospection in her arguments to
him, and to his address, it is but fit that he should suffer for my
mortification in failing to carry a point upon which I had set my whole
heart.

Think, my dear, if in any way I can serve you. If you allow of it,
I protest I will go off privately with you, and we will live and die
together. Think of it. Improve upon my hint, and command me.

A little interruption.--What is breakfast to the subject I am upon?


*****


London, I am told, is the best hiding-place in the world. I have written
nothing but what I will stand in to at the word of command. Women love
to engage in knight-errantry, now-and-then, as well as to encourage
it in the men. But in your case, what I propose will not seem to have
anything of that nature in it. It will enable me to perform what is no
more than a duty in serving and comforting a dear and worthy friend, who
labours under undeserved oppression: and you will ennoble, as I may say,
your Anna Howe, if you allow her to be your companion in affliction.

I will engage, my dear, we shall not be in town together one month,
before we surmount all difficulties; and this without being beholden to
any men-fellows for their protection.

I must repeat what I have often said, that the authors of your
persecutions would not have presumed to set on foot their selfish
schemes against you, had they not depended upon the gentleness of your
spirit; though now, having gone so far, and having engaged Old AUTHORITY
in it, [chide me if you will!] neither he nor they know how to recede.

When they find you out of their reach, and know that I am with you,
you'll see how they'll pull in their odious horns.

I think, however, that you should have written to your cousin Morden,
the moment they had begun to treat you disgracefully.

I shall be impatient to hear whether they will attempt to carry you to
your uncle's. I remember, that Lord M.'s dismissed bailiff reported of
Lovelace, that he had six or seven companions as bad as himself; and
that the country was always glad when they left it.* He actually has, as
I hear, such a knot of them about him now. And, depend upon it, he will
not suffer them quietly to carry you to your uncle's: And whose must you
be, if he succeeds in taking you from them?


     * See Vol.I. Letter IV.


I tremble for you but upon supposing what may be the consequence of a
conflict upon this occasion. Lovelace owes some of them vengeance. This
gives me a double concern, that my mother should refuse her consent to
the protection I had set my heart upon procuring for you.

My mother will not breakfast without me. A quarrel has its conveniencies
sometimes. Yet too much love, I think, is as bad as too little.


*****


We have just now had another pull. Upon my word, she is
excessively--what shall I say?--unpersuadable--I must let her off with
that soft word.

Who was the old Greek, that said, he governed Athens; his wife, him; and
his son, her?

It was not my mother's fault [I am writing to you, you know] that she
did not govern my father. But I am but a daughter!--Yet I thought I was
not quite so powerless when I was set upon carrying a point, as I find
myself to be.

Adieu, my dear!--Happier times must come--and that quickly too.--The
strings cannot long continue to be thus overstrained. They must break
or be relaxed. In either way, the certainty must be preferable to the
suspense.

One word more:

I think in my conscience you must take one of these two alternatives;
either to consent to let us go to London together privately; [in which
case, I will procure a vehicle, and meet you at your appointment at the
stile to which Lovelace proposes to bring his uncle's chariot;] or,
to put yourself into the protection of Lord M. and the ladies of his
family.

You have another, indeed; and that is, if you are absolutely resolved
against Solmes, to meet and marry Lovelace directly.

Whichsoever of these you make choice of, you will have this plea,
both to yourself, and to the world, that you are concluded by the same
uniform principle that has governed your whole conduct, ever since the
contention between Lovelace and your brother has been on foot: that
is to say, that you have chosen a lesser evil, in hopes to prevent a
greater.

Adieu! and Heaven direct for the best my beloved creature, prays

Her ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY, APRIL 6.


I thank you, my dearest friend, for the pains you have taken in
accounting so affectionately for my papers not being taken away
yesterday; and for the kind protection you would have procured for me,
if you could.

This kind protection was what I wished for: but my wishes, raised at
first by your love, were rather governed by my despair of other refuge
[having before cast about, and not being able to determine, what I
ought to do, and what I could do, in a situation so unhappy] than by a
reasonable hope: For why indeed should any body embroil themselves for
others, when they can avoid it?

All my consolation is, as I have frequently said, that I have not, by my
own inadvertence or folly, brought myself into this sad situation. If I
had, I should not have dared to look up to any body with the expectation
of protection or assistance, nor to you for excuse of the trouble I give
you. But nevertheless we should not be angry at a person's not doing
that for ourselves, or for our friend, which she thinks she ought not to
do; and which she has it in her option either to do, or to let it alone.
Much less have you a right to be displeased with so prudent a mother,
for not engaging herself so warmly in my favour, as you wished she
would. If my own aunt can give me up, and that against her judgment, as
I may presume to say; and if my father and mother, and uncles, who once
loved me so well, can join so strenuously against me; can I expect, or
ought you, the protection of your mother, in opposition to them?

Indeed, my dear love, [permit me to be very serious,] I am afraid I am
singled out (either for my own faults, or for the faults of my
family, or perhaps for the faults of both) to be a very unhappy
creature!--signally unhappy! For see you not how irresistible the waves
of affliction come tumbling down upon me?

We have been till within these few weeks, every one of us, too happy. No
crosses, no vexations, but what we gave ourselves from the pamperedness,
as I may call it, of our own wills. Surrounded by our heaps and stores,
hoarded up as fast as acquired, we have seemed to think ourselves out
of the reach of the bolts of adverse fate. I was the pride of all my
friends, proud myself of their pride, and glorying in my standing. Who
knows what the justice of Heaven may inflict, in order to convince us,
that we are not out of the reach of misfortune; and to reduce us to a
better reliance, than what we have hitherto presumptuously made?

I should have been very little the better for the conversation-visits
with the good Dr. Lewen used to honour me with, and for the principles
wrought (as I may say) into my earliest mind by my pious Mrs. Norton,
founded on her reverend father's experience, as well as on her own, if
I could not thus retrospect and argue, in such a strange situation as we
are in. Strange, I may well call it; for don't you see, my dear, that we
seem all to be impelled, as it were, by a perverse fate, which none of
us are able to resist?--and yet all arising (with a strong appearance
of self-punishment) from ourselves? Do not my parents see the hopeful
children, from whom they expected a perpetuity of worldly happiness
to their branching family, now grown up to answer the till now distant
hope, setting their angry faces against each other, pulling up by the
roots, as I may say, that hope which was ready to be carried into a
probable certainty?

Your partial love will be ready to acquit me of capital and intentional
faults:--but oh, my dear! my calamities have humbled me enough to make
me turn my gaudy eye inward; to make me look into myself.--And what have
I discovered there?--Why, my dear friend, more secret pride and vanity
than I could have thought had lain in my unexamined heart.

If I am to be singled out to be the punisher of myself and family, who
so lately was the pride of it, pray for me, my dear, that I may not
be left wholly to myself; and that I may be enabled to support my
character, so as to be justly acquitted of wilful and premeditated
faults. The will of Providence be resigned to in the rest: as that
leads, let me patiently and unrepiningly follow!--I shall not live
always!--May but my closing scene be happy!

But I will not oppress you, my dearest friend, with further reflections
of this sort. I will take them all into myself. Surely I have a mind
that has room for them. My afflictions are too sharp to last long. The
crisis is at hand. Happier times you bid me hope for. I will hope.


*****


But yet, I cannot be but impatient at times, to find myself thus driven,
and my character so depreciated and sunk, that were all the future to be
happy, I should be ashamed to shew my face in public, or to look up. And
all by the instigation of a selfish brother, and envious sister--

But let me stop: let me reflect!--Are not these suggestions the
suggestions of the secret pride I have been censuring? Then, already
so impatient! but this moment so resigned, so much better disposed
for reflection! yet 'tis hard, 'tis very hard, to subdue an embittered
spirit!--in the instant of its trial too!--O my cruel brother!--but
now it rises again.--I will lay down a pen I am so little able
to govern.--And I will try to subdue an impatience, which (if my
afflictions are sent me for corrective ends) may otherwise lead me into
still more punishable errors.--


*****


I will return to a subject, which I cannot fly from for ten minutes
together--called upon especially, as I am, by your three alternatives
stated in the conclusion of your last.

As to the first; to wit, your advice for me to escape to London--let me
tell you, that the other hint or proposal which accompanies it perfectly
frightens me--surely, my dear, (happy as you are, and indulgently
treated as your mother treats you,) you cannot mean what you propose!
What a wretch must I be, if, for one moment only, I could lend an ear
to such a proposal as this!--I, to be the occasion of making such
a mother's (perhaps shortened) life unhappy to the last hour of
it!--Ennoble you, my dear creature! How must such an enterprise (the
rashness public, the motives, were they excusable, private) debase
you!--but I will not dwell upon the subject--for your own sake I will
not.

As to your second alternative, to put myself into the protection of Lord
M. and of the ladies of that family, I own to you, (as I believe I have
owned before,) that although to do this would be the same thing in the
eye of the world as putting myself into Mr. Lovelace's protection, yet
I think I would do it rather than be Mr. Solmes's wife, if there were
evidently no other way to avoid being so.

Mr. Lovelace, you have seen, proposes to contrive a way to put me into
possession of my own house; and he tells me, that he will soon fill
it with the ladies of his family, as my visiters;--upon my invitation,
however, to them. A very inconsiderate proposal I think it to be,
and upon which I cannot explain myself to him. What an exertion of
independency does it chalk out for me! How, were I to attend to him,
(and not to the natural consequences to which the following of his
advice would lead me,) might I be drawn by gentle words into the
penetration of the most violent acts!--For how could I gain possession,
but either by legal litigation, which, were I inclined to have recourse
to it, (as I never can be,) must take up time; or by forcibly turning
out the persons whom my father has placed there, to look after the
gardens, the house, and the furniture--persons entirely attached to
himself, and who, as I know, have been lately instructed by my brother?

Your third alternative, to meet and marry Mr. Lovelace directly; a man
with whose morals I am far from being satisfied--a step, that could
not be taken with the least hope of ever obtaining pardon from or
reconciliation with any of my friends; and against which a thousand
objections rise in my mind--that is not to be thought of.

What appears to me, upon the fullest deliberation, the most eligible,
if I must be thus driven, is the escaping to London. But I would forfeit
all my hopes of happiness in this life, rather than you should go away
with me, as you rashly, though with the kindest intentions, propose.
If I could get safely thither, and be private, methinks I might remain
absolutely independent of Mr. Lovelace, and at liberty either to make
proposals to my friends, or, should they renounce me, (and I had no
other or better way,) to make terms with him; supposing my cousin
Morden, on his arrival, were to join with my other relations. But they
would then perhaps indulge me in my choice of a single life, on giving
him up: the renewing to them this offer, when at my own liberty, will
at least convince them, that I was in earnest when I made it first: and,
upon my word, I would stand to it, dear as you seem to think, when you
are disposed to rally me, it would cost me, to stand to it.

If, my dear, you can procure a vehicle for us both, you can perhaps
procure one for me singly: but can it be done without embroiling
yourself with your mother, or her with our family?--Be it coach,
chariot, chaise, wagon, or horse, I matter not, provided you appear not
to have a hand in my withdrawing. Only, in case it be one of the two
latter, I believe I must desire you to get me an ordinary gown and coat,
or habit, of some servant; having no concert with any of our own: the
more ordinary the better. They must be thrust on in the wood-house;
where I can put them on; and then slide down from the bank, that
separates the wood-yard from the green lane.

But, alas! my dear, this, even this alternative, is not without
difficulties, which, to a spirit so little enterprising as mine, seem in
a manner insuperable. These are my reflections upon it.

I am afraid, in the first place, that I shall not have time for the
requisite preparations for an escape.

Should I be either detected in those preparations, or pursued and
overtaken in my flight, and so brought back, then would they think
themselves doubly warranted to compel me to have their Solmes: and,
conscious of an intended fault, perhaps, I should be the less able to
contend with them.

But were I even to get safely to London, I know nobody there but by
name; and those the tradesmen to our family; who, no doubt, would be
the first written to and engaged to find me out. And should Mr. Lovelace
discover where I was, and he and my brother meet, what mischiefs
might ensue between them, whether I were willing or not to return to
Harlowe-place!

But supposing I could remain there concealed, to what might my youth, my
sex, and unacquaintedness of the ways of that great, wicked town, expose
me!--I should hardly dare to go to church for fear of being discovered.
People would wonder how I lived. Who knows but I might pass for a kept
mistress; and that, although nobody came to me, yet, that every time I
went out, it might be imagined to be in pursuance of some assignation?

You, my dear, who alone would know where to direct to me, would be
watched in all your steps, and in all your messages; and your mother,
at present not highly pleased with our correspondence, would then have
reason to be more displeased: And might not differences follow between
her and you, that would make me very unhappy, were I to know them? And
this the more likely, as you take it so unaccountably (and, give me
leave to say, so ungenerously) into your head, to revenge yourself upon
the innocent Mr. Hickman, for all the displeasure your mother gives you.

Were Lovelace to find out my place of abode, that would be the same
thing in the eye of the world as if I had actually gone off with him:
For would he, do you think, be prevailed upon to forbear visiting me?
And then his unhappy character (a foolish man!) would be no credit to
any young creature desirous of concealment. Indeed the world, let me
escape whither, and to whomsoever I could, would conclude him to be the
contriver of it.

These are the difficulties which arise to me on revolving this scheme;
which, nevertheless, might appear surmountable to a more enterprising
spirit in my circumstances. If you, my dear, think them surmountable in
any one of the cases put, [and to be sure I can take no course, but what
must have some difficulty in it,] be pleased to let me know your free
and full thoughts upon it.

Had you, my dear friend, been married, then should I have had no doubt
but that you and Mr. Hickman would have afforded an asylum to a poor
creature more than half lost in her own apprehension for want of one
kind protecting friend!

You say I should have written to my cousin Morden the moment I was
treated disgracefully: But could I have believed that my friends would
not have softened by degrees when they saw my antipathy to their Solmes?

I had thoughts indeed several times of writing to my cousin: but by the
time an answer could have come, I imagined all would have been over, as
if it had never been: so from day to day, from week to week, I hoped on:
and, after all, I might as reasonably fear (as I have heretofore said)
that my cousin would be brought to side against me, as that some of
those I have named would.

And then to appeal a cousin [I must have written with warmth to engage
him] against a father; this was not a desirable thing to set about. Then
I had not, you know, one soul on my side; my mother herself against me.
To be sure my cousin would have suspended his judgment till he could
have arrived. He might not have been in haste to come, hoping the malady
would cure itself: but had he written, his letters probably would have
run in the qualifying style; to persuade me to submit, or them only to
relax. Had his letters been more on my side than on theirs, they would
not have regarded them: nor perhaps himself, had he come and been an
advocate for me: for you see how strangely determined they are; how they
have over-awed or got in every body; so that no one dare open their lips
in my behalf. And you have heard that my brother pushes his measures
with the more violence, that all may be over with me before my cousin's
expected arrival.

But you tell me, that, in order to gain time, I must palliate; that I
must seem to compromise with my friends: But how palliate? How seem to
compromise? You would not have me endeavour to make them believe, that I
will consent to what I never intended to consent to! You would not have
me to gain time, with a view to deceive!

To do evil, that good may come of it, is forbidden: And shall I do evil,
yet know not whether good may come of it or not?

Forbid it, heaven! that Clarissa Harlowe should have it in her thought
to serve, or even to save herself at the expense of her sincerity, and
by a studied deceit!

And is there, after all, no way to escape one great evil, but by
plunging myself into another?--What an ill-fated creature am I!--Pray
for me, my dearest Nancy!--my mind is at present so much disturbed, that
I can hardly pray for myself.




LETTER XXXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY NIGHT.


This alarming hurry I mentioned under my date of last night, and Betty's
saucy dark hints, come out to be owing to what I guessed they were; that
is to say, to the private intimation Mr. Lovelace contrived our family
should have of his insolent resolution [insolent I must call it] to
prevent my being carried to my uncle's.

I saw at the time that it was as wrong with respect to answering his own
view, as it was insolent: For, could he think, as Betty (I suppose from
her betters) justly observed, that parents would be insulted out of
their right to dispose of their own child, by a violent man, whom they
hate; and who could have no pretension to dispute that right with them,
unless what he had from her who had none over herself? And how must
this insolence of his, aggravated as my brother is able to aggravate it,
exasperate them against me?

The rash man has indeed so far gained his point, as to intimidate them
from attempting to carry me away: but he has put them upon a surer and
a more desperate measure: and this has driven me also into one as
desperate; the consequence of which, although he could not foresee it,*
may perhaps too well answer his great end, little as he deserves to have
it answered.


     * She was mistaken in this. Mr. Lovelace did foresee this
     consequence. All his contrivances led to it, and the whole
     family, as he boasts, unknown to themselves, were but so
     many puppets danced by his wires. See Vol.I. Letter XXXI.


In short, I have done, as far as I know, the most rash thing that ever I
did in my life.

But let me give you the motive, and then the action will follow of
course.

About six o'clock this evening, my aunt (who stays here all night, on my
account, no doubt) came up and tapped at my door; for I was writing;
and had locked myself in. I opened it; and she entering, thus delivered
herself:

I come once more to visit you, my dear; but sorely against my will;
because it is to impart to you matters of the utmost concern to you, and
to the whole family.

What, Madam, is now to be done with me? said I, wholly attentive.

You will not be hurried away to your uncle's, child; let that comfort
you.--They see your aversion to go.--You will not be obliged to go to
your uncle Antony's.

How you revive me, Madam! this is a cordial to my heart!

I little thought, my dear, what was to follow this supposed
condescension.

And then I ran over with blessings for this good news, (and she
permitted me so to do, by her silence); congratulating myself, that
I thought my father could not resolve to carry things to the last
extremity.--

Hold, Niece, said she, at last--you must not give yourself too much joy
upon the occasion neither.--Don't be surprised, my dear.--Why look you
upon me, child, with so affecting an earnestness?--but you must be Mrs.
Solmes, for all that.

I was dumb.

She then told me, that they had undoubted information, that a certain
desperate ruffian (I must excuse her that word, she said) had prepared
armed men to way-lay my brother and uncles, and seize me, and carry me
off.--Surely, she said, I was not consenting to a violence that might be
followed by murder on one side or the other; perhaps on both.

I was still silent.

That therefore my father (still more exasperated than before) had
changed his resolution as to my going to my uncle's; and was determined
next Tuesday to set out thither himself with my mother; and that (for
it was to no purpose to conceal a resolution so soon to be put into
execution)--I must not dispute it any longer--on Wednesday I must give
my hand--as they would have me.

She proceeded, that orders were already given for a license: that the
ceremony was to be performed in my own chamber, in presence of all my
friends, except of my father and mother; who would not return, nor see
me, till all was over, and till they had a good account of my behaviour.

The very intelligence, my dear!--the very intelligence this, which
Lovelace gave me!

I was still dumb--only sighing, as if my heart would break.

She went on, comforting me, as she thought. 'She laid before me the
merit of obedience; and told me, that if it were my desire that my
Norton should be present at the ceremony, it would be complied with:
that the pleasure I should receive from reconciling al my friends to me,
and in their congratulations upon it, must needs overbalance, with such
a one as me, the difference of persons, however preferable I might think
the one man to the other: that love was a fleeting thing, little better
than a name, where mortality and virtue did not distinguish the object
of it: that a choice made by its dictates was seldom happy; at least not
durably so: nor was it to be wondered at, when it naturally exalted the
object above its merits, and made the lover blind to faults, that were
visible to every body else: so that when a nearer intimacy stript it of
its imaginary perfections, it left frequently both parties surprised,
that they could be so grossly cheated; and that then the indifference
became stronger than the love ever was. That a woman gave a man great
advantages, and inspired him with great vanity, when she avowed her
love for him, and preference of him; and was generally requited with
insolence and contempt: whereas the confessedly-obliged man, it was
probable, would be all reverence and gratitude'--and I cannot tell what.

'You, my dear, said she, believe you shall be unhappy, if you have
Mr. Solmes: your parents think the contrary; and that you will be
undoubtedly so, were you to have Mr. Lovelace, whose morals are
unquestionably bad: suppose it were your sad lot to consider, what
great consolation you will have on one hand, if you pursue your parents'
advice, that you did so; what mortification on the other, that by
following your own, you have nobody to blame but yourself.'

This, you remember, my dear, was an argument enforced upon me by Mrs.
Norton.

These and other observations which she made were worthy of my aunt
Hervey's good sense and experience, and applied to almost any young
creature who stood in opposition to her parents' will, but one who had
offered to make the sacrifices I have offered to make, ought to have had
their due weight. But although it was easy to answer some of them in my
own particular case; yet having over and over, to my mother, before my
confinement, and to my brother and sister, and even to my aunt Hervey,
since, said what I must now have repeated, I was so much mortified and
afflicted at the cruel tidings she brought me, that however attentive I
was to what she said, I had neither power nor will to answer one word;
and, had she not stopped of herself, she might have gone on an hour
longer, without interruption from me.

Observing this, and that I only sat weeping, my handkerchief covering
my face, and my bosom heaving ready to burst; What! no answer, my
dear?--Why so much silent grief? You know I have always loved you. You
know, that I have no interest in the affair. You would not permit Mr.
Solmes to acquaint you with some things which would have set your heart
against Mr. Lovelace. Shall I tell you some of the matters charged
against him?--shall I, my dear?

Still I answered only by my tears and sighs.

Well, child, you shall be told these things afterwards, when you will be
in a better state of mind to hear them; and then you will rejoice in the
escape you will have had. It will be some excuse, then, for you to plead
for your behaviour to Mr. Solmes, that you could not have believed Mr.
Lovelace had been so very vile a man.

My heart fluttered with impatience and anger at being so plainly talked
to as the wife of this man; but yet I then chose to be silent. If I had
spoken, it would have been with vehemence.

Strange, my dear, such silence!--Your concern is infinitely more on this
side the day, than it will be on the other.--But let me ask you, and do
not be displeased, Will you choose to see what generous stipulations
for you there are in the settlements?--You have knowledge beyond your
years--give the writings a perusal: do, my dear: they are engrossed, and
ready for signing, and have been for some time. Excuse me, my love--I
mean not to disorder you:--your father would oblige me to bring them up,
and to leave them with you. He commands you to read them. But to read
them, Niece--since they are engrossed, and were before you made them
absolutely hopeless.

And then, to my great terror, she drew some parchments form her
handkerchief, which she had kept, (unobserved by me,) under her apron;
and rising, put them in the opposite window. Had she produced a serpent,
I could not have been more frightened.

Oh! my dearest Aunt, turning away my face, and holding out my hands,
hide from my eyes those horrid parchments!--Let me conjure you to tell
me--by all the tenderness of near relationship, and upon your honour,
and by your love for me, say, Are they absolutely resolved, that, come
what will, I must be that man's?

My dear, you must have Mr. Solmes: indeed you must.

Indeed I never will!--This, as I have said over and over, is not
originally my father's will.--Indeed I never will--and that is all I
will say!

It is your father's will now, replied my aunt: and, considering how
all the family is threatened by Mr. Lovelace, and the resolution he has
certainly taken to force you out of their hands, I cannot but say they
are in the right, not to be bullied out of their child.

Well, Madam, then nothing remains for me to say. I am made desperate. I
care not what becomes of me.

Your piety, and your prudence, my dear, and Mr. Lovelace's immoral
character, together with his daring insults, and threatenings, which
ought to incense you, as much as any body, are every one's dependence.
We are sure the time will come, when you'll think very differently of
the steps your friends take to disappoint a man who has made himself so
justly obnoxious to them all.

She withdrew; leaving me full of grief and indignation:--and as much
out of humour with Mr. Lovelace as with any body; who, by his conceited
contrivances, has made things worse for me than before; depriving me
of the hopes I had of gaining time to receive your advice, and private
assistance to get to town; and leaving me not other advice, in all
appearance, than either to throw myself upon his family, or to be made
miserable for ever with Mr. Solmes. But I was still resolved to avoid
both these evils, if possible.

I sounded Betty, in the first place, (whom my aunt sent up, not thinking
it proper, as Betty told me, that I should be left by myself, and who, I
found, knew their designs,) whether it were not probable that they
would forbear, at my earnest entreaty, to push matters to the threatened
extremity.

But she confirmed all my aunt said; rejoicing (as she said they all did)
that Mr. Lovelace had given them so good a pretence to save me from him
now, and for ever.

She ran on about equipages bespoken; talked of my brother's and sister's
exultations that now the whole family would soon be reconciled to each
other: of the servants' joy upon it: of the expected license: of a visit
to be paid me by Dr. Lewen, or another clergyman, whom they named not
to her; which was to crown the work: and of other preparations, so
particular, as made me dread that they designed to surprise me into a
still nearer day than Wednesday.

These things made me excessively uneasy. I knew not what to resolve
upon.

At one time, What have I to do, thought I, but to throw myself at once
into the protection of Lady Betty Lawrance?--But then, in resentment of
his fine contrivances, which had so abominably disconcerted me, I soon
resolved to the contrary: and at last concluded to ask the favour of
another half-hour's conversation with my aunt.

I sent Betty to her with my request.

She came.

I put it to her, in the most earnest manner, to tell me, whether I might
not obtain the favour of a fortnight's respite?

She assured me, it would not be granted.

Would a week? Surely a week would?

She believed a week might, if I would promise two things: the first,
upon my honour, not to write a line out of the house, in that week:
for it was still suspected, she said, that I found means to write to
somebody. And, secondly, to marry Mr. Solmes, at the expiration of it.

Impossible! Impossible! I said with a passion--What! might not I be
obliged with one week, without such a horrid condition as the last?

She would go down, she said, that she might not seem of her own head to
put upon me what I thought a hardship so great.

She went down: and came up again.

Did I want, was the answer, to give the vilest of men an opportunity to
put his murderous schemes into execution?--It was time for them to put
an end to my obstinacy (they were tired out with me) and to his hopes
at once. And an end should be put on Tuesday or Wednesday next, at
furthest; unless I would give my honour to comply with the condition
upon which my aunt had been so good as to allow me a longer time.

I even stamped with impatience!--I called upon her to witness, that
I was guiltless of the consequence of this compulsion; this barbarous
compulsion, I called it; let that consequence be what it would.

My aunt chid me in a higher strain than ever she did before.

While I, in a half phrensy, insisted upon seeing my father; such usage,
I said, set me above fear. I would rejoice to owe my death to him, as I
did my life.

I did go down half way of the stairs, resolved to throw myself at his
feet wherever he was.--My aunt was frighted. She owned, that she feared
for my head.--Indeed I was in a perfect phrensy for a few minutes--but
hearing my brother's voice, as talking to somebody in my sister's
apartment just by, I stopt; and heard the barbarous designer say,
speaking to my sister, This works charmingly, my dear Arabella!

It does! It does! said she, in an exulting accent.

Let us keep it up, said my brother.--The villain is caught in his own
trap!--Now must she be what we would have her be.

Do you keep my father to it; I'll take care of my mother, said Bella.

Never fear, said he!--and a laugh of congratulation to each other, and
derision of me (as I made it out) quite turned my frantic humour into a
vindictive one.

My aunt then just coming down to me, and taking my hand led me up; and
tried to sooth me.

My raving was turned into sullenness.

She preached patience and obedience to me.

I was silent.

At last she desired me to assure her, that I would offer no violence to
myself.

God, I said, had given me more grace, I hoped, than to permit me to be
guilty of so horrid a rashness, I was his creature, and not my own.

She then took leave of me; and I insisted upon her taking down with her
the odious parchments.

Seeing me in so ill an humour, and very earnest that she should take
them with her, she took them; but said, that my father should not know
that she did: and hoped I would better consider of the matter, and be
calmer next time they were offered to my perusal.

I revolved after she was gone all that my brother and sister had said.
I dwelt upon their triumphings over me; and found rise in my mind
a rancour that was new to me; and which I could not withstand.--And
putting every thing together, dreading the near day, what could I
do?--Am I in any manner excusable for what I did do?--If I shall be
condemned by the world, who know not my provocations, may I be acquitted
by you?--If not, I am unhappy indeed!--for this I did.

Having shaken off the impertinent Betty, I wrote to Mr. Lovelace, to
let him know, 'That all that was threatened at my uncle Antony's, was
intended to be executed here. That I had come to a resolution to throw
myself upon the protection of either of his two aunts, who would afford
it me--in short, that by endeavouring to obtain leave on Monday to dine
in the ivy summer-house, I would, if possible, meet him without the
garden-door, at two, three, four, or five o'clock on Monday afternoon,
as I should be able. That in the mean time he should acquaint me,
whether I might hope for either of those ladies' protection: and if I
might, I absolutely insisted that he should leave me with either, and go
to London himself, or remain at Lord M.'s; nor offer to visit me, till I
were satisfied that nothing could be done with my friends in an amicable
way; and that I could not obtain possession of my own estate, and leave
to live upon it: and particularly, that he should not hint marriage to
me, till I consented to hear him upon that subject.--I added, that if
he could prevail upon one of the Misses Montague to favour me with
her company on the road, it would make me abundantly more easy in the
thoughts of carrying into effect a resolution which I had not come to,
although so driven, but with the utmost reluctance and concern; and
which would throw such a slur upon my reputation in the eye of the
world, as perhaps I should never be able to wipe off.'

This was the purport of what I wrote; and down into the garden I slid
with it in the dark, which at another time I should not have had the
courage to do; and deposited it, and came up again unknown to any body.

My mind so dreadfully misgave me when I returned, that, to divert in
some measure my increasing uneasiness, I had recourse to my private pen;
and in a very short time ran this length.

And now, that I am come to this part, my uneasy reflections begin again
to pour in upon me. Yet what can I do?--I believe I shall take it back
again the first thing in the morning--Yet what can I do?

And who knows but they may have a still earlier day in their intention,
than that which will too soon come?

I hope to deposit this early in the morning for you, as I shall return
from resuming my letter, if I do resume it as my inwardest mind bids me.

Although it is now near two o'clock, I have a good mind to slide down
once more, in order to take back my letter. Our doors are always locked
and barred up at eleven; but the seats of the lesser hall-windows being
almost even with the ground without, and the shutters not difficult to
open, I could easily get out.

Yet why should I be thus uneasy, since, should the letter go, I can
but hear what Mr. Lovelace says to it? His aunts live at too great a
distance for him to have an immediate answer from them; so I can scruple
going to them till I have invitation. I can insist upon one of his
cousins meeting me in the chariot; and may he not be able to obtain
that favour from either of them. Twenty things may happen to afford me
a suspension at least: Why should I be so very uneasy?--When likewise
I can take back my letter early, before it is probable he will have the
thought of finding it there. Yet he owns he spends three parts of his
days, and has done for this fortnight past, in loitering about sometimes
in one disguise, sometimes in another, besides the attendance given by
his trusty servant when he himself is not in waiting, as he calls it.

But these strange forebodings!--Yet I can, if you advise, cause the
chariot he shall bring with him, to carry me directly to town, whither
in my London scheme, if you were to approve it, I had proposed to go:
and this will save you the trouble of procuring for me a vehicle; as
well as prevent any suspicion from your mother of your contributing to
my escape.

But, solicitous of your advice, and approbation too, if I can have it, I
will put an end to this letter.

Adieu, my dearest friend, adieu!




LETTER XL

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY MORNING, SEVEN O'CLOCK, APRIL
7.


My aunt Hervey, who is a very early riser, was walking in the garden
(Betty attending her, as I saw from my window this morning) when I
arose: for after such a train of fatigue and restless nights, I had
unhappily overslept myself: so all I durst venture upon, was, to step
down to my poultry-yard, and deposit mine of yesterday, and last night.
And I am just come up; for she is still in the garden. This prevents me
from going to resume my letter, as I think still to do; and hope it will
not be too late.

I said, I had unhappily overslept myself: I went to bed about half
an hour after two. I told the quarters till five; after which I dropt
asleep, and awaked not till past six, and then in great terror, from a
dream, which has made such an impression upon me, that, slightly as I
think of dreams, I cannot help taking this opportunity to relate it to
you.

'Methought my brother, my uncle Antony, and Mr. Solmes, had formed a
plot to destroy Mr. Lovelace; who discovering it, and believing I had a
hand in it, turned all his rage against me. I thought he made them all
fly to foreign parts upon it; and afterwards seizing upon me, carried
me into a church-yard; and there, notwithstanding, all my prayers and
tears, and protestations of innocence, stabbed me to the heart, and
then tumbled me into a deep grave ready dug, among two or three
half-dissolved carcases; throwing in the dirt and earth upon me with his
hands, and trampling it down with his feet.'

I awoke in a cold sweat, trembling, and in agonies; and still the
frightful images raised by it remain upon my memory.

But why should I, who have such real evils to contend with, regard
imaginary ones? This, no doubt, was owing to my disturbed imagination;
huddling together wildly all the frightful idea which my aunt's
communications and discourse, my letter to Mr. Lovelace, my own
uneasiness upon it, and the apprehensions of the dreaded Wednesday,
furnished me with.


*****

EIGHT O'CLOCK.

The man, my dear, has got the letter!--What a strange diligence! I wish
he mean me well, that he takes so much pains!--Yet, to be ingenuous, I
must own, that I should be displeased if he took less--I wish, however,
he had been an hundred miles off!--What an advantage have I given him
over me!

Now the letter is out of my power, I have more uneasiness and regret
than I had before. For, till now, I had a doubt, whether it should or
should not go: and now I think it ought not to have gone. And yet is
there any other way than to do as I have done, if I would avoid Solmes?
But what a giddy creature shall I be thought, if I pursue the course to
which this letter must lead me?

My dearest friend, tell me, have I done wrong?--Yet do not say I have,
if you think it; for should all the world besides condemn me, I shall
have some comfort, if you do not. The first time I ever besought you to
flatter me. That, of itself, is an indication that I have done wrong,
and am afraid of hearing the truth--O tell me (but yet do not tell me)
if I have done wrong!


*****


FRIDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

My aunt has made me another visit. She began what she had to say
with letting me know that my friends are all persuaded that I still
correspond with Mr. Lovelace; as is plain, she said, by hints and
menaces he throws out, which shew that he is apprized of several things
that have passed between my relations and me, sometimes within a very
little while after they have happened.

Although I approve not of the method he stoops to take to come at his
intelligence, yet it is not prudent in me to clear myself by the ruin of
the corrupted servant, (although his vileness has neither my connivance
nor approbation,) since my doing so might occasion the detection of my
own correspondence; and so frustrate all the hopes I have to avoid
this Solmes. Yet it is not at all likely, that this very agent of Mr.
Lovelace acts a double part between my brother and him: How else can our
family know (so soon too) his menaces upon the passages they hint at?

I assured my aunt, that I was too much ashamed of the treatment I met
with (and that from every one's sake as well as for my own) to acquaint
Mr. Lovelace with the particulars of that treatment, even were the means
of corresponding with him afforded me: that I had reason to think, that
if he were to know of it from me, we must be upon such terms, that
he would not scruple making some visits, which would give me great
apprehensions. They all knew, I said, that I had no communication
with any of my father's servants, except my sister's Betty Barnes: for
although I had a good opinion of them all, and believed, if left to
their own inclinations, that they would be glad to serve me; yet,
finding by their shy behaviour, that they were under particular
direction, I had forborn, ever since my Hannah had been so disgracefully
dismissed, so much as to speak to any of them, for fear I should be the
occasion of their losing their places too. They must, therefore, account
among themselves for the intelligence Mr. Lovelace met with, since
neither my brother nor sister, (as Betty had frequently, in praise of
their open hearts, informed me,) nor perhaps their favourite Mr. Solmes,
were all careful before whom they spoke, when they had any thing to
throw out against him, or even against me, whom they took great pride to
join with him on this occasion.

It was but too natural, my aunt said, for my friends to suppose that
he had his intelligence (part of it at least) from me; who, thinking
yourself hardly treated, might complain of it, if not to him, to Miss
Howe; which, perhaps, might be the same thing; for they knew Miss Howe
spoke as freely of them, as they could do of Mr. Lovelace; and must have
the particulars she spoke of from somebody who knew what was done here.
That this determined my father to bring the whole matter to a speedy
issue, lest fatal consequences should ensue.

I perceive you are going to speak with warmth, proceeded she: [and so I
was] for my own part I am sure, you would not write any thing, if you
do write, to inflame so violent a spirit.--But this is not the end of my
present visit.

You cannot, my dear, but be convinced, that your father will be obeyed.
The more you contend against his will, the more he thinks himself
obliged to assert his authority. Your mother desires me to tell you,
that if you will give her the least hopes of a dutiful compliance, she
will be willing to see you in her closet just now, while your father is
gone to take a walk in the garden.

Astonishing perseverance! said I--I am tired with making declarations
and with pleadings on this subject; and had hoped, that my resolution
being so well known, I should not have been further urged upon it.

You mistake the purport of my present visit, Miss: [looking
gravely]--Heretofore you have been desired and prayed to obey and oblige
your friends. Entreaty is at an end: they give it up. Now it is resolved
upon, that your father's will is to be obeyed; as it is fit it should.
Some things are laid at your door, as if you concurred with Lovelace's
threatened violence to carry you off, which your mother will not
believe. She will tell you her own good opinion of you. She will tell
you how much she still loves you; and what she expects of you on
the approaching occasion. But yet, that she may not be exposed to an
opposition which would the more provoke her, she desires that you will
first assure her that you go down with a resolution to do that with a
grace which must be done with or without a grace. And besides, she wants
to give you some advice how to proceed in order to reconcile yourself
to your father, and to every body else. Will you go down, Miss Clary, or
will you not?

I said, I should think myself happy, could I be admitted to my mother's
presence, after so long a banishment from it; but that I could not wish
it upon those terms.

And this is your answer, Niece?

It must be my answer, Madam. Come what may, I never will have Mr.
Solmes. It is cruel to press this matter so often upon me.--I never will
have that man.

Down she went with displeasure. I could not help it. I was quite tired
with so many attempts, all to the same purpose. I am amazed that they
are not!--So little variation! and no concession on either side!


I will go down and deposit this; for Betty has seen I have been writing.
The saucy creature took a napkin, and dipt it in water, and with a
fleering air, here, Miss; holding the wet corner to me.

What's that for? said I.

Only, Miss, one of the fingers of your right-hand, if you please to look
at it.

It was inky.

I gave her a look; but said nothing.

But, lest I should have another search, I will close here.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XLI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, ONE O'CLOCK.


I have a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of transports, vows, and
promises. I will send it to you enclosed. You'll see how 'he engages
in it for Lady Betty's protection, and for Miss Charlotte Montague's
accompanying me. I have nothing to do, but to persevere, he says, and
prepare to receive the personal congratulations of his whole family.'

But you'll see how he presumes upon my being his, as the consequence of
throwing myself into that lady's protection.

'The chariot and six is to be ready at the place he mentions. You'll see
as to the slur upon my reputation, about which I am so apprehensive, how
boldly he argues.' Generously enough, indeed, were I to be his; and had
given him to believe that I would.--But that I have not done.

How one step brings on another with this encroaching sex; how soon a
young creature, who gives a man the least encouragement, be carried
beyond her intentions, and out of her own power! You would imagine, by
what he writes, that I have given him reason to think that my aversion
to Mr. Solmes is all owing to my favour for him.

The dreadful thing is, that comparing what he writes from his
intelligencer of what is designed against me (though he seems not to
know the threatened day) with what my aunt and Betty assure me of, there
can be no hope for me, but that I must be Solmes's wife, if I stay here.

I had better have gone to my uncle Antony's at this rate. I should
have gained time, at least, by it. This is the fruit of his fine
contrivances!

'What we are to do, and how good he is to be: how I am to direct all his
future steps.' All this shews, as I said before, that he is sure of me.

However, I have replied to the following effect: 'That although I had
given him room to expect that I would put myself into the protection
of one of the ladies of his family; yet as I have three days to come,
between this and Monday, and as I still hope that my friends will
relent, or that Mr. Solmes will give up a point they will find
impossible to carry; I shall not look upon myself as absolutely bound
by the appointment: and expect therefore, if I recede, that I shall not
again be called to account for it by him. That I think it necessary
to acquaint him, that if my throwing myself upon Lady Betty Lawrance's
protection, as he proposed, he understands, that I mean directly to put
myself into his power, he is very much mistaken: for that there are many
point in which I must be satisfied; several matters to be adjusted, even
after I have left this house, (if I do leave it,) before I can think of
giving him any particular encouragement: that in the first place he must
expect that I will do my utmost to procure my father's reconciliation
and approbation of my future steps; and that I will govern myself
entirely by his commands, in every reasonable point, as much as if I had
not left his house: that if he imagines I shall not reserve to myself
this liberty, but that my withdrawing is to give him any advantages
which he would not otherwise have had; I am determined to stay where I
am, and abide the event, in hopes that my friends will still accept
of my reiterated promise never to marry him, or any body else, without
their consent.

This I will deposit as soon as I can. And as he thinks things are near
their crisis, I dare say it will not be long before I have an answer to
it.


FRIDAY, FOUR O'CLOCK.

I am really ill. I was used to make the best of any little accidents
that befel me, for fear of making my then affectionate friends uneasy:
but now I shall make the worst of my indisposition, in hopes to obtain a
suspension of the threatened evil of Wednesday next. And if I do obtain
it, will postpone my appointment with Mr. Lovelace.

Betty has told them that I am very much indisposed. But I have no pity
from any body.

I believe I am become the object of every one's aversion; and that they
would all be glad if I were dead. Indeed I believe it. 'What ails the
perverse creature?' cries one:--'Is she love-sick?' another.

I was in the ivy summer-house, and came out shivering with cold, as
if aguishly affected. Betty observed this, and reported it.--'O no
matter!--Let her shiver on!--Cold cannot hurt her. Obstinacy will defend
her from harm. Perverseness is a bracer to a love-sick girl, and more
effectual than the cold bath to make hardy, although the constitution be
ever so tender.'

This was said by a cruel brother, and heard said by the dearer friends
of one, for whom, but a few months ago, every body was apprehensive at
the least blast of wind to which she exposed herself!

Betty, it must be owned, has an admirable memory on these occasions.
Nothing of this nature is lost by her repetition: even the very air with
which she repeats what she hears said, renders it unnecessary to ask,
who spoke this or that severe thing.


FRIDAY, SIX O'CLOCK.

My aunt, who again stays all night, just left me. She came to tell me
the result of my friends' deliberations about me. It is this:

Next Wednesday morning they are all to be assembled: to wit, my father,
mother, my uncles, herself, and my uncle Hervey; my brother and sister
of course: my good Mrs. Norton is likewise to be admitted: and Dr. Lewen
is to be at hand, to exhort me, it seems, if there be occasion: but my
aunt is not certain whether he is to be among them, or to tarry till
called in.

When this awful court is assembled, the poor prisoner is to be brought
in, supported by Mrs. Norton; who is to be first tutored to instruct me
in the duty of a child; which it seems I have forgotten.

Nor is the success at all doubted, my aunt says: since it is not
believed that I can be hardened enough to withstand the expostulations
of so venerable a judicature, although I have withstood those of several
of them separately. And still the less, as she hints at extraordinary
condescensions from my father. But what condescensions, even from my
father, can induce me to make such a sacrifice as is expected from me?

Yet my spirits will never bear up, I doubt, at such a tribunal--my
father presiding in it.

Indeed I expected that my trials would not be at an end till he had
admitted me into his awful presence.

What is hoped from me, she says, is, that I will cheerfully, on Tuesday
night, if not before, sign the articles; and so turn the succeeding
day's solemn convention into a day of festivity. I am to have the
license sent me up, however, and once more the settlements, that I may
see how much in earnest they are.

She further hinted, that my father himself would bring up the
settlements for me to sign.

O my dear! what a trial will this be!--How shall I be able to refuse my
father the writing of my name?--To my father, from whose presence I
have been so long banished!--He commanding and entreating, perhaps, in a
breath!--How shall I be able to refuse this to my father?

They are sure, she says, something is working on Mr. Lovelace's part,
and perhaps on mine: and my father would sooner follow to the grave,
than see me his wife.

I said, I was not well: that the very apprehensions of these trials were
already insupportable to me; and would increase upon me, as the time
approached; and I was afraid I should be extremely ill.

They had prepared themselves for such an artifice as that, was my aunt's
unkind word; and she could assure me, it would stand me in no stead.

Artifice! repeated I: and this from my aunt Hervey?

Why, my dear, said she, do you think people are fools?--Can they not see
how dismally you endeavour to sigh yourself down within-doors?--How you
hang down your sweet face [those were the words she was pleased to use]
upon your bosom?--How you totter, as it were, and hold by this chair,
and by that door post, when you know that any body sees you? [This, my
dear Miss Howe, is an aspersion to fasten hypocrisy and contempt upon
me: my brother's or sister's aspersion!--I am not capable of arts so
low.] But the moment you are down with your poultry, or advancing upon
your garden-walk, and, as you imagine, out of every body's sight, it is
seem how nimbly you trip along; and what an alertness governs all your
motions.

I should hate myself, said I, were I capable of such poor artifices as
these. I must be a fool to use them, as well as a mean creature; for
have I not had experience enough, that my friends are incapable of being
moved in much more affecting instances?--But you'll see how I shall be
by Tuesday.


My dear, you will not offer any violence to your health?--I hope, God
has given you more grace than to do that.

I hope he has, Madam. But there is violence enough offered, and
threatened, to affect my health; and so it will be found, without my
needing to have recourse to any other, or to artifice either.

I'll only tell you one thing, my dear: and that is, ill or well, the
ceremony will probably be performed before Wednesday night:--but this,
also, I will tell you, although beyond my present commission, That Mr.
Solmes will be under an engagement (if you should require it of him as
a favour) after the ceremony is passed, and Lovelace's hopes thereby
utterly extinguished, to leave you at your father's, and return to his
own house every evening, until you are brought to a full sense of your
duty, and consent to acknowledge your change of name.

There was no opening of my lips to such a speech as this. I was dumb.

And these, my dear Miss Howe, are they who, some of them at least, have
called me a romantic girl!--This is my chimerical brother, and wise
sister; both joining their heads together, I dare say. And yet, my aunt
told me, that the last part was what took in my mother: who had, till
that last expedient was found out, insisted, that her child should not
be married, if, through grief or opposition, she should be ill, or fall
into fits.

This intended violence my aunt often excused, by the certain information
they pretended to have, of some plots or machinations, that were
ready to break out, from Mr. Lovelace:* the effects of which were thus
cunningly to be frustrated.


     * It may not be amiss to observe in this place, that Mr.
     Lovelace artfully contrived to drive the family on, by
     permitting his and their agent Leman to report machinations,
     which he had neither intention nor power to execute.


FRIDAY, NINE O'CLOCK.

And now, my dear, what shall I conclude upon? You see how
determined--But how can I expect your advice will come time enough
to stand me in any stead? For here I have been down, and already have
another letter from Mr. Lovelace [the man lives upon the spot, I think:]
and I must write to him, either that I will or will not stand to my
first resolution of escaping hence on Monday next. If I let him know
that I will not, (appearances so strong against him and for Solmes, even
stronger than when I made the appointment,) will it not be justly deemed
my own fault, if I am compelled to marry their odious man? And if any
mischief ensue from Mr. Lovelace's rage and disappointment, will it not
lie at my door?--Yet, he offers so fair!--Yet, on the other hand, to
incur the censure of the world, as a giddy creature--but that, as he
hints, I have already incurred--What can I do?--Oh! that my cousin
Morden--But what signifies wishing?

I will here give you the substance of Mr. Lovelace's letter. The letter
itself I will send, when I have answered it; but that I will defer doing
as long as I can, in hopes of finding reason to retract an appointment
on which so much depends. And yet it is necessary you should have all
before you as I go along, that you may be the better able to advise me
in this dreadful crisis.

'He begs my pardon for writing with so much assurance; attributing it to
his unbounded transport; and entirely acquiesces to me in my will. He is
full of alternatives and proposals. He offers to attend me directly to
Lady Betty's; or, if I had rather, to my own estate; and that my Lord
M. shall protect me there.' [He knows not, my dear, my reasons for
rejecting this inconsiderate advice.] 'In either case, as soon as he
sees me safe, he will go up to London, or whither I please; and not
come near me, but by my own permission; and till I am satisfied in every
thing I am doubtful of, as well with regard to his reformation, as to
settlements, &c.

'To conduct me to you, my dear, is another of his proposals, not
doubting, he says, but your mother will receive me:* or, if that be not
agreeable to you, or to your mother, or to me, he will put me into Mr.
Hickman's protection; whom, no doubt he says, you can influence; and
that it may be given out, that I have gone to Bath, or Bristol, or
abroad; wherever I please.


     * See Note in Letter V. of this Volume.


'Again, if it be more agreeable, he proposes to attend me privately to
London, where he will procure handsome lodgings for me, and both his
cousins Montague to receive me in them, and to accompany me till
all shall be adjusted to my mind; and till a reconciliation shall
be effected; which he assures me nothing shall be wanting in him to
facilitate, greatly as he has been insulted by all my family.

'These several measures he proposes to my choice; as it was unlikely,
he says, that he could procure, in the time, a letter from Lady Betty,
under her own hand, to invite me in form to her house, unless he
had been himself to go to that lady for it; which, at this critical
juncture, while he is attending my commands, is impossible.

'He conjures me, in the most solemn manner, if I would not throw him
into utter despair, to keep to my appointment.

'However, instead of threatening my relations, or Solmes, if I recede,
he respectfully says, that he doubts not, but that, if I do, it will be
upon the reason, as he ought to be satisfied with; upon no slighter,
he hopes, than their leaving me at full liberty to pursue my own
inclinations: in which (whatever they shall be) he will entirely
acquiesce; only endeavouring to make his future good behaviour the sole
ground for his expectation of my favour.

'In short, he solemnly vows, that his whole view, at present, is to free
me from my imprisonment; and to restore me to my future happiness. He
declares, that neither the hopes he has of my future favour, nor the
consideration of his own and his family's honour, will permit him to
propose any thing that shall be inconsistent with my own most scrupulous
notions: and, for my mind's sake, should choose to have the proposed end
obtained by my friends declining to compel me. But that nevertheless, as
to the world's opinion, it is impossible to imagine that the behaviour
of my relations to me has not already brought upon my family those
free censures which they deserve, and caused the step which I am so
scrupulous about taking, to be no other than the natural and expected
consequence of their treatment of me.'

Indeed, I am afraid all this is true: and it is owing to some little
degree of politeness, that Mr. Lovelace does not say all he might on
this subject: for I have no doubt that I am the talk, and perhaps the
bye-word of half the county. If so, I am afraid I can now do nothing
that will give me more disgrace than I have already so causelessly
received by their indiscreet persecutions: and let me be whose I
will, and do what I will, I shall never wipe off the stain which my
confinement, and the rigorous usage I have received, have fixed upon me;
at least in my own opinion.

I wish, if ever I am to be considered as one of the eminent family this
man is allied to, some of them do not think the worse of me for the
disgrace I have received. In that case, perhaps, I shall be obliged to
him, if he do not. You see how much this harsh, this cruel treatment
from my own family has humbled me! But perhaps I was too much exalted
before.

Mr. Lovelace concludes, 'with repeatedly begging an interview with me;
and that, this night, if possible: an hour, he says, he is the more
encouraged to solicit for, as I had twice before made him hope for it.
But whether he obtain it or not, he beseeches me to choose one of the
alternatives he offers to my acceptance; and not to depart from my
resolution of escaping on Monday, unless the reason ceases on which I
had taken it up; and that I have a prospect of being restored to
the favour of my friends; at least to my own liberty, and freedom of
choice.'

He renews all his vows and promises on this head in so earnest and so
solemn a manner, that (his own interest, and his family's honour, and
their favour for me, co-operating) I can have no room to doubt of his
sincerity.




LETTER XLII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. MORN., EIGHT O'CLOCK, APRIL 8.

Whether you will blame me or not, I cannot tell, but I have deposited
a letter confirming my resolution to leave this house on Monday next,
within the hour mentioned in my former, if possible. I have not kept a
copy of it. But this is the substance:

I tell him, 'That I have no way to avoid the determined resolution of
my friends in behalf of Mr. Solmes, but by abandoning this house by his
assistance.'

I have not pretended to make a merit with him on this score; for I
plainly tell him, 'That could I, without an unpardonable sin, die when I
would, I would sooner make death my choice, than take a step, which all
the world, if not my own heart, would condemn me for taking.'

I tell him, 'That I shall not try to bring any other clothes with me
than those I shall have on; and those but my common wearing-apparel;
lest I should be suspected. That I must expect to be denied the
possession of my estate: but that I am determined never to consent to a
litigation with my father, were I to be reduced to ever so low a state:
so that the protection I am to be obliged for to any one, must be alone
for the distress sake. That, therefore, he will have nothing to hope for
from this step that he had not before: and that in ever light I
reserve to myself to accept or refuse his address, as his behaviour and
circumspection shall appear to me to deserve.'

I tell him, 'That I think it best to go into a private lodging in the
neighbourhood of Lady Betty Lawrance; and not to her ladyship's house;
that it may not appear to the world that I have refuged myself in his
family; and that a reconciliation with my friends may not, on that
account, be made impracticable: that I will send for thither my faithful
Hannah; and apprize only Miss Howe where I am: that he shall instantly
leave me, and go to London, or to one of Lord M.'s seats; and as he had
promised not to come near me, but by my leave; contenting himself with a
correspondence by letter only.

'That if I find myself in danger of being discovered, and carried back
by violence, I will then throw myself directly into the protection
either of Lady Betty or Lady Sarah: but this only in case of absolute
necessity; for that it will be more to my reputation, for me, by the
best means I can, (taking advantage of my privacy,) to enter by a second
or third hand into a treaty of reconciliation with my friends.

'That I must, however, plainly tell him, 'That if, in this treaty, my
friends insist upon my resolving against marrying him, I will engage
to comply with them; provided they will allow me to promise him, that I
will never be the wife of any other man while he remains single, or is
living: that this is a compliment I am willing to pay him, in return for
the trouble and pains he has taken, and the usage he has met with on
my account: although I intimate, that he may, in a great measure, thank
himself (by reason of the little regard he has paid to his reputation)
for the slights he has met with.'

I tell him, 'That I may, in this privacy, write to my cousin Morden,
and, if possible, interest him in my cause.

'I take some brief notice then of his alternatives.'

You must think, my dear, that this unhappy force upon me, and this
projected flight, make it necessary for me to account to him much sooner
than I should otherwise choose to do, for every part of my conduct.

'It is not to be expected, I tell him, that your mother will embroil
herself, or suffer you or Mr. Hickman to be embroiled, on my account:
and as to his proposal of my going to London, I am such an absolute
stranger to every body there, and have such a bad opinion of the place,
that I cannot by any means think of going thither; except I should be
induced, some time hence, by the ladies of his family to attend them.

'As to the meeting he is desirous of, I think it by no means proper;
especially as it is so likely that I may soon see him. But that if any
thing occurs to induce me to change my mind, as to withdrawing, I will
then take the first opportunity to see him, and give him my reasons for
that change.

This, my dear, I the less scrupled to write, as it might qualify him to
bear such a disappointment, should I give it him; he having, besides,
behaved so very unexceptionably when he surprised me some time ago in
the lonely wood-house.

Finally, 'I commend myself, as a person in distress, and merely as such,
to his honour, and to the protection of the ladies of his family. I
repeat [most cordially, I am sure!] my deep concern for being forced to
take a step so disagreeable, and so derogatory to my honour. And having
told him, that I will endeavour to obtain leave to dine in the Ivy
Summer-house,* and to send Betty of some errand, when there, I leave the
rest to him; but imagine, that about four o'clock will be a proper time
for him to contrive some signal to let me know he is at hand, and for me
to unbolt the garden-door.'


     * The Ivy Summer-house (or Ivy Bower, as it was sometimes
     called in the family) was a place, that from a girl, this
     young lady delighted in. She used, in the summer months,
     frequently to sit and work, and read, and write, and draw,
     and (when permitted) to breakfast, and dine, and sometimes
     to sup, in it; especially when Miss Howe, who had an equal
     liking to it, was her visiter and guest.

She describes it, in another letter (which appears not) as 'pointing to
a pretty variegated landscape of wood, water, and hilly country; which
had pleased her so much, that she had drawn it; the piece hanging up, in
her parlous, among some of her other drawings.'


I added, by way of postscript, 'That their suspicions seeming to
increase, I advise him to contrive to send or some to the usual place,
as frequently as possible, in the interval of time till Monday morning
ten or eleven o'clock; as something may possibly happen to make me alter
my mind.'

O my dear Miss Howe!--what a sad, sad thing is the necessity, forced
upon me, for all this preparation and contrivance!--But it is now too
late!--But how!--Too late, did I say?--What a word is that!--What a
dreadful thing, were I to repent, to find it to be too late to remedy
the apprehended evil!


SATURDAY, TEN O'CLOCK.

Mr. Solmes is here. He is to dine with his new relations, as Betty tells
me he already calls them.

He would have thrown himself in my way once more: but I hurried up to my
prison, in my return from my garden-walk, to avoid him.

I had, when in the garden, the curiosity to see if my letter were gone:
I cannot say with an intention to take it back again if it were not,
because I see not how I could do otherwise than I have done; yet, what a
caprice! when I found it gone, I began (as yesterday morning) to wish it
had not: for no other reason, I believe, than because it was out of my
power.

A strange diligence in this man!--He says, he almost lives upon the
place; and I think so too.

He mentions, as you will see in his letter, four several disguises,
which he puts on in one day. It is a wonder, nevertheless, that he has
not been seen by some of our tenants: for it is impossible that any
disguise can hide the gracefulness of his figure. But this is to be
said, that the adjoining grounds being all in our own hands, and no
common foot-paths near that part of the garden, and through the park and
coppice, nothing can be more bye and unfrequented.

Then they are less watchful, I believe, over my garden-walks, and my
poultry-visits, depending, as my aunt hinted, upon the bad character
they have taken so much pains to fasten upon Mr. Lovelace. This, they
think, (and justly think,) must fill me with doubts. And then the regard
I have hitherto had for my reputation is another of their securities.
Were it not for these two, they would not surely have used me as they
have done; and at the same time left me the opportunities which I have
several times had, to get away, had I been disposed to do so:* and,
indeed, their dependence on both these motives would have been well
founded, had they kept but tolerable measures with me.


     * They might, no doubt, make a dependence upon the reasons
     she gives: but their chief reliance was upon the vigilance
     of their Joseph Leman; little imagining what an implement he
     was of Mr. Lovelace.


Then, perhaps, they have no notion of the back-door; as it is seldom
opened, and leads to a place so pathless and lonesome.* If not, there
can be no other way to escape (if one would) unless by the plashy lane,
so full of springs, by which your servant reaches the solitary wood
house; to which lane one must descend from a high bank, that bounds the
poultry yard. For, as to the front-way, you know, one must pass through
the house to that, and in sight of the parlours, and the servants' hall;
and then have the open courtyard to go through, and, by means of the
iron-gate, be full in view, as one passes over the lawn, for a quarter
of a mile together; the young plantations of elms and limes affording
yet but little shade or covert.


     * This, in another of her letters, (which neither is
     inserted,) is thus described:--'A piece of ruins upon it,
     the remains of an old chapel, now standing in the midst of
     the coppice; here and there an over-grown oak, surrounded
     with ivy and mistletoe, starting up, to sanctify, as it
     were, the awful solemnness of the place: a spot, too, where
     a man having been found hanging some years ago, it was used
     to be thought of by us when children, and by the maid-
     servants, with a degree of terror, (it being actually the
     habitation of owls, ravens, and other ominous birds,) as
     haunted by ghosts, goblins, specters: the genuine result of
     the country loneliness and ignorance: notions which, early
     propagated, are apt to leave impressions even upon minds
     grown strong enough at the same time to despise the like
     credulous follies in others.'


The Ivy Summer-house is the most convenient for this heart-affecting
purpose of any spot in the garden, as it is not far from the back-door,
and yet in another alley, as you may remember. Then it is seldom
resorted to by any body else, except in the summer-months, because it is
cool. When they loved me, they would often, for this reason, object to
my long continuance in it:--but now, it is no matter what becomes of me.
Besides, cold is a bracer, as my brother said yesterday.

Here I will deposit what I have written. Let me have your prayers, my
dear; and your approbation, or your censure, of the steps I have taken:
for yet it may not be quite too late to revoke the appointment. I am

Your most affectionate and faithful CL. HARLOWE.

Why will you send your servant empty-handed?




LETTER XLIII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SAT. AFTERNOON.


By your last date of ten o'clock in your letter of this day, you could
not long have deposited it before Robin took it. He rode hard, and
brought it to be just as I had risen from table.

You may justly blame me for sending my messenger empty-handed, your
situation considered; and yet that very situation (so critical!) is
partly the reason for it: for indeed I knew not what to write, fit to
send you.

I have been inquiring privately, how to procure you a conveyance from
Harlowe-place, and yet not appear in it; knowing, that to oblige in
the fact, and to disoblige in the manner, is but obliging by halves: my
mother being moreover very suspicious, and very uneasy; made more so by
daily visits from your uncle Antony; who tells her, that every thing
is now upon the point of being determined; and hopes, that her daughter
will not so interfere, as to discourage your compliance with their
wills. This I came at by a way that I cannot take notice of, or both
should hear of it in a manner neither would like: and, without that, my
mother and I have had almost hourly bickerings.

I found more difficulty than I expected (as the time was confined, and
secrecy required, and as you so earnestly forbid me to accompany you in
your enterprise) in procuring you a vehicle. Had you not obliged me to
keep measures with my mother, I could have managed it with ease. I could
even have taken our own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put two
horses extraordinary to it, if I had thought fit; and I could, when we
had got to London, have sent it back, and nobody the wiser as to the
lodgings we might have taken.

I wish to the Lord you had permitted this. Indeed I think you are too
punctilious a great deal for you situation. Would you expect to enjoy
yourself with your usual placidness, and not to be ruffled, in an
hurricane which every moment threatens to blow your house down?

Had your distress sprung from yourself, that would have been another
thing. But when all the world knows where to lay the fault, this alters
the case.

How can you say I am happy, when my mother, to her power, is as much an
abettor of their wickedness to my dearest friend, as your aunt, or any
body else?--and this through the instigation of that odd-headed and
foolish uncle of yours, who [sorry creature that he is!] keeps her up
to resolutions which are unworthy of her, for an example to me, if it
please you. Is not this cause enough for me to ground a resentment upon,
sufficient to justify me for accompanying you; the friendship between us
so well known?

Indeed, my dear, the importance of the case considered, I must repeat,
that you are too nice. Don't they already think that your non-compliance
with their odious measures is owing a good deal to my advice? Have they
not prohibited our correspondence upon that very surmise? And have I,
but on your account, reason to value what they think?

Besides, What discredit have I to fear by such a step? What detriment?
Would Hickman, do you believe, refuse me upon it?--If he did, should
I be sorry for that?--Who is it, that has a soul, who would not be
affected by such an instance of female friendship?

But I should vex and disorder my mother!--Well, that is something: but
not more than she vexes and disorders me, on her being made an implement
by such a sorry creature, who ambles hither every day in spite to my
dearest friend--Woe be to both, if it be for a double end!--Chide me, if
you will: I don't care.

I say, and I insist upon it, such a step would ennoble your friend: and
if still you will permit it, I will take the office out of Lovelace's
hands; and, to-morrow evening, or on Monday before his time of
appointment takes place, will come in a chariot, or chaise: and then,
my dear, if we get off as I wish, will we make terms (and what terms we
please) with them all. My mother will be glad to receive her daughter
again, I warrant: and Hickman will cry for joy on my return; or he shall
for sorrow.

But you are so very earnestly angry with me for proposing such a step,
and have always so much to say for your side of any question, that I am
afraid to urge it farther.--Only be so good (let me add) as to encourage
me to resume it, if, upon farther consideration, and upon weighing
matters well, (and in this light, whether best to go off with me,
or with Lovelace,) you can get over your punctilious regard for my
reputation. A woman going away with a woman is not so discreditable a
thing, surely! and with no view, but to avoid the fellows!--I say, only
to be so good, as to consider this point; and if you can get over your
scruples on my account, do. And so I will have done with this argument
for the present; and apply myself to some of the passages in yours.

A time, I hope, will come, that I shall be able to read your affecting
narratives without the impatient bitterness which now boils over in my
heart, and would flow to my pen, were I to enter into the particulars of
what you write. And indeed I am afraid of giving you my advice at all,
or telling you what I should do in your case (supposing you will still
refuse my offer; finding too what you have been brought or rather driven
to without it); lest any evil should follow it: in which case, I
should never forgive myself. And this consideration has added to my
difficulties in writing to you now you are upon such a crisis, and yet
refuse the only method--but I said, I would not for the present touch
any more that string. Yet, one word more, chide me if you please: If any
harm betide you, I shall for ever blame my mother--indeed I shall--and
perhaps yourself, if you do not accept my offer.

But one thing, in your present situation and prospects, let me advise:
It is this, that if you do go off with Mr. Lovelace, you take the first
opportunity to marry. Why should you not, when every body will know by
whose assistance, and in whose company, you leave your father's house,
go whithersoever you will?--You may indeed keep him at a distance, until
settlements are drawn, and such like matters are adjusted to your mind:
but even these are matters of less consideration in your particular
case, than they would be in that of most others: and first, because, be
his other faults what they will, nobody thinks him an ungenerous man:
next, because the possession of your estate must be given up to you
as soon as your cousin Morden comes; who, as your trustee, will see
it done; and done upon proper terms: 3dly, because there is no want of
fortune on his side: 4thly, because all his family value you, and are
extremely desirous that you should be their relation: 5thly, because he
makes no scruple of accepting you without conditions. You see how he has
always defied your relations: [I, for my own part, can forgive him for
the fault: nor know I, if it be not a noble one:] and I dare say, he
had rather call you his, without a shilling, than be under obligation
to those whom he has full as little reason to love, as they have to love
him. You have heard, that his own relations cannot make his proud spirit
submit to owe any favour to them.

For all these reasons, I think, you may the less stand upon previous
settlements. It is therefore my absolute opinion, that, if you do
withdraw with him, (and in that case you must let him be judge when he
can leave you with safety, you'll observe that,) you should not postpone
the ceremony.

Give this matter your most serious consideration. Punctilio is out of
doors the moment you are out of your father's house. I know how justly
severe you have been upon those inexcusable creatures, whose giddiness
and even want of decency have made them, in the same hour as I may
say, leap from a parent's window to a husband's bed--but considering
Lovelace's character, I repeat my opinion, that your reputation in the
eye of the world requires no delay be made in this point, when once you
are in his power.

I need not, I am sure, make a stronger plea to you.

You say, in excuse for my mother, (what my fervent love for my friend
very ill brooks,) that we ought not to blame any one for not doing what
she has an opinion to do, or to let alone. This, in cases of friendship,
would admit of very strict discussion. If the thing requested be of
greater consequence, or even of equal, to the person sought to, and it
were, as the old phrase has it, to take a thorn out of one's friend's
foot to put in into one's own, something might be said.--Nay, it would
be, I will venture to say, a selfish thing in us to ask a favour of
a friend which would subject that friend to the same or equal
inconvenience as that from which we wanted to be relieved, The requested
would, in this case, teach his friend, by his own selfish example, with
much better reason, to deny him, and despise a friendship so merely
nominal. But if, by a less inconvenience to ourselves, we could relieve
our friend from a greater, the refusal of such a favour makes the
refuser unworthy of the name of friend: nor would I admit such a one,
not even into the outermost fold of my heart.

I am well aware that this is your opinion of friendship, as well as
mine: for I owe the distinction to you, upon a certain occasion; and it
saved me from a very great inconvenience, as you must needs remember.
But you were always for making excuses for other people, in cases
wherein you would not have allowed of one for yourself.

I must own, that were these excuses for a friend's indifference, or
denial, made by any body but you, in a case of such vast importance to
herself, and of so comparative a small one to those for whose protection
she would be thought to wish; I, who am for ever, as you have often
remarked, endeavouring to trace effects to their causes, should be
ready to suspect that there was a latent, unowned inclination, which
balancing, or preponderating rather, made the issue of the alternative
(however important) sit more lightly upon the excuser's mind than she
cared to own.

You will understand me, my dear. But if you do not, it may be well for
me; for I am afraid I shall have it from you for but starting such a
notion, or giving a hint, which perhaps, as you did once in another
case, you will reprimandingly call, 'Not being able to forego the
ostentation of sagacity, though at the expense of that tenderness which
is due to friendship and charity.'

What signifies owning a fault without mending it, you'll say?--Very
true, my dear. But you know I ever was a saucy creature--ever stood in
need of great allowances.--And I remember, likewise, that I ever had
them from my dear Clarissa. Nor do I doubt them now: for you know how
much I love you--if it be possible, more than myself I love you! Believe
me, my dear: and, in consequence of that belief, you will be able to
judge how much I am affected by your present distressful and critical
situation; which will not suffer me to pass by without a censure even
that philosophy of temper in your own cause, which you have not in
another's, and which all that know you ever admired you for.

From this critical and distressful situation, it shall be my hourly
prayers that you may be delivered without blemish to that fair fame
which has hitherto, like your heart, been unspotted.

With this prayer, twenty times repeated, concludes Your ever
affectionate, ANNA HOWE.

I hurried myself in writing this; and I hurry Robin away with it, that,
in a situation so very critical, you may have all the time possible to
consider what I have written, upon two points so very important. I will
repeat them in a very few words:

'Whether you choose not rather to go off with one of your own sex; with
your ANNA HOWE--than with one of the other; with Mr. LOVELACE?'

And if not,

'Whether you should not marry him as soon as possible?'




LETTER XLIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [THE PRECEDING LETTER NOT RECEIVED.]
SATURDAY AFTERNOON.


Already have I an ecstatic answer, as I may call it, to my letter.

'He promises compliance with my will in every article: approves of all
I propose; particularly of the private lodging: and thinks it a happy
expedient to obviate the censures of the busy and the unreflecting: and
yet he hopes, that the putting myself into the protection of either of
his aunts, (treated as I am treated,) would be far from being looked
upon by any body in a disreputable light. But every thing I enjoin
or resolve upon must, he says, be right, not only with respect to my
present but future reputation; with regard to which, he hopes so to
behave himself, as to be allowed to be, next to myself, more properly
solicitous than any body. He will only assure me, that his whole family
are extremely desirous to take advantage of the persecutions I labour
under to make their court, and endear themselves to me, by their best
and most cheerful services: happy if they can in any measure contribute
to my present freedom and future happiness.

'He will this afternoon, he says, write to Lord M. and to Lady Betty and
Lady Sarah, that he is now within view of being the happiest man in the
world, if it be not his own fault; since the only woman upon earth that
can make him so will be soon out of danger of being another man's; and
cannot possibly prescribe any terms to him that he shall not think it
his duty to comply with.

'He flatters himself now (my last letter confirming my resolution) that
he can be in no apprehension of my changing my mind, unless my friends
change their manner of acting by me; which he is too sure they will
not.* And now will all his relations, who take such a kind and generous
share in his interests, glory and pride themselves in the prospects he
has before him.'


     * Well might he be so sure, when he had the art to play them
     off, by his corrupted agent, and to make them all join to
     promote his views unknown to themselves; as is shewn in some
     of his preceding letters.


Thus does he hold me to it.

'As to fortune, he begs me not to be solicitous on that score: that his
own estate is sufficient for us both; not a nominal, but a real, two
thousand pounds per annum, equivalent to some estates reputed a third
more: that it never was encumbered; that he is clear of the world, both
as to book and bond debts; thanks, perhaps, to his pride, more than to
his virtue: that Lord M. moreover resolves to settle upon him a thousand
pounds per annum on his nuptials. And to this, he will have it, his
lordship is instigated more by motives of justice than of generosity; as
he must consider it was but an equivalent for an estate which he had
got possession of, to which his (Mr. Lovelace's) mother had better
pretensions. That his lordship also proposed to give him up either
his seat in Hertfordshire, or that in Lancashire, at his own or at his
wife's option, especially if I am the person. All which it will be in my
power to see done, and proper settlements drawn, before I enter into any
farther engagements with him; if I will have it so.'

He says, 'That I need not be under any solicitude as to apparel: all
immediate occasions of that sort will be most cheerfully supplied by the
ladies of his family: as my others shall, with the greatest pride and
pleasure (if I allow him that honour) by himself.

'He assures me, that I shall govern him as I please, with regard to any
thing in his power towards effecting a reconciliation with my friends:'
a point he knows my heart is set upon.

'He is afraid, that the time will hardly allow of his procuring Miss
Charlotte Montague's attendance upon me, at St. Alban's, as he had
proposed she should; because, he understands, she keeps her chamber with
a violent cold and sore throat. But both she and her sister, the first
moment she is able to go abroad, shall visit me at my private lodgings;
and introduce me to Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, or those ladies to me, as
I shall choose; and accompany me to town, if I please; and stay as long
in it with me as I shall think fit to stay there.

'Lord M. will also, at my own time, and in my own manner, (that is to
say, either publicly or privately,) make me a visit. And, for his own
part, when he has seen me in safety, either in their protection, or in
the privacy I prefer, he will leave me, and not attempt to visit me but
by my own permission.

'He had thought once, he says, on hearing of his cousin Charlotte's
indisposition, to have engaged his cousin Patty's attendance upon me,
either in or about the neighbouring village, or at St. Alban's: but, he
says, she is a low-spirited, timorous girl, and would but the more have
perplexed us.'

So, my dear, the enterprise requires courage and high spirits, you
see!--And indeed it does!--What am I about to do!

He himself, it is plain, thinks it necessary that I should be
accompanied with one of my own sex.--He might, at least, have proposed
the woman of one of the ladies of his family.--Lord bless me!--What am I
about to do!--


*****


After all, as far as I have gone, I know not but I may still recede:
and, if I do, a mortal quarrel I suppose will ensue.--And what if it
does?--Could there be any way to escape this Solmes, a breach with
Lovelace might make way for the single life to take place, which I
so much prefer: and then I would defy the sex. For I see nothing but
trouble and vexation that they bring upon ours: and when once entered,
one is obliged to go on with them, treading, with tender feet, upon
thorns, and sharper thorns, to the end of a painful journey.

What to do I know not. The more I think, the more I am embarrassed!--And
the stronger will be my doubts as the appointed time draws near.

But I will go down, and take a little turn in the garden; and deposit
this, and his letters all but the two last, which I will enclose in my
next, if I have opportunity to write another.

Mean time, my dear friend----But what can I desire you to pray
for?--Adieu, then!--Let me only say--Adieu--!




LETTER XLV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE. [IN ANSWER TO LETTER XLIII.] SUNDAY
MORNING, APRIL 9.


Do not think, my beloved friend, although you have given me in yours
of yesterday a severer instance of what, nevertheless, I must call your
impartial love, than ever yet I received from you, that I would be
displeased with you for it. That would be to put myself into the
inconvenient situation of royalty: that is to say, out of the way of
ever being told of my faults; of ever mending them: and in the way of
making the sincerest and warmest friendship useless to me.

And then how brightly, how nobly glows in your bosom the sacred flame
of friendship; since it can make you ready to impute to the unhappy
sufferer a less degree of warmth in her own cause, than you have for
her, because of the endeavours to divest herself of self so far as to
leave others to the option which they have a right to make!--Ought I, my
dear, to blame, ought I not rather to admire you for this ardor?

But nevertheless, lest you should think that there is any foundation for
a surmise which (although it owe its rise to your friendship) would, if
there were, leave me utterly inexcusable, I must, in justice to myself,
declare, that I know not my own heart if I have any of that latent or
unowned inclination, which you would impute to any other but me. Nor
does the important alternative sit lightly on my mind. And yet I must
excuse your mother, were it but on this single consideration, that
I could not presume to reckon upon her favour, as I could upon her
daughter's, so as to make the claim of friendship upon her, to whom, as
the mother of my dearest friend, a veneration is owing, which can
hardly be compatible with that sweet familiarity which is one of the
indispensable requisites of the sacred tie by which your heart and mine
are bound in one.

What therefore I might expect from my Anna Howe, I ought not from
her mother; for would it not be very strange, that a person of her
experience should be reflected upon because she gave not up her own
judgment, where the consequence of her doing so would be to embroil
herself, as she apprehends, with a family she has lived well with,
and in behalf of a child against her parents?--as she has moreover a
daughter of her own:--a daughter too, give me leave to say, of whose
vivacity and charming spirits she is more apprehensive than she need to
be, because her truly maternal cares make her fear more from her youth,
than she hopes for her prudence; which, nevertheless, she and all the
world know to be beyond her years.

And here let me add, that whatever you may generously, and as the result
of an ardent affection for your unhappy friend, urge on this head, in my
behalf, or harshly against any one who may refuse me protection in the
extraordinary circumstances I find myself in, I have some pleasure
in being able to curb undue expectations upon my indulgent friends,
whatever were to befal myself from those circumstances, for I should be
extremely mortified, were I by my selfish forwardness to give occasion
for such a check, as to be told, that I had encouraged an unreasonable
hope, or, according to the phrase you mention, wished to take a thorn
out of my own foot, and to put in to that of my friend. Nor should I
be better pleased with myself, if, having been taught by my good Mrs.
Norton, that the best of schools is that of affliction, I should rather
learn impatience than the contrary, by the lessons I am obliged to get
by heart in it; and if I should judge of the merits of others, as they
were kind to me; and that at the expense of their own convenience or
peace of mind. For is not this to suppose myself ever in the right; and
all who do not act as I would have them act, perpetually in the wrong?
In short, to make my sake God's sake, in the sense of Mr. Solmes's
pitiful plea to me?

How often, my dear, have you and I endeavoured to detect and censure
this partial spirit in others?

But I know you do not always content yourself with saying what you think
may justly be said; but, in order the shew the extent of a penetration
which can go to the bottom of any subject, delight to say or to write
all that can be said or written, or even thought, on the particular
occasion; and this partly perhaps from being desirous [pardon me, my
dear!] to be thought mistress of a sagacity that is aforehand with
events. But who would wish to drain off or dry up a refreshing current,
because it now-and-then puts us to some little inconvenience by its
over-flowings? In other words, who would not allow for the liveliness of
a spirit which for one painful sensibility gives an hundred pleasurable
ones; and the one in consequence of the other?

But now I come to the two points in your letter, which most sensibly
concern me: Thus you put them:

'Whether I choose not rather to go off [shocking words!] with one of
my own sex; with my ANNA HOWE--than with one of the other; with Mr.
LOVELACE?'

And if not,

'Whether I should not marry him as soon as possible?'

You know, my dear, my reasons for rejecting your proposal, and even
for being earnest that you should not be known to be assisting me in an
enterprise in which a cruel necessity induced me to think of engaging;
and for which you have not the same plea. At this rate, well might
your mother be uneasy at our correspondence, not knowing to what
inconveniencies it might subject her and you!--If I am hardly excusable
to think of withdrawing from my unkind friends, what could you have to
say for yourself, were you to abandon a mother so indulgent? Does
she suspect that your fervent friendship may lead you to a small
indiscretion? and does this suspicion offend you? And would you, in
resentment, shew her and the world, that you can voluntarily rush into
the highest error that any of our sex can be guilty of?

And is it worthy of your generosity [I ask you, my dear, is it?] to
think of taking so undutiful a step, because you believe your mother
would be glad to receive you again?

I do assure you, that were I to take this step myself, I would run all
risks rather than you should accompany me in it. Have I, do you think, a
desire to double and treble my own fault in the eye of the world? in the
eye of that world which, cruelly as I am used, (not knowing all,) would
not acquit me?

But, my dearest, kindest friend, let me tell you, that we will neither
of us take such a step. The manner of putting your questions abundantly
convinces me, that I ought not, in your opinion, to attempt it. You no
doubt intend that I shall so take it; and I thank you for the equally
polite and forcible conviction.

It is some satisfaction to me (taking the matter in this light) that I
had begun to waver before I received your last. And now I tell you, that
it has absolutely determined me not to go off; at least not to-morrow.

If you, my dear, think the issue of the alternative (to use your own
words) sits so lightly upon my mind, in short, that my inclination is
faulty; the world would treat me much less scrupulously. When therefore
you represent, that all punctilio must be at an end the moment I am out
of my father's house; and hint, that I must submit it to Mr. Lovelace
to judge when he can leave me with safety; that is to say, give him the
option whether he will leave me, or not; who can bear these reflections,
who can resolve to incur these inconveniencies, that has the question
still in her own power to decide upon?

While I thought only of an escape from this house as an escape from Mr.
Solmes; that already my reputation suffered by my confinement; and that
it would be in my own option either to marry Mr. Lovelace, or wholly to
renounce him; bold as the step was, I thought, treated as I am treated,
something was to be said in excuse of it--if not to the world, to
myself: and to be self-acquitted, is a blessing to be preferred to the
option of all the world. But, after I have censured most severely, as I
have ever done, those giddy girls, who have in the same hour, as I may
say, that they have fled from their chamber, presented themselves at
the altar that is witness to their undutiful rashness; after I have
stipulated with Mr. Lovelace for time, and for an ultimate option
whether to accept or refuse him; and for his leaving me, as soon as I am
in a place of safety (which, as you observe, he must be the judge of);
and after he has signified to me his compliance with these terms; so
that I cannot, if I would, recall them, and suddenly marry;--you see,
my dear, that I have nothing left me but to resolve not to go away with
him!

But, how, on this revocation of my appointment, shall I be able to
pacify him?

How!--Why assert the privilege of my sex!--Surely, on this side of the
solemnity he has no right to be displeased. Besides, did I not reserve a
power of receding, as I saw fit? To what purpose, as I asked in the case
between your mother and you, has any body an option, if the making use
of it shall give the refused a right to be disgusted?

Far, very far, would those, who, according to the old law, have a right
of absolving or confirming a child's promise, be from ratifying mine,
had it been ever so solemn a one.* But this was rather an appointment
than a promise: and suppose it had been the latter; and that I had not
reserved to myself a liberty of revoking it; was it to preclude better
or maturer consideration?--If so, how unfit to be given!--how ungenerous
to be insisted upon!--And how unfitter still to be kept!--Is there a man
living who ought to be angry that a woman whom he hopes one day to
call his, shall refuse to keep a rash promise, when, on the maturest
deliberation, she is convinced that it was a rash one?


     * See Numb. XXX. Where it is declared, whose vows shall be
     binding, and whose not. The vows of a man, or of a widow,
     are there pronounced to be indispensable; because they are
     sole, and subject to no other domestic authority. But the
     vows of a single woman, or of a wife, if the father of the
     one, or the husband of the other, disallow of them as soon
     as they know them, are to be of no force.

     A matter highly necessary to be known; by all young ladies
     especially, whose designing addressers too often endeavour
     to engage them by vows; and then plead conscience and honour
     to them to hold them down to the performance.

     It cannot be amiss to recite the very words.

     Ver. 3 If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself
     by a bond, being in her father's house in her youth;

     4. And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she
     hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at
     her; then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith
     she hath bound her soul shall stand.

     5. But if her father disallow her in the day that he
     heareth; not any of her vows or of her bonds wherewith she
     hath bound her soul shall stand: and the Lord shall forgive
     her, because her father disallowed her.

     The same in the case of a wife, as said above. See ver. 6,
     7, 8, &c.--All is thus solemnly closed:

     Ver. 16. These are the statutes which the Lord commanded
     Moses between a man and his wife, between the father and his
     daughter, being yet in her youth in her father's house.


I resolve then, upon the whole, to stand this one trial of Wednesday
next--or, perhaps, I should rather say, of Tuesday evening, if my father
hold his purpose of endeavouring, in person, to make me read, or hear
read, and then sign, the settlements.--That, that must be the greatest
trial of all.

If I am compelled to sign them over-night--then (the Lord bless me!)
must all I dread follow, as of course, on Wednesday. If I can prevail
upon them by my prayers [perhaps I shall fall into fits; for the very
first appearance of my father, after having been so long banished his
presence, will greatly affect me--if, I say, I can prevail upon them by
my prayers] to lay aside their views; or to suspend the day, if but for
one week; but if not, but for two or three days; still Wednesday will
be a lighter day of trial. They will surely give me time to consider: to
argue with myself. This will not be promising. As I have made no
effort to get away, they have no reason to suspect me; so I may have an
opportunity, in the last resort, to withdraw. Mrs. Norton is to be with
me: she, although she should be chidden for it, will, in my extremity,
plead for me. My aunt Hervey may, in such an extremity, join with her.
Perhaps my mother may be brought over. I will kneel to each, one by one,
to make a friend. Some of them have been afraid to see me, lest they
should be moved in my favour: does not this give a reasonable hope that
I may move them? My brother's counsel, heretofore given, to turn me out
of doors to my evil destiny, may again be repeated, and may prevail;
then shall I be in no worse case than now, as to the displeasure of my
friends; and thus far better, that it will not be my fault that I seek
another protection: which even then ought to be my cousin Morden's,
rather than Mr. Lovelace's, or any other person's.

My heart, in short, misgives me less, when I resolve this way, than when
I think of the other: and in so strong and involuntary a bias, the heart
is, as I may say, conscience. And well cautions the wise man: 'Let the
counsel of thine own heart stand; for there is no man more faithful to
thee than it: for a man's mind is sometimes wont to tell him more than
seven watchmen, that sit above in a high tower.'*


     * Ecclus. xxxvii. 13, 14.


Forgive these indigested self-reasonings. I will close here: and
instantly set about a letter of revocation to Mr. Lovelace; take it
as he will. It will only be another trial of temper to him. To me of
infinite importance. And has he not promised temper and acquiescence, on
the supposition of a change in my mind?




LETTER XLVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.


Nobody it seems will go to church this day. No blessing to be expected
perhaps upon views so worldly, and in some so cruel.

They have a mistrust that I have some device in my head. Betty has been
looking among my clothes. I found her, on coming up from depositing my
letter to Lovelace (for I have written!) peering among them; for I had
left the key in the lock. She coloured, and was confounded to be caught.
But I only said, I should be accustomed to any sort of treatment in
time. If she had her orders--those were enough for her.

She owned, in her confusion, that a motion had been made to abridge
me of my airings; and the report she should make, would be of no
disadvantage to me. One of my friends, she told me, urged in my behalf,
That there was no need of laying me under greater restraint, since Mr.
Lovelace's threatening to rescue me by violence, were I to have been
carried to my uncle's, was a conviction that I had no design to go to
him voluntarily; and that if I had, I should have made preparations
of that kind before now; and, most probably, had been detected in
them.--Hence, it was also inferred, that there was no room to doubt,
but I would at last comply. And, added the bold creature, if you don't
intend to do so, your conduct, Miss, seems strange to me.--Only thus
she reconciled it, that I had gone so far, I knew not how to come off
genteelly: and she fancied I should, in full congregation, on Wednesday,
give Mr. Solmes my hand. And then said the confident wench, as the
learned Dr. Brand took his text last Sunday, There will be joy in
heaven--

This is the substance of my letter to Mr. Lovelace:

'That I have reasons of the greatest consequence to myself (and which,
when known, must satisfy him) to suspend, for the present, my intention
of leaving my father's house: that I have hopes that matters may be
brought to an happy conclusion, without taking a step, which nothing
but the last necessity could justify: and that he may depend upon my
promise, that I will die rather than consent to marry Mr. Solmes.'

And so, I am preparing myself to stand the shock of his exclamatory
reply. But be that what it will, it cannot affect me so much, as the
apprehensions of what may happen to me next Tuesday or Wednesday; for
now those apprehensions engage my whole attention, and make me sick at
the very heart.


SUNDAY, FOUR IN THE AFTERNOON.

My letter is not yet taken away--If he should not send for it, or take
it, or come hither on my not meeting him to-morrow, in doubt of what
may have befallen me, what shall I do! Why had I any concerns with this
sex!--I, that was so happy till I knew this man!

I dined in the ivy summer-house. My request to do so, was complied with
at the first word. To shew I meant nothing, I went again into the house
with Betty, as soon as I had dined. I thought it was not amiss to ask
this liberty; the weather seemed to be set in fine. Who knows what
Tuesday or Wednesday may produce?


SUNDAY EVENING, SEVEN O'CLOCK.

There remains my letter still!--He is busied, I suppose, in his
preparations for to-morrow. But then he has servants. Does the man think
he is so secure of me, that having appointed, he need not give himself
any further concern about me till the very moment? He knows how I am
beset. He knows not what may happen. I may be ill, or still more closely
watched or confined than before. The correspondence might be discovered.
It might be necessary to vary the scheme. I might be forced into
measures, which might entirely frustrate my purpose. I might have new
doubts. I might suggest something more convenient, for any thing he
knew. What can the man mean, I wonder!--Yet it shall lie; for if he has
it any time before the appointed hour, it will save me declaring to him
personally my changed purpose, and the trouble of contending with him on
that score. If he send for it at all, he will see by the date, that he
might have had it in time; and if he be put to any inconvenience from
shortness of notice, let him take it for his pains.


SUNDAY NIGHT, NINE O'CLOCK.

It is determined, it seems, to send for Mrs. Norton to be here on
Tuesday to dinner; and she is to stay with me for a whole week.

So she is first to endeavour to persuade me to comply; and, when the
violence is done, she is to comfort me, and try to reconcile me to
my fate. They expect fits and fetches, Betty insolently tells me, and
expostulations, and exclamations, without number: but every body will
be prepared for them: and when it's over, it's over; and I shall be easy
and pacified when I find I can't help it.


MONDAY MORN. APRIL 10, SEVEN O'CLOCK.

O my dear! there yet lies the letter, just as I left it!

Does he think he is so sure of me?--Perhaps he imagines that I dare not
alter my purpose. I wish I had never known him! I begin now to see this
rashness in the light every one else would have seen it in, had I been
guilty of it. But what can I do, if he come to-day at the appointed
time! If he receive not the letter, I must see him, or he will think
something has befallen me; and certainly will come to the house. As
certainly he will be insulted. And what, in that case, may be the
consequence! Then I as good as promised that I would take the first
opportunity to see him, if I change my mind, and to give him my reasons
for it. I have no doubt but he will be out of humour upon it: but
better, if we meet, that he should go away dissatisfied with me, than
that I should go away dissatisfied with myself.

Yet, short as the time is, he may still perhaps send, and get the
letter. Something may have happened to prevent him, which when known
will excuse him.

After I have disappointed him more than once before, on a requested
interview only, it is impossible he should not have a curiosity at
least, to know if something has not happened; and whether my mind hold
or not in this more important case. And yet, as I rashly confirmed my
resolution by a second letter, I begin now to doubt it.


NINE O'CLOCK.

My cousin Dolly Hervey slid the enclosed letter into my hand, as I
passed by her, coming out of the garden.


DEAREST MADAM,

I have got intelligence from one who pretends to know every thing,
that you must be married on Wednesday morning to Mr. Solmes. Perhaps,
however, she says this only to vex me; for it is that saucy creature
Betty Barnes. A license is got, as she says: and so far she went as to
tell me (bidding me say nothing, but she knew I would) that Mr. Brand is
to marry you. For Dr. Lewen I hear, refuses, unless your consent can
be obtained; and they have heard that he does not approve of their
proceedings against you. Mr. Brand, I am told, is to have his fortune
made by uncle Harlowe and among them.

You will know better than I what to make of all these matters; for
sometimes I think Betty tells me things as if I should not tell you,
and yet expects that I will.* For there is great whispering between Miss
Harlowe and her; and I have observed that when their whispering is over,
Betty comes and tells me something by way of secret. She and all the
world know how much I love you: and so I would have them. It is an
honour to me to love a young lady who is and ever was an honour to all
her family, let them say what they will.


     * It is easy for such of the readers as have been attentive
     to Mr. Lovelace's manner of working, to suppose, from this
     hint of Miss Hervey's, that he had instructed his double-
     faced agent to put his sweet-heart Betty upon alarming Miss
     Hervey, in hopes she would alarm her beloved cousin, (as we
     see she does,) in order to keep her steady to her
     appointment with him.


But from a more certain authority than Betty's I can assure you (but I
must beg of you to burn this letter) that you are to be searched
once more for letters, and for pen and ink; for they know you write.
Something they pretend to have come at from one of Mr. Lovelace's
servants, which they hope to make something of. I know not for certain
what it is. He must be a very vile and wicked man who would boast of a
lady's favour to him, and reveal secrets. But Mr. Lovelace, I dare say,
is too much of a gentleman to be guilty of such ingratitude.

Then they have a notion, from that false Betty I believe, that you
intend to take something to make yourself sick; and so they will search
for phials and powders and such like.

If nothing shall be found that will increase their suspicions, you are
to be used more kindly by your papa when you appear before them all,
than he of late has used you.

Yet, sick or well, alas! my dear cousin! you must be married. But your
husband is to go home every night without you, till you are reconciled
to him. And so illness can be no pretence to save you.

They are sure you will make a good wife. So would not I, unless I liked
my husband. And Mr. Solmes is always telling them how he will purchase
your love by rich presents.--A syncophant man!--I wish he and Betty
Barnes were to come together; and he would beat her every day.

After what I told you, I need not advise you to secure every thing you
would not have seen.

Once more let me beg that you will burn this letter; and, pray, dearest
Madam, do not take any thing that may prejudice your health: for that
will not do. I am

Your truly loving cousin, D.H.


*****


When I first read my cousin's letter, I was half inclined to resume my
former intention; especially as my countermanding letter was not taken
away; and as my heart ached at the thoughts of the conflict I must
expect to have with him on my refusal. For see him for a few moments I
doubt I must, lest he should take some rash resolutions; especially as
he has reason to expect I will see him. But here your words, that all
punctilio is at an end the moment I am out of my father's house,
added to the still more cogent considerations of duty and reputation,
determined me once more against the rash step. And it will be very hard
(although no seasonable fainting, or wished-for fit, should stand my
friend) if I cannot gain one month, or fortnight, or week. And I have
still more hopes that I shall prevail for some delay, from my cousin's
intimation that the good Dr. Lewen refuses to give his assistance to
their projects, if they have not my consent, and thinks me cruelly used:
since, without taking notice that I am apprized of this, I can plead
a scruple of conscience, and insist upon having that worthy divine's
opinion upon it: in which, enforced as I shall enforce it, my mother
will surely second me: my aunt Hervey, and Mrs. Norton, will support
her: the suspension must follow: and I can but get away afterwards.

But, if they will compel me: if they will give me no time: if nobody
will be moved: if it be resolved that the ceremony should be read over
my constrained hand--why then--Alas! What then!--I can but--But what? O
my dear! this Solmes shall never have my vows I am resolved! and I will
say nothing but no, as long as I shall be able to speak. And who will
presume to look upon such an act of violence as a marriage?--It is
impossible, surely, that a father and mother can see such a dreadful
compulsion offered to their child--but if mine should withdraw, and
leave the task to my brother and sister, they will have no mercy.

I am grieved to be driven to have recourse to the following artifices.

I have given them a clue, by the feather of a pen sticking out, where
they will find such of my hidden stories, as I intend they shall find.

Two or three little essays I have left easy to be seen, of my own
writing.

About a dozen lines also of a letter begun to you, in which I express
my hopes, (although I say that appearances are against me,) and that
my friends will relent. They know from your mother, by my uncle Antony,
that, some how or other, I now and then get a letter to you. In this
piece of a letter I declare renewedly my firm resolution to give up the
man so obnoxious to my family, on their releasing me from the address of
the other.

Near the essays, I have left the copy of my letter to Lady Drayton;*
which affording arguments suitable to my case, may chance (thus
accidentally to be fallen upon) to incline them to favour me.


     * See Letters XIII. and XIV.


I have reserves of pens and ink, you may believe; and one or two in the
ivy summer-house; with which I shall amuse myself, in order to lighten,
if possible, those apprehensions which more and more affect me, as
Wednesday, the day of trial, approaches.




LETTER XLVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE IVY SUMMER-HOUSE, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

He has not yet got my letter: and while I was contriving here how to
send my officious gaoleress from me, that I might have time for the
intended interview, and had hit upon an expedient, which I believe would
have done, came my aunt, and furnished me with a much better. She saw my
little table covered, preparative to my solitary dinner; and hoped,
she told me, that this would be the last day that my friends would be
deprived of my company at table.

You may believe, my dear, that the thoughts of meeting Mr. Lovelace,
for fear of being discovered, together with the contents of my cousin
Dolly's letter, gave me great and visible emotions. She took notice of
them--Why these sighs, why these heavings here? said she, patting my
neck--O my dear Niece, who would have thought so much natural sweetness
could be so very unpersuadable?

I could not answer her, and she proceeded--I am come, I doubt, upon a
very unwelcome errand. Some things have been told us yesterday, which
came from the mouth of one of the most desperate and insolent men in the
world, convince your father, and all of us, that you still find means
to write out of the house. Mr. Lovelace knows every thing that is done
here; and that as soon as done; and great mischief is apprehended from
him, which you are as much concerned as any body to prevent. Your mother
has also some apprehensions concerning yourself, which yet she hopes are
groundless; but, however, cannot be easy, if she would, unless (while
you remain here in the garden, or in this summer-house) you give her
the opportunity once more of looking into your closet, your cabinet and
drawers. It will be the better taken, if you give me cheerfully your
keys. I hope, my dear, you won't dispute it. Your desire of dining in
this place was the more readily complied with for the sake of such an
opportunity.

I thought myself very lucky to be so well prepared by my cousin Dolly's
means for this search: but yet I artfully made some scruples, and not a
few complaints of this treatment: after which, I not only gave her the
keys of all, but even officiously emptied my pockets before her, and
invited her to put her fingers in my stays, that she might be sure I had
no papers there.

This highly obliged her; and she said, she would represent my cheerful
compliance as it deserved, let my brother and sister say what they
would. My mother in particular, she was sure, would rejoice at the
opportunity given her to obviate, as she doubted not would be the case,
some suspicions that were raised against me.

She then hinted, That there were methods taken to come at all Mr.
Lovelace's secrets, and even, from his careless communicativeness, at
some secret of mine; it being, she said, his custom, boastingly to prate
to his very servants of his intentions, in particular cases. She added,
that deep as he was thought to be, my brother was as deep as he, and
fairly too hard for him at his own weapons--as one day it would be
found.

I knew not, I said, the meaning of these dark hints. I thought the
cunning she hinted at, on both sides, called rather for contempt than
applause. I myself might have been put upon artifices which my heart
disdained to practise, had I given way to the resentment, which, I was
bold to say, was much more justifiable than the actions that occasioned
it: that it was evident to me, from what she had said, that their
present suspicions of me were partly owing to this supposed superior
cunning of my brother, and partly to the consciousness that the usage I
met with might naturally produce a reason for such suspicions: that it
was very unhappy for me to be made the butt of my brother's wit: that it
would have been more to his praise to have aimed at shewing a kind heart
than a cunning head: that, nevertheless, I wished he knew himself as
well as I imagined I knew him; and he would then have less conceit of
his abilities: which abilities would, in my opinion, be less thought of,
if his power to do ill offices were not much greater than they.

I was vexed. I could not help making this reflection. The dupe the
other, too probably, makes of him, through his own spy, deserved it. But
I so little approve of this low art in either, that were I but tolerably
used, the vileness of that man, that Joseph Leman, should be inquired
into.

She was sorry, she said, to find that I thought so disparagingly of my
brother. He was a young man both of learning and parts.

Learning enough, I said, to make him vain of it among us women: but not
of parts sufficient to make his learning valuable either to himself or
to any body else.

She wished, indeed, that he had more good nature: but she feared that
I had too great an opinion of somebody else, to think so well of my
brother as a sister ought: since, between the two, there was a sort of
rivalry, as to abilities, that made them hate one another.

Rivalry! Madam, said I.--If that be the case, or whether it be or not,
I wish they both understood, better than either of them seem to do,
what it becomes gentlemen, and men of liberal education, to be, and to
do.--Neither of them, then, would glory in what they ought to be ashamed
of.

But waving this subject, it was not impossible, I said, that they might
find a little of my writing, and a pen or two, and a little ink, [hated
art!--or rather, hateful the necessity for it!] as I was not permitted
to go up to put them out of the way: but if they did, I must be
contented. And I assured her, that, take what time they pleased, I would
not go in to disturb them, but would be either in or near the garden,
in this summer-house, or in the cedar one, or about my poultry-yard, or
near the great cascade, till I was ordered to return to my prison. With
like cunning I said, I supposed the unkind search would not be made
till the servants had dined; because I doubted not that the pert Betty
Barnes, who knew all the corners of my apartment and closet, would be
employed in it.

She hoped, she said, that nothing could be found that would give a
handle against me: for, she would assure me, the motives to the search,
on my mother's part especially, were, that she hoped to find reason
rather to acquit than to blame me; and that my father might be induced
to see my to-morrow night, or Wednesday morning, with temper: with
tenderness, I should rather say, said she; for he is resolved to do so,
if no new offence be given.

Ah! Madam, said I--

Why that Ah! Madam, and shaking your head so significantly?

I wish, Madam, that I may not have more reason to dread my father's
continued displeasure, than to hope for his returning tenderness.

You don't know, my dear!--Things may take a turn--things may not be so
bad as you fear--

Dearest Madam, have you any consolation to give me?--

Why, my dear, it is possible, that you may be more compliable than you
have been.

Why raised you my hopes, Madam?--Don't let me think my dear aunt Hervey
cruel to a niece who truly honours her.

I may tell you more perhaps, said she (but in confidence, absolute
confidence) if the inquiry within came out in your favour. Do you know
of any thin above that can be found to your disadvantage?--

Some papers they will find, I doubt: but I must take consequences.
My brother and sister will be at hand with their good-natured
constructions. I am made desperate, and care not what is found.

I hope, I earnestly hope, that nothing can be found that will impeach
your discretion; and then--but I may say too much--

And away she went, having added to my perplexity.

But I now can think of nothing but this interview.--Would to Heaven it
were over!--To meet to quarrel--but, let him take what measures he will,
I will not stay a moment with him, if he be not quite calm and resigned.

Don't you see how crooked some of my lines are? Don't you see how some
of the letters stagger more than others?--That is when this interview is
more in my head than in my subject.

But, after all, should I, ought I to meet him? How have I taken it for
granted that I should!--I wish there were time to take your advice. Yet
you are so loth to speak quite out--but that I owe, as you own, to the
difficulty of my situation.

I should have mentioned, that in the course of this conversation I
besought my aunt to stand my friend, and to put in a word for me on
my approaching trial; and to endeavour to procure me time for
consideration, if I could obtain nothing else.

She told me, that, after the ceremony was performed [odious confirmation
of a hint in my cousin Dolly's letter!] I should have what time I
pleased to reconcile myself to my lot before cohabitation.

This put me out of all patience.

She requested of me in her turn, she said, that I would resolve to meet
them all with cheerful duty, and with a spirit of absolute acquiescence.
It was in my power to make them all happy. And how joyful would it be
to her, she said, to see my father, my mother, my uncles, my brother, my
sister, all embracing me with raptures, and folding me in turns to their
fond hearts, and congratulating each other on their restored happiness!
Her own joy, she said, would probably make her motionless and speechless
for a time: and for her Dolly--the poor girl, who had suffered in the
esteem of some, for her grateful attachment to me, would have every body
love her again.

Will you doubt, my dear, that my next trial will be the most affecting
that I have yet had?

My aunt set forth all this in so strong a light, and I was so
particularly touched on my cousin Dolly's account, that, impatient as I
was just before, I was greatly moved: yet could only shew, by my sighs
and my tears, how desirable such an event would be to me, could it
be brought about upon conditions with which it was possible for me to
comply.

Here comes Betty Barnes with my dinner--


*****


The wench is gone. The time of meeting is at hand. O that he may not
come!--But should I, or should I not, meet him?--How I question, without
possibility of a timely answer!

Betty, according to my leading hint to my aunt, boasted to me, that she
was to be employed, as she called it, after she had eat her own dinner.

She should be sorry, she told me, to have me found out. Yet 'twould be
all for my good. I should have it in my power to be forgiven for all at
once, before Wednesday night. The confident creature then, to stifle a
laugh, put a corner of her apron in her mouth, and went to the door:
and on her return to take away, as I angrily bid her, she begged my
excuse--but--but--and then the saucy creature laughed again, she could
not help it, to think how I had drawn myself in by my summer-house
dinnering, since it had given so fine an opportunity, by way of
surprise, to look into all my private hoards. She thought something was
in the wind, when my brother came into my dining here so readily. Her
young master was too hard for every body. 'Squire Lovelace himself was
nothing at all at a quick thought to her young master.

My aunt mentioned Mr. Lovelace's boasting behaviour to his servants:
perhaps he may be so mean. But as to my brother, he always took a pride
in making himself appear to be a man of parts and learning to our
own servants. Pride and meanness, I have often thought, are as nearly
allied, and as close borderers upon each other, as the poet tells us wit
and madness are.

But why do I trouble you (and myself, at such a crisis) with these
impertinences?--Yet I would forget, if I could, the nearest evil, the
interview; because, my apprehensions increasing as the hour is at hand,
I should, were my intentions to be engrossed by them, be unfit to see
him, if he does come: and then he will have too much advantage over me,
as he will have seeming reason to reproach me with change of resolution.

The upbraider, you know, my dear, is in some sense a superior; while the
upbraided, if with reason upbraided, must make a figure as spiritless as
conscious.

I know that this wretch will, if he can, be his own judge, and mine too.
But the latter he shall not be.

I dare say, we shall be all to pieces. But I don't care for that. It
would be hard, if I, who have held it out so sturdily to my father and
uncles, should not--but he is at the garden-door--


*****


I was mistaken!--How many noises unlike, be made like to what one
fears!--Why flutters the fool so--!


*****


I will hasten to deposit this. Then I will, for the last time, go to the
usual place, in hopes to find that he has got my letter. If he has, I
will not meet him. If he has not, I will take it back, and shew him what
I have written. That will break the ice, as I may say, and save me much
circumlocution and reasoning: and a steady adherence to that my written
mind is all that will be necessary.--The interview must be as short as
possible; for should it be discovered, it would furnish a new and strong
pretence for the intended evil of Wednesday next.

Perhaps I shall not be able to write again one while. Perhaps not till
I am the miserable property of that Solmes!--But that shall never, never
be, while I have my senses.

If your servant find nothing from me by Wednesday morning, you may then
conclude that I can neither write to you, nor receive your favours.

In that case, pity and pray for me, my beloved friend; and continue to
me that place in your affection, which is the pride of my life, and the
only comfort left to

Your CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XLVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE ST. ALBAN'S, TUESDAY MORN. PAST ONE.


O MY DEAREST FRIEND!

After what I had resolved upon, as by my former, what shall I write?
what can I? with what consciousness, even by letter, do I approach
you?--You will soon hear (if already you have not heard from the mouth
of common fame) that your Clarissa Harlowe is gone off with a man!

I am busying myself to give you the particulars at large. The whole
twenty-four hours of each day (to begin at the moment I can fix) shall
be employed in it till it is finished: every one of the hours, I mean,
that will be spared me by this interrupting man, to whom I have made
myself so foolishly accountable for too many of them. Rest is departed
from me. I have no call for that: and that has no balm for the wounds
of my mind. So you'll have all those hours without interruption till the
account is ended.

But will you receive, shall you be permitted to receive my letters,
after what I have done?

O my dearest friend!--But I must make the best of it.

I hope that will not be very bad! yet am I convinced that I did a rash
and inexcusable thing in meeting him; and all his tenderness, all his
vows, cannot pacify my inward reproaches on that account.

The bearer comes to you, my dear, for the little parcel of linen which I
sent you with far better and more agreeable hopes.

Send not my letters. Send the linen only: except you will favour me with
one line, to tell me you love me still; and that you will suspend your
censures till you have the whole before you. I am the readier to send
thus early, because if you have deposited any thing for me, you may
cause it to be taken back, or withhold any thing you had but intended to
send.

Adieu, my dearest friend!--I beseech you to love me still--But
alas! what will your mother say?--what will mine?--what my other
relations?--and what my dear Mrs. Norton?--and how will my brother and
sister triumph!

I cannot at present tell you how, or where, you can direct to me. For
very early shall I leave this place; harassed and fatigued to death.
But, when I can do nothing else, constant use has made me able to write.
Long, very long, has been all my amusement and pleasure: yet could not
that have been such to me, had I not had you, my best beloved friend, to
write to. Once more adieu. Pity and pray for

Your CL. HARLOWE.

END OF VOL. II






End of Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 2 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 2 (OF 9) ***

***** This file should be named 9798.txt or 9798.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/9/9798/

Produced by Julie C. Sparks

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 5 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Clarissa, Volume 5 (of 9)

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: January 23, 2004 [EBook #10799]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 5 (OF 9) ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks




CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

Nine Volumes

Volume V.



CONTENTS OF VOLUME V


LETTER I.  Lovelace to Belford.--
An agreeable airing with the lady.  Delightfully easy she.  Obsequiously
respectful he.  Miss Howe's plot now no longer his terror.  Gives the
particulars of their agreeable conversation while abroad.

LETTER II.  From the same.--
An account of his ipecacuanha plot.  Instructs Dorcas how to act surprise
and terror.  Monosyllables and trisyllables to what likened.  Politeness
lives not in a storm.  Proclamation criers.  The lady now sees she loves
him.  Her generous tenderness for him.  He has now credit for a new
score.  Defies Mrs. Townsend.

LETTER III.  Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Acknowledged tenderness for Lovelace.  Love for a man of errors
punishable.

LETTER IV.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Suspicious inquiry after him and the lady by a servant in livery from one
Captain Tomlinson.  Her terrors on the occasion.  His alarming
management.  She resolves not to stir abroad.  He exults upon her not
being willing to leave him.

LETTER V. VI.  From the same.--
Arrival of Captain Tomlinson, with a pretended commission from Mr. John
Harlowe to set on foot a general reconciliation, provided he can be
convinced that they are actually married. Different conversations on this
occasion.--The lady insists that the truth be told to Tomlinson.  She
carries her point through to the disappointment of one of his private
views.  He forms great hopes of success from the effects of his
ipecacuanha contrivance.

LETTER VII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
He makes such a fair representation to Tomlinson of the situation between
him and the lady, behaves so plausibly, and makes an overture so
generous, that she is all kindness and unreserved to him.  Her affecting
exultation on her amended prospects.  His unusual sensibility upon it.
Reflection on the good effects of education.  Pride an excellent
substitute to virtue.

LETTER VIII.  From the same.--
Who Tomlinson is.  Again makes Belford object, in order to explain his
designs by answering the objections.  John Harlowe a sly sinner.  Hard-
hearted reasons for giving the lady a gleam of joy.  Illustrated by a
story of two sovereigns at war.

Extracts from Clarissa's letter to Miss Howe.  She rejoices in her
present agreeable prospects.  Attributes much to Mr. Hickman.  Describes
Captain Tomlinson.  Gives a character of Lovelace, [which is necessary to
be attended to: especially by those who have thought favourably of him
for some of his liberal actions, and hardly of her for the distance she
at first kept him at.]

LETTER IX.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Letter from Lord M.  His further arts and precautions.  His happy day
promised to be soon.  His opinion of the clergy, and of going to church.
She pities every body who wants pity.  Loves every body.  He owns he
should be the happiest of men, could he get over his prejudices against
matrimony.  Draughts of settlements. Ludicrously accounts for the reason
why she refuses to hear them read to her.  Law and gospel two different
things.  Sally flings her handkerchief in his face.

LETTER X.  From the same.--
Has made the lady more than once look about her.  She owns that he is
more than indifferent to her.  Checks him with sweetness of temper for
his encroaching freedoms.  Her proof of true love.  He ridicules marriage
purity.  Severely reflects upon public freedoms between men and their
wives.  Advantage he once made upon such an occasion.  Has been after a
license.  Difficulty in procuring one.  Great faults and great virtues
often in the same person.  He is willing to believe that women have no
souls.  His whimsical reasons.

LETTER XI.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Almost despairs of succeeding (as he had hoped) by love and gentleness.
Praises her modesty.  His encroaching freedoms resented by her.  The
woman, he observes, who resents not initiatory freedoms, must be lost.
He reasons, in his free way, upon her delicacy.  Art of the Eastern
monarchs.

LETTER XII.  From the same.--
A letter from Captain Tomlinson makes all up.  Her uncle Harlowe's
pretended proposal big with art and plausible delusion.  She acquiesces
in it.  He writes to the pretended Tomlinson, on an affecting hint of
her's, requesting that her uncle Harlowe would, in person, give his niece
to him; or permit Tomlinson to be his proxy on the occasion.--And now for
a little of mine, he says, which he has ready to spring.

LETTER XIII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Again earnestly expostulates with him in the lady's favour.  Remembers
and applauds the part she bore in the conversation at his collation.  The
frothy wit of libertines how despicable.  Censures the folly, the
weakness, the grossness, the unpermanency of sensual love.  Calls some of
his contrivances trite, stale, and poor.  Beseeches him to remove her
from the vile house.  How many dreadful stories could the horrid Sinclair
tell the sex!  Serious reflections on the dying state of his uncle.

LETTER XIV.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Cannot yet procure a license.  Has secured a retreat, if not victory.
Defends in anger the simplicity of his inventive contrivances.  Enters
upon his general defence, compared with the principles and practices of
other libertines.  Heroes and warlike kings worse men than he.  Epitome
of his and the lady's story after ten years' cohabitation.  Caution to
those who would censure him.  Had the sex made virtue a recommendation to
their favour, he says, he should have had a greater regard to his morals
than he has had.

LETTER XV.  From the same.--
Preparative to his little mine, as he calls it.  Loves to write to the
moment.  Alarm begins.  Affectedly terrified.

LETTER XVI.  From the same.--
The lady frighted out of her bed by dreadful cries of fire.  She awes him
into decency.  On an extorted promise of forgiveness, he leaves her.
Repenting, he returns; but finds her door fastened.  What a triumph has
her sex obtained by her virtue!  But how will she see him next morning,
as he has given her.

LETTER XVII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Dialogue with Clarissa, the door between them.  Her letter to him.  She
will not see him for a week.

LETTER XVIII.  From the same.--
Copies of letters that pass between them.  Goes to the commons to try to
get the license.  She shall see him, he declares, on his return.  Love
and compassion hard to be separated.  Her fluctuating reasons on their
present situation.  Is jealous of her superior qualities.  Does justice
to her immovable virtue.

LETTER XIX.  From the same.--
The lady escaped.  His rage.  Makes a solemn vow of revenge, if once more
he gets her into his power.  His man Will. is gone in search of her.  His
hopes; on what grounded.  He will advertise her.  Describes her dress.
Letter left behind her.  Accuses her (that is to say, LOVELACE accuses
her,) of niceness, prudery, affectation.

LETTER XX.  From the same.--
A letter from Miss Howe to Clarissa falls into his hands; which, had it
come to her's, would have laid open and detected all his designs.  In it
she acquits Clarissa of prudery, coquetry, and undue reserve.  Admires,
applauds, blesses her for the example she has set for her sex, and for
the credit she has done it, by her conduct in the most difficult
situations.

[This letter may be considered as a kind of summary of Clarissa's trials,
her persecutions, and exemplary conduct hitherto; and of Mr. Lovelace's
intrigues, plots, and views, so far as Miss Howe could be supposed to
know them, or to guess at them.]

A letter from Lovelace, which farther shows the fertility of his
contriving genius.

LETTER XXI.  Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Informs her of Lovelace's villany, and of her escape.  Her only concern,
what.  The course she intends to pursue.

LETTER XXII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Exults on hearing, from his man Will., that the lady has refuged herself
at Hampstead.  Observations in a style of levity on some passages in the
letter she left behind her.  Intimates that Tomlinson is arrived to aid
his purposes.  The chariot is come; and now, dressed like a bridegroom,
attended by a footman she never saw, he is already, he says, at
Hampstead.

LETTER XXIII. XXIV.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Exults on his contrivances.--By what means he gets into the lady's
presence at Mrs. Moore's.  Her terrors, fits, exclamations.  His
plausible tales to Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins.  His intrepid behaviour
to the lady.  Copies of letters from Tomlinson, and of pretended ones
from his own relations, calculated to pacify and delude her.

LETTER XXV. XXVI.  From the same.--
His farther arts, inventions, and intrepidity.  She puts home questions
to him.  'Ungenerous and ungrateful she calls him.  He knows not the
value of the heart he had insulted.  He had a plain path before him,
after he had tricked her out of her father's house!  But that now her
mind was raised above fortune, and above him.'  His precautionary
contrivances.

LETTER XXVII. XXVIII. XXX. XXXI. XXXII.  From the same.--
Character of widow Bevis.  Prepossesses the women against Miss Howe.
Leads them to think she is in love with him.  Apt himself to think so;
and why.  Women like not novices; and why.  Their vulgar aphorism
animadverted on.  Tomlinson arrives.  Artful conversation between them.
Miss Rawlins's prudery.  His forged letter in imitation of Miss Howe's,
No. IV.  Other contrivances to delude the lady, and attach the women to
his party.


LETTER XXXIII. XXXIV. XXXV. XXXVI.  From the same.--
Particulars of several interesting conversations between himself,
Tomlinson, and the lady.  Artful management of the two former.  Her noble
spirit.  He tells Tomlinson before her that he never had any proof of
affection from her.  She frankly owns the regard she once had for him.
'He had brought her,' she tells Tomlinson and him, 'more than once to own
it to him. Nor did his own vanity, she was sure, permit him to doubt of
it.  He had kept her soul in suspense an hundred times.'  Both men
affected in turn by her noble behaviour, and great sentiments.  Their
pleas, prayers, prostrations, to move her to relent.  Her distress.




THE HISTORY

OF

CLARISSA HARLOWE



LETTER I

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY EVENING.


Just returned from an airing with my charmer, complied with after great
importunity.  She was attended by the two nymphs.  They both topt their
parts; kept their eyes within bounds; made moral reflections now-and-
then.  O Jack! what devils are women, when all tests are got over, and we
have completely ruined them!

The coach carried us to Hampstead, to Highgate, to Muswell-hill; back to
Hampstead to the Upper-Flask: there, in compliment to the nymphs, my
beloved consented to alight, and take a little repast.  Then home early
by Kentish-town.

Delightfully easy she, and so respectful and obliging I, all the way, and
as we walked out upon the heath, to view the variegated prospects which
that agreeable elevation affords, that she promised to take now-and-then
a little excursion with me.  I think, Miss Howe, I think, said I to
myself, every now-and-then as we walked, that thy wicked devices are
superceded.

But let me give thee a few particulars of our conversation in the
circumrotation we took, while in the coach--She had received a letter
from Miss Howe yesterday, I presumed?

She made no answer.  How happy should I think myself to be admitted into
their correspondence?  I would joyfully make an exchange of
communications.

So, though I hoped not to succeed by her consent, [and little did she
think I had so happily in part succeeded without it,] I thought it not
amiss to urge for it, for several reasons: among others, that I might
account to her for my constant employment at my pen; in order to take off
her jealousy, that she was the subject of thy correspondence and mine:
and that I might justify my secrecy and uncommunicativeness by her own.

I proceeded therefore--That I loved familiar-letter-writing, as I had
more than once told her, above all the species of writing: it was writing
from the heart, (without the fetters prescribed by method or study,) as
the very word cor-respondence implied.  Not the heart only; the soul was
in it.  Nothing of body, when friend writes to friend; the mind impelling
sovereignly the vassal-fingers.  It was, in short, friendship recorded;
friendship given under hand and seal; demonstrating that the parties were
under no apprehension of changing from time or accident, when they so
liberally gave testimonies, which would always be ready, on failure or
infidelity, to be turned against them.--For my own part, it was the
principal diversion I had in her absence; but for this innocent
amusement, the distance she so frequently kept me at would have been
intolerable.

Sally knew my drift; and said, She had had the honour to see two or three
of my letters, and of Mr. Belford's; and she thought them the most
entertaining that she had ever read.

My friend Belford, I said, had a happy talent in the letter-writing way;
and upon all subjects.

I expected my beloved would have been inquisitive after our subject: but
(lying perdue, as I saw) not a word said she.  So I touched upon this
article myself.

Our topics were various and diffuse: sometimes upon literary articles
[she was very attentive upon this]; sometimes upon the public
entertainments; sometimes amusing each other with the fruits of the
different correspondencies we held with persons abroad, with whom we
had contracted friendships; sometimes upon the foibles and perfections
of our particular friends; sometimes upon our own present and future
hopes; sometimes aiming at humour and raillery upon each other.--It might
indeed appear to savour of vanity, to suppose my letters would entertain
a lady of her delicacy and judgment: but yet I could not but say, that
perhaps she would be far from thinking so hardly of me as sometimes she
had seemed to do, if she were to see the letters which generally passed
between Mr. Belford and me [I hope, Jack, thou hast more manners, than to
give me the lie, though but in thy heart].

She then spoke: after declining my compliment in such a manner, as only a
person can do, who deserved it, she said, For her part, she had always
thought me a man of sense [a man of sense, Jack!  What a niggardly
praise!],--and should therefore hope, that, when I wrote, it exceeded
even my speech: for that it was impossible, be the letters written in as
easy and familiar a style as they would, but that they must have that
advantage from sitting down to write them which prompt speech could not
always have.  She should think it very strange therefore, if my letters
were barren of sentiment; and as strange, if I gave myself liberties upon
premeditation, which could have no excuse at all, but from a
thoughtlessness, which itself wanted excuse.--But if Mr. Belford's
letters and mine were upon subjects so general, and some of them equally
(she presumed) instructive and entertaining, she could not but say, that
she should be glad to see any of them; and particularly those which Miss
Martin had seen and praised.

This was put close.

I looked at her, to see if I could discover any tincture of jealousy in
this hint; that Miss Martin had seen what I had not shown to her.  But
she did not look it: so I only said, I should be very proud to show her
not only those, but all that passed between Mr. Belford and me; but I
must remind her, that she knew the condition.

No, indeed! with a sweet lip pouted out, as saucy as pretty; implying a
lovely scorn, that yet can only be lovely in youth so blooming, and
beauty so divinely distinguished.

How I long to see such a motion again!  Her mouth only can give it.

But I am mad with love--yet eternal will be the distance, at the rate I
go on: now fire, now ice, my soul is continually upon the hiss, as I may
say.  In vain, however, is the trial to quench--what, after all, is
unquenchable.

Pr'ythee, Belford, forgive my nonsense, and my Vulcan-like metaphors--Did
I not tell thee, not that I am sick of love, but that I am mad with it?
Why brought I such an angel into such a house? into such company?--And
why do I not stop my ears to the sirens, who, knowing my aversion to
wedlock, are perpetually touching that string?

I was not willing to be answered so easily: I was sure, that what passed
between two such young ladies (friends so dear) might be seen by every
body: I had more reason than any body to wish to see the letters that
passed between her and Miss Howe; because I was sure they must be full of
admirable instruction, and one of the dear correspondents had deigned to
wish my entire reformation.

She looked at me as if she would look me through: I thought I felt eye-
beam, after eye-beam, penetrate my shivering reins.--But she was silent.
Nor needed her eyes the assistance of speech.

Nevertheless, a little recovering myself, I hoped that nothing unhappy
had befallen either Miss Howe or her mother.  The letter of yesterday
sent by a particular hand: she opening it with great emotion--seeming to
have expected it sooner--were the reasons for my apprehensions.

We were then at Muswell-hill: a pretty country within the eye, to Polly,
was the remark, instead of replying to me.

But I was not so to be answered--I should expect some charming subjects
and characters from two such pens: I hoped every thing went on well
between Mr. Hickman and Miss Howe.  Her mother's heart, I said, was set
upon that match: Mr. Hickman was not without his merits: he was what the
ladies called a SOBER man: but I must needs say, that I thought Miss Howe
deserved a husband of a very different cast!

This, I supposed, would have engaged her into a subject from which I
could have wiredrawn something:--for Hickman is one of her favourites--
why, I can't divine, except for the sake of opposition of character to
that of thy honest friend.

But she cut me short by a look of disapprobation, and another cool remark
upon a distant view; and, How far off, Miss Horton, do you think that
clump of trees may be? pointing out of the coach.--So I had done.

Here endeth all I have to write concerning our conversation on this our
agreeable airing.

We have both been writing ever since we came home.  I am to be favoured
with her company for an hour, before she retires to rest.

All that obsequious love can suggest, in order to engage her tenderest
sentiments for me against tomorrow's sickness, will I aim at when we
meet.  But at parting will complain of a disorder in my stomach.


***


We have met.  All was love and unexceptionable respect on my part.  Ease
and complaisance on her's.  She was concerned for my disorder.  So
sudden!--Just as we parted!  But it was nothing.  I should be quite well
by the morning.

Faith, Jack, I think I am sick already.  Is it possible for such a giddy
fellow as me to persuade myself to be ill!  I am a better mimic at this
rate than I wish to be.  But every nerve and fibre of me is always ready
to contribute its aid, whether by health or by ailment, to carry a
resolved-on roguery into execution.

Dorcas has transcribed for me the whole letter of Miss Howe, dated
Sunday, May 14,* of which before I had only extracts.  She found no other
letter added to that parcel: but this, and that which I copied myself in
character last Sunday whilst she was at church, relating to the smuggling
scheme,** are enough for me.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXIX.
** Ibid. Letter XLII.


***


Dorcas tells me, that her lady has been removing her papers from the
mahogany chest into a wainscot box, which held her linen, and which she
put into her dark closet.  We have no key of that at present.  No doubt
but all her letters, previous to those I have come at, are in that box.
Dorcas is uneasy upon it: yet hopes that her lady does not suspect her;
for she is sure that she laid in every thing as she found it.



LETTER II

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
COCOA-TREE, SATURDAY, MAY 27.

This ipecacuanha is a most disagreeable medicine.  That these cursed
physical folks can find out nothing to do us good, but what would poison
the devil!  In the other world, were they only to take physic, it would
be punishable enough of itself for a mis-spent life.  A doctor at one
elbow, and an apothecary at the other, and the poor soul labouring under
their prescribed operations, he need no worse tormentors.

But now this was to take down my countenance.  It has done it: for, with
violent reachings, having taken enough to make me sick, and not enough
water to carry it off, I presently looked as if I had kept my bed a
fortnight.  Ill jesting, as I thought in the midst of the exercise, with
edge tools, and worse with physical ones.

Two hours it held me.  I had forbid Dorcas to let her lady know any thing
of the matter; out of tenderness to her; being willing, when she knew my
prohibition, to let her see that I expected her to be concerned for me.--

Well, but Dorcas was nevertheless a woman, and she can whisper to her
lady the secret she is enjoined to keep!

Come hither, toad, [sick as the devil at the instant]; let me see what a
mixture of grief and surprize may be beat up together in thy puden-face.

That won't do.  That dropt jaw, and mouth distended into the long oval,
is more upon the horrible than the grievous.

Nor that pinking and winking with thy odious eyes, as my charmer once
called them.

A little better that; yet not quite right: but keep your mouth closer.
You have a muscle or two which you have no command of, between your
cheek-bone and your lips, that should carry one corner of your mouth
up towards your crow's-foot, and that down to meet it.

There!  Begone!  Be in a plaguy hurry running up stair and down, to fetch
from the dining-room what you carry up on purpose to fetch, till motion
extraordinary put you out of breath, and give you the sigh natural.

What's the matter, Dorcas?

Nothing, Madam.

My beloved wonders she has not seen me this morning, no doubt; but is too
shy to say she wonders.  Repeated What's the matter, however, as Dorcas
runs up and down stairs by her door, bring on, O Madam! my master! my
poor master!

What!  How!  When!--and all the monosyllables of surprize.

[Within parentheses let me tell thee, that I have often thought, that the
little words in the republic of letters, like the little folks in a nation,
are the most significant.  The trisyllables, and the rumblers of syllables
more than three, are but the good-for-little magnates.]

I must not tell you, Madam--My master ordered me not to tell you--but he
is in a worse way than he thinks for!--But he would not have you
frighted.

High concern took possession of every sweet feature.  She pitied me!--by
my soul, she pitied me!

Where is he?

Too much in a hurry for good manners, [another parenthesis, Jack!  Good
manners are so little natural, that we ought to be composed to observe
them: politeness will not live in a storm].  I cannot stay to answer
questions, cries the wench--though desirous to answer [a third
parenthesis--Like the people crying proclamations, running away from the
customers they want to sell to].  This hurry puts the lady in a hurry to
ask, [a fourth, by way of establishing the third!] as the other does the
people in a hurry to buy.  And I have in my eye now a whole street
raised, and running after a proclamation or express-crier, as if the
first was a thief, the other his pursuers.

At last, O Lord! let Mrs. Lovelace know!--There is danger, to be sure!
whispered from one nymph to another; but at the door, and so loud, that
my listening fair-one might hear.

Out she darts--As how! as how, Dorcas!

O Madam--A vomiting of blood!  A vessel broke, to be sure!

Down she hastens; finds every one as busy over my blood in the entry,
as if it were that of the Neapolitan saint.

In steps my charmer, with a face of sweet concern.

How do you, Mr. Lovelace?

O my best love!--Very well!--Very well!--Nothing at all! nothing of
consequence!--I shall be well in an instant!--Straining again! for I was
indeed plaguy sick, though no more blood came.

In short, Belford, I have gained my end.  I see the dear soul loves me.
I see she forgives me all that's past.  I see I have credit for a new
score.

Miss Howe, I defy thee, my dear--Mrs. Townsend!--Who the devil are you?--
Troop away with your contrabands.  No smuggling! nor smuggler, but
myself!  Nor will the choicest of my fair-one's favours be long
prohibited goods to me!


***


Every one is now sure that she loves me.  Tears were in her eyes more
than once for me.  She suffered me to take her hand, and kiss it as often
as I pleased.  On Mrs. Sinclair's mentioning, that I too much confined
myself, she pressed me to take an airing; but obligingly desired me to be
careful of myself.  Wished I would advise with a physician.  God made
physicians, she said.

I did not think that, Jack.  God indeed made us all.  But I fancy she
meant physic instead of physicians; and then the phrase might mean what
the vulgar phrase means;--God sends meat, the Devil cooks.

I was well already, on taking the styptic from her dear hands.

On her requiring me to take the air, I asked, If I might have the honour
of her company in a coach; and this, that I might observe if she had an
intention of going out in my absence.

If she thought a chair were not a more proper vehicle for my case, she
would with all her heart!

There's a precious!

I kissed her hand again!  She was all goodness!--Would to Heaven I better
deserved it, I said!--But all were golden days before us!--Her presence
and generous concern had done every thing.  I was well!  Nothing ailed
me.  But since my beloved will have it so, I'll take a little airing!--
Let a chair be called!--O my charmer! were I to have owned this
indisposition to my late harasses, and to the uneasiness I have had for
disobliging you; all is infinitely compensated by your goodness.--All the
art of healing is in your smiles!--Your late displeasure was the only
malady!

While Mrs. Sinclair, and Dorcas, and Polly, and even poor silly Mabell
[for Sally went out, as my angel came in] with uplifted hands and eyes,
stood thanking Heaven that I was better, in audible whispers: See the
power of love, cried one!--What a charming husband, another!--Happy
couple, all!

O how the dear creature's cheek mantled!--How her eyes sparkled!--How
sweetly acceptable is praise to conscious merit, while it but reproaches
when applied to the undeserving!--What a new, what a gay creation it
makes all at once in a diffident or dispirited heart!

And now, Belford, was it not worth while to be sick?  And yet I must tell
thee, that too many pleasanter expedients offer themselves, to make trial
any more of this confounded ipecacuanha.



LETTER III

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, MAY 27.


Mr. Lovelace, my dear, has been very ill.  Suddenly taken.  With a
vomiting of blood in great quantities.  Some vessel broken.  He
complained of a disorder in his stomach over night.  I was the
affected with it, as I am afraid it was occasioned by the violent
contentions between us.--But was I in fault?

How lately did I think I hated him!--But hatred and anger, I see, are but
temporary passions with me.  One cannot, my dear, hate people in danger
of death, or who are in distress or affliction.  My heart, I find, is not
proof against kindness, and acknowledgements of errors committed.

He took great care to have his illness concealed from me as long as he
could.  So tender in the violence of his disorder!--So desirous to make
the best of it!--I wish he had not been ill in my sight.  I was too much
affected--every body alarming me with his danger.  The poor man, from
such high health, so suddenly taken!--and so unprepared!--

He is gone out in a chair.  I advised him to do so.  I fear that my
advice was wrong; since quiet in such a disorder must needs be best.  We
are apt to be so ready, in cases of emergency, to give our advice,
without judgment, or waiting for it!--I proposed a physician indeed; but
he would not hear of one.  I have great honour for the faculty; and the
greater, as I have always observed that those who treat the professors of
the art of healing contemptuously, too generally treat higher
institutions in the same manner.

I am really very uneasy.  For I have, I doubt, exposed myself to him, and
to the women below.  They indeed will excuse me, as they think us
married.  But if he be not generous, I shall have cause to regret this
surprise; which (as I had reason to think myself unaccountably treated by
him) has taught me more than I knew of myself.

'Tis true, I have owned more than once, that I could have liked Mr.
Lovelace above all men.  I remember the debates you and I used to have on
this subject, when I was your happy guest.  You used to say, and once you
wrote,* that men of his cast are the men that our sex do not naturally
dislike: While I held, that such were not (however that might be) the men
we ought to like.  But what with my relations precipitating of me, on one
hand, and what with his unhappy character, and embarrassing ways, on the
other, I had no more leisure than inclination to examine my own heart in
this particular.  And this reminds me of a transcribe, though it was
written in raillery.  'May it not be,' say you,** 'that you have had such
persons to deal with, as have not allowed you to attend to the throbs; or
if you had them a little now-and-then, whether, having had two accounts
to place them to, you have not by mistake put them to the wrong one?'  A
passage, which, although it came into my mind when Mr. Lovelace was least
exceptionable, yet that I have denied any efficacy to, when he has teased
and vexed me, and given me cause of suspicion.  For, after all, my dear,
Mr. Lovelace is not wise in all his ways.  And should we not endeavour,
as much as is possible, (where we are not attached by natural ties,) to
like and dislike as reason bids us, and according to the merit or demerit
of the object?  If love, as it is called, is allowed to be an excuse for
our most unreasonable follies, and to lay level all the fences that a
careful education has surrounded us by, what is meant by the doctrine of
subduing our passions?--But, O my dearest friend, am I not guilty of a
punishable fault, were I to love this man of errors?  And has not my own
heart deceived me, when I thought it did not?  And what must be that love,
that has not some degree of purity for its object?  I am afraid of
recollecting some passages in my cousin Morden's letter.***--And yet why
fly I from subjects that, duly considered, might tend to correct and
purify my heart?  I have carried, I doubt, my notions on this head too
high, not for practice, but for my practice.  Yet think me not guilty of
prudery neither; for had I found out as much of myself before; or,
rather, had he given me heart's ease enough before to find it out, you
should have had my confession sooner.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXXIV.
** See Vol. I. Letter XII.
*** See Vol. IV. Letter XIX, & seq.


Nevertheless, let me tell you (what I hope I may justly tell you,) that
if again he give me cause to resume distance and reserve, I hope my
reason will gather strength enough from his imperfections to enable me to
keep my passions under.--What can we do more than govern ourselves by the
temporary lights lent us?

You will not wonder that I am grave on this detection--Detection, must I
call it?  What can I call it?--

Dissatisfied with myself, I am afraid to look back upon what I have
written: yet know not how to have done writing.  I never was in such an
odd frame of mind.--I know not how to describe it.--Was you ever so?--
Afraid of the censure of her you love--yet not conscious that you deserve
it?

Of this, however, I am convinced, that I should indeed deserve censure,
if I kept any secret of my heart from you.

But I will not add another word, after I have assured you, that I will
look still more narrowly into myself: and that I am

Your equally sincere and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER IV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. EVENING.


I had a charming airing.  No return of my malady.  My heart was perfectly
easy, how could my stomach be otherwise?

But when I came home, I found that my sweet soul had been alarmed by a
new incident--The inquiry after us both, in a very suspicious manner, and
that by description of our persons, and not by names, by a servant in a
blue livery turn'd up and trimm'd with yellow.

Dorcas was called to him, as the upper servant; and she refusing to
answer any of the fellow's questions, unless he told his business, and
from whom he came, the fellow (as short as she) said, that if she would
not answer him, perhaps she might answer somebody else; and went away out
of humour.

Dorcas hurried up to her Lady, and alarmed her, not only with the fact,
but with her own conjectures; adding, that he was an ill-looking fellow,
and she was sure could come for no good.

The livery and the features of the servant were particularly inquired
after, and as particularly described--Lord bless her! no end of her
alarms, she thought!  And then did her apprehensions anticipate every
evil that could happen.

She wished Mr. Lovelace would come in.

Mr. Lovelace came in soon after; all lively, grateful, full of hopes, of
duty, of love, to thank his charmer, and to congratulate with her upon
the cure she had performed.  And then she told the story, with all its
circumstances; and Dorcas, to point her lady's fears, told us, that the
servant was a sun-burnt fellow, and looked as if he had been at sea.

He was then, no doubt, Captain Singleton's servant, and the next news she
should hear, was, that the house was surrounded by a whole ship's crew;
the vessel lying no farther off, as she understood, than Rotherhithe.

Impossible, I said.  Such an attempt would not be ushered in by such a
manner of inquiry.  And why may it not rather be a servant of your cousin
Morden, with notice of his arrival, and of his design to attend you?

This surmise delighted her.  Her apprehensions went off, and she was at
leisure to congratulate me upon my sudden recovery; which she did in the
most obliging manner.

But we had not sat long together, when Dorcas again came fluttering up to
tell us, that the footman, the very footman, was again at the door, and
inquired, whether Mr. Lovelace and his lady, by name, had not lodgings in
this house?  He asked, he told Dorcas, for no harm.  But his disavowing
of harm, was a demonstration with my apprehensive fair-one, that harm was
intended.  And as the fellow had not been answered by Dorcas, I proposed
to go down to the street-parlour, and hear what he had to say.

I see your causeless terror, my dearest life, said I, and your impatience
--Will you be pleased to walk down--and, without being observed, (for he
shall come no farther than the parlour-door,) you may hear all that
passes?

She consented.  We went down.  Dorcas bid the man come forward.  Well,
friend, what is your business with Mr. and Mrs. Lovelace?

Bowing, scraping, I am sure you are the gentleman, Sir.  Why, Sir, my
business is only to know if your honour be here, and to be spoken with;
or if you shall be here for any time?

Whom came you from?

From a gentleman who ordered me to say, if I was made to tell, but not
else, it was from a friend of Mr. John Harlowe, Mrs. Lovelace's eldest
uncle.

The dear creature was ready to sink upon this.  It was but of late that
she had provided herself with salts.  She pulled them out.

Do you know anything of Colonel Morden, friend? said I.

No; I never heard of his name.

Of Captain Singleton?

No, Sir.  But the gentleman, my master, is a Captain too.

What is his name?

I don't know if I should tell.

There can be no harm in telling the gentleman's name, if you come upon
a good account.

That I do; for my master told me so; and there is not an honester
gentleman on the face of God's yearth.--His name is Captain Tomlinson,
Sir.

I don't know such a one.

I believe not, Sir.  He was pleased to say, he don't know your honor,
Sir; but I heard him say as how he should not be an unwelcome visiter to
you for all that.

Do you know such a man as Captain Tomlinson, my dearest life, [aside,]
your uncle's friend?

No; but my uncle may have acquaintance, no doubt, that I don't know.--
But I hope [trembling] this is not a trick.

Well, friend, if your master has anything to say to Mr. Lovelace, you may
tell him, that Mr. Lovelace is here; and will see him whenever he
pleases.

The dear creature looked as if afraid that my engagement was too prompt
for my own safety; and away went the fellow--I wondering, that she might
not wonder, that this Captain Tomlinson, whoever he were, came not
himself, or sent not a letter the second time, when he had reason to
suppose that I might be here.

Mean time, for fear that this should be a contrivance of James Harlowe,
who, I said, love plotting, though he had not a head turned for it, I
gave some precautionary directions to the servants, and the women, whom,
for the greater parade, I assembled before us, and my beloved was
resolved not to stir abroad till she saw the issue of this odd affair.

And here must I close, though in so great a puzzle.

Only let me add, that poor Belton wants thee; for I dare not stir for my
life.

Mowbray and Tourville skulk about like vagabonds, without heads, without
hands, without souls; having neither you nor me to conduct them.  They
tell me, they shall rust beyond the power of oil or action to brighten
them up, or give them motion.

How goes it with thy uncle?



LETTER V

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY, MAY 28.


This story of Captain Tomlinson employed us not only for the time we were
together last night, but all the while we sat at breakfast this morning.
She would still have it that it was the prelude to some mischief from
Singleton.  I insisted (according to my former hint) that it might much
more probably be a method taken by Colonel Morden to alarm her, previous
to a personal visit.  Travelled gentlemen affected to surprise in this
manner.  And why, dearest creature, said I, must every thing that
happens, which we cannot immediately account for, be what we least wish?

She had had so many disagreeable things befall her of late, that her
fears were too often stronger than her hopes.

And this, Madam, makes me apprehensive, that you will get into so low-
spirited a way, that you will not be able to enjoy the happiness that
seems to await us.

Her duty and her gratitude, she gravely said, to the Dispenser of all
good, would secure her, she hoped, against unthankfulness.  And a
thankful spirit was the same as a joyful one.

So, Belford, for all her future joys she depends entirely upon the
invisible Good.  She is certainly right; since those who fix least upon
second causes are the least likely to be disappointed--And is not this
gravity for her gravity?

She had hardly done speaking, when Dorcas came running up in a hurry--
she set even my heart into a palpitation--thump, thump, thump, like a
precipitated pendulum in a clock-case--flutter, flutter, flutter, my
charmer's, as by her sweet bosom rising to her chin I saw.

This lower class of people, my beloved herself observed, were for ever
aiming at the stupid wonderful, and for making even common incidents
matter of surprise.

Why the devil, said I to the wench, this alarming hurry?--And with your
spread fingers, and your O Madams, and O Sirs!--and be cursed to you!
Would there have been a second of time difference, had you come up
slowly?

Captain Tomlinson, Sir!

Captain Devilson, what care I?--Do you see how you have disordered your
lady?

Good Mr. Lovelace, said my charmer, trembling [see, Jack, when she has an
end to serve, I am good Mr. Lovelace,] if--if my brother,--if Captain
Singleton should appear--pray now--I beseech you--let me beg of you--to
govern your temper--My brother is my brother--Captain Singleton is but an
agent.

My dearest life, folding my arms about her, [when she asks favours,
thought I, the devil's in it, if she will not allow such an innocent
freedom as this, from good Mr. Lovelace too,] you shall be witness of all
passes between us.--Dorcas, desire the gentleman to walk up.

Let me retire to my chamber first!--Let me not be known to be in the
house!

Charming dear!--Thou seest, Belford, she is afraid of leaving me!--O the
little witchcrafts!  Were it not for surprises now-and-then, how would an
honest man know where to have them?

She withdrew to listen.--And though this incident has not turned out to
answer all I wished from it, yet is it not necessary, if I would acquaint
thee with my whole circulation, to be very particular in what passed
between Captain Tomlinson and me.


Enter Captain Tomlinson, in a riding-dress, whip in hand.

Your servant, Sir,--Mr. Lovelace, I presume?

My name is Lovelace, Sir.

Excuse the day, Sir.--Be pleased to excuse my garb.  I am obliged to go
out of town directly, that I may return at night.

The day is a good day.  Your garb needs no apology.

When I sent my servant, I did not know that I should find time to do
myself this honour.  All that I thought I could do to oblige my friend
this journey, was only to assure myself of your abode; and whether there
was a probability of being admitted to the speech of either you, or your
lady.

Sir, you best know your own motives.  What your time will permit you to do,
you also best know.  And here I am, attending your pleasure.


My charmer owned afterwards her concern on my being so short.  Whatever
I shall mingle of her emotions, thou wilt easily guess I had afterwards.

Sir, I hope no offence.  I intend none.

None--None at all, Sir.

Sir, I have no interest in the affair I come about.  I may appear
officious; and if I thought I should, I would decline any concern in it,
after I have just hinted what it is.

And pray, Sir, what is it?

May I ask you, Sir, without offence, whether you wish to be reconciled,
and to co-operate upon honourable terms, with one gentleman of the name
of Harlowe; preparative, as it may be hoped, to a general reconciliation?

O how my heart fluttered! cried my charmer.

I can't tell, Sir--[and then it fluttered still more, no doubt:]  The
whole family have used me extremely ill.  They have taken greater
liberties with my character than are justifiable; and with my family too;
which I can less forgive.

Sir, Sir, I have done.  I beg pardon for this intrusion.

My beloved was then ready to sink, and thought very hardly of me.

But, pray, Sir, to the immediate purpose of your present commission;
since a commission it seems to be?

It is a commission, Sir; and such a one, as I thought would be agreeable
to all parties, or I should not have given myself concern about it.

Perhaps it may, Sir, when known.  But let me ask you one previous
question--Do you know Colonel Morden, Sir?

No, Sir.  If you mean personally, I do not.  But I have heard my good
friend Mr. John Harlowe talk of him with great respect; and such a
co-trustee with him in a certain trust.

Lovel.   I thought it probable, Sir, that the Colonel might be arrived;
that you might be a gentleman of his acquaintance; and that something of
an agreeable surprise might be intended.

Capt.   Had Colonel Morden been in England, Mr. John Harlowe would have
known it; and then I should not have been a stranger to it.

Lovel.   Well but, Sir, have you then any commission to me from Mr. John
Harlowe?

Capt.   Sir, I will tell you, as briefly as I can, the whole of what I
have to say; but you'll excuse me also in a previous question, for what
curiosity is not my motive; but it is necessary to be answered before I
can proceed; as you will judge when you hear it.

Lovel.   What, pray, Sir, is your question?

Capt.   Briefly, whether you are actually, and bona fide, married to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe?

I started, and, in a haughty tone, is this, Sir, a question that must be
answered before you can proceed in the business you have undertaken?

I mean no offence, Mr. Lovelace.  Mr. Harlowe sought to me to undertake
this office.  I have daughters and nieces of my own.  I thought it a good
office, or I, who have many considerable affairs upon my hands, had not
accepted of it.  I know the world; and will take the liberty to say, that
if the young lady--

Captain Tomlinson, I think you are called?

My name is Tomlinson.

Why then, Tomlinson, no liberty, as you call it, will be taken well, that
is not extremely delicate, when that lady is mentioned.

When you had heard me out, Mr. Lovelace, and had found I had so behaved,
as to make the caution necessary, it would have been just to have given
it.--Allow me to say, I know what is due to the character of a woman of
virtue, as well as any man alive.

Why, Sir!  Why, Captain Tomlinson, you seem warm.  If you intend any
thing by this, [O how I trembled! said the lady, when she took notice of
this part of our conversation afterwards,] I will only say, that this is
a privileged place.  It is at present my home, and an asylum for any
gentleman who thinks it worth his while to inquire after me, be the
manner or end of his inquiry what it will.

I know not, Sir, that I have given occasion for this.  I make no scruple
to attend you elsewhere, if I am troublesome here.  I was told, I had a
warm young gentleman to deal with: but as I knew my intention, and that
my commission was an amicable one, I was the less concerned about that.
I am twice your age, Mr. Lovelace, I dare say: but I do assure you, that
if either my message or my manner gives you offence, I can suspend the
one or the other for a day, or for ever, as you like.  And so, Sir, any
time before eight tomorrow morning, you will let me know your further
commands.--And was going to tell me where he might be found.

Captain Tomlinson, said I, you answer well.  I love a man of spirit.
Have you not been in the army?

I have, Sir; but have turned my sword into a ploughshare, as the
scripture has it,--[there was a clever fellow, Jack!--he was a good man
with somebody, I warrant!  O what a fine coat and cloke for an hypocrite
will a text of scripture, properly applied, make at any time in the eyes
of the pious!--how easily are the good folks taken in!]--and all my
delight, added he, for some years past, has been in cultivating my
paternal estate.  I love a brave man, Mr. Lovelace, as well as ever I did
in my life.  But let me tell you, Sir, that when you come to my time of
life, you will be of opinion, that there is not so much true bravery in
youthful choler, as you may now think there is.

A clever fellow again, Belford!--Ear and heart, both at once, he took in
my charmer!--'Tis well, she says, there are some men who have wisdom in
their anger.

Well, Captain, that is reproof for reproof.  So we are upon a footing.
And now give me the pleasure of hearing the import of your commission.

Sir, you must first allow me to repeat my question: Are you really, and
bona fide, married to Miss Clarissa Harlowe? or are you not yet married?

Bluntly put, Captain.  But if I answer that I am, what then?

Why then, Sir, I shall say, that you are a man of honour.

That I hope I am, whether you say it or not, Captain Tomlinson.

Sir, I will be very frank in all I have to say on this subject--Mr. John
Harlowe has lately found out, that you and his niece are both in the same
lodgings; that you have been long so; and that the lady was at the play
with you yesterday was se'nnight; and he hopes that you are actually
married.  He has indeed heard that you are; but as he knows your
enterprising temper, and that you have declared, that you disdain a
relation to their family, he is willing by me to have your marriage
confirmed from your own mouth, before he take the steps he is inclined to
take in his niece's favour.  You will allow me to say, Mr. Lovelace, that
he will not be satisfied with an answer that admits of the least doubt.

Let me tell you, Captain Tomlinson, that it is a high degree of vileness
for any man to suppose--

Sir--Mr. Lovelace--don't put yourself into a passion.  The lady's
relations are jealous of the honour of their family.  They have
prejudices to overcome as well as you--advantage may have been taken--and
the lady, at the time, not to blame.

This lady, Sir, could give no such advantages: and if she had, what must
the man be, Captain Tomlinson, who could have taken them?--Do you know
the lady, Sir?

I never had the honour to see her but once; and that was at a church; and
should not know her again.

Not know her again, Sir!--I thought there was not a man living who had
once seen her, and would not know her among a thousand.

I remember, Sir, that I thought I never saw a finer woman in my life.
But, Mr. Lovelace, I believe, you will allow, that it is better that her
relations should have wronged you, than you the lady, I hope, Sir, you
will permit me to repeat my question.


Enter Dorcas, in a hurry.

A gentleman, this minute, Sir, desires to speak with your honour--[My
lady, Sir!--Aside.]

Could the dear creature put Dorcas upon telling this fib, yet want to
save me one?

Desire the gentleman to walk into one of the parlours.  I will wait upon
him presently.

[Exit Dorcas.


The dear creature, I doubted not, wanted to instruct me how to answer
the Captain's home put.  I knew how I intended to answer it--plumb, thou
may'st be sure--but Dorcas's message staggered me.  And yet I was upon
one of my master-strokes--which was, to take advantage of the captain's
inquiries, and to make her own her marriage before him, as she had done
to the people below; and if she had been brought to that, to induce her,
for her uncle's satisfaction, to write him a letter of gratitude; which
of course must have been signed Clarissa Lovelace.  I was loth,
therefore, thou may'st believe, to attend her sudden commands: and yet,
afraid of pushing matters beyond recovery with her, I thought proper to
lead him from the question, to account for himself and for Mr. Harlowe's
coming to the knowledge of where we are; and for other particulars which
I knew would engage her attention; and which might possibly convince her
of the necessity there was for her to acquiesce in the affirmative I was
disposed to give.  And this for her own sake; For what, as I asked her
afterwards, is it to me, whether I am ever reconciled to her family?--A
family, Jack, which I must for ever despise.

You think, Captain, that I have answered doubtfully to the question you
put.  You may think so.  And you must know, that I have a good deal of
pride; and, only that you are a gentleman, and seem in this affair to be
governed by generous motives, or I should ill brook being interrogated as
to my honour to a lady so dear to me.--But before I answer more directly
to the point, pray satisfy me in a question or two that I shall put to
you.

With all my heart, Sir.  Ask me what questions you please, I will answer
them with sincerity and candour.

You say, Mr. Harlowe has found out that we were at a play together: and
that we were both in the same lodgings--How, pray, came he at his
knowledge?--for, let me tell you, that I have, for certain
considerations, (not respecting myself, I will assure you,) condescended
that our abode should be kept secret.  And this has been so strictly
observed, that even Miss Howe, though she and my beloved correspond, knows
not directly where to send to us.

Why, Sir, the person who saw you at the play, was a tenant of Mr. John
Harlowe.  He watched all your motions.  When the play was done, he
followed your coach to your lodgings.  And early the next day, Sunday,
he took horse, and acquainted his landlord with what he had observed.

Lovel.   How oddly things come about!--But does any other of the Harlowes
know where we are?

Capt.   It is an absolute secret to every other person of the family; and
so it is intended to be kept: as also that Mr. John Harlowe is willing to
enter into treaty with you, by me, if his niece be actually married; for
perhaps he is aware, that he shall have difficulty enough with some
people to bring about the desirable reconciliation, although he could
give them this assurance.

I doubt it not, Captain--to James Harlowe is all the family folly owing.
Fine fools! [heroically stalking about] to be governed by one to whom
malice and not genius, gives the busy liveliness that distinguishes him
from a natural!--But how long, pray, Sir, has Mr. John Harlowe been in
this pacific disposition?

I will tell you, Mr. Lovelace, and the occasion; and be very explicit
upon it, and upon all that concerns you to know of me, and of the
commission I have undertaken to execute; and this the rather, as when
you have heard me out, you will be satisfied, that I am not an officious
man in this my present address to you.

I am all attention, Captain Tomlinson.

And so I doubt not was my beloved.

Capt.   'You must know, Sir, that I have not been many months in Mr. John
Harlowe's neighbourhood.  I removed from Northamptonshire, partly for the
sake of better managing one of two executorship, which I could not avoid
engaging in, (the affairs of which frequently call me to town, and are
part of my present business;) and partly for the sake of occupying a
neglected farm, which has lately fallen into my hands.  But though an
acquaintance of no longer standing, and that commencing on the bowling-
green, [uncle John is a great bowler, Belford,] (upon my decision of a
point to every one's satisfaction, which was appealed to me by all the
gentlemen, and which might have been attended with bad consequences,) no
two brothers have a more cordial esteem for each other.  You know, Mr.
Lovelace, that there is a consent, as I may call it, in some minds, which
will unite them stronger together in a few hours, than years can do with
others, whom yet we see not with disgust.'

Lovel.   Very true, Captain.

Capt.   'It was on the foot of this avowed friendship on both sides, that
on Monday the 15th, as I very well remember, Mr. Harlowe invited himself
home with me.  And when there, he acquainted me with the whole of the
unhappy affair that had made them all so uneasy.  Till then I knew it
only by report; for, intimate as we were, I forbore to speak of what was
so near his heart, till he began first.  And then he told me, that he had
had an application made to him, two or three days before, by a gentleman
whom he named,*  to induce him not only to be reconciled himself to his
niece, but to forward for her a general reconciliation.


* See Vol. IV. Letters XXIII and XXIX.


'A like application, he told me, had been made to his sister Harlowe, by
a good woman, whom every body respected; who had intimated, that his
niece, if encouraged, would again put herself into the protection of her
friends, and leave you: but if not, that she must unavoidably be your's.'

I hope, Mr. Lovelace, I make no mischief.--You look concerned--you sigh,
Sir.

Proceed, Captain Tomlinson.  Pray proceed.--And I sighed still more
profoundly.

Capt.   'They all thought it extremely particular, that a lady should
decline marriage with a man she had so lately gone away with.'

Pray, Captain--pray, Mr. Tomlinson--no more of this subject.  My beloved
is an angel.  In every thing unblamable.  Whatever faults there have
been, have been theirs and mine.  What you would further say, is, that
the unforgiving family rejected her application.  They did.  She and I
had a misunderstanding.  The falling out of lovers--you know, Captain.
--We have been happier ever since.

Capt.   'Well, Sir; but Mr. John Harlowe could not but better consider
the matter afterwards.  And he desired my advice how to act in it.  He
told me that no father ever loved a daughter as he loved this niece of
his; whom, indeed, he used to call his daughter-niece.  He said, she had
really been unkindly treated by her brother and sister: and as your
alliance, Sir, was far from being a discredit to their family, he would
do his endeavour to reconcile all parties, if he could be sure that ye
were actually man and wife.'

Lovel.   And what, pray, Captain, was your advice?

Capt.   'I gave it as my opinion, that if his niece were unworthily
treated, and in distress, (as he apprehended from the application to
him,) he would soon hear of her again: but that it was likely, that this
application was made without expecting it would succeed; and as a salvo
only, to herself, for marrying without their consent.  And the rather
thought I so, as he had told me, that it came from a young lady her
friend, and not in a direct way from herself; which young lady was no
favourite of the family; and therefore would hardly have been employed,
had success been expected.'

Lovel.   Very well, Captain Tomlinson--pray proceed.

Capt.   'Here the matter rested till last Sunday evening, when Mr. John
Harlowe came to me with the man who had seen you and your lady (as I
presume she is) at the play; and who had assured him, that you both
lodged in the same house.--And then the application having been so lately
made, which implied that you were not then married, he was so uneasy for
his niece's honour, that I advised him to dispatch to town some one in
whom he could confide, to make proper inquiries.'

Lovel.   Very well, Captain--And was such a person employed on such an
errand by her uncle?

Capt.   'A trusty and discreet person was accordingly sent; and last
Tuesday, I think it was, (for he returned to us on the Wednesday,) he
made the inquiries among the neighbours first.'  [The very inquiry, Jack,
that gave us all so much uneasiness.*]  'But finding that none of them
could give any satisfactory account, the lady's woman was come at, who
declared, that you were actually married.  But the inquirist keeping
himself on the reserve as to his employers, the girl refused to tell the
day, or to give him other particulars.'


* See Vol. IV. Letter L.


Lovel.   You give a very clear account of every thing, Captain Tomlinson.
Pray proceed.

Capt.   'The gentleman returned; and, on his report, Mr. Harlowe, having
still doubts, and being willing to proceed on some grounds in so
important a point, besought me (as my affairs called me frequently to
town) to undertake this matter.  "You, Mr. Tomlinson, he was pleased to
say, have children of your own: you know the world: you know what I drive
at: you will proceed, I am sure, with understanding and spirit: and
whatever you are satisfied with shall satisfy me."'


Enter Dorcas again in a hurry.

Sir, the gentleman is impatient.

I will attend him presently.

The Captain then accounted for his not calling in person, when he had
reason to think us here.

He said he had business of consequence a few miles out of town, whither
he thought he must have gone yesterday, and having been obliged to put
off his little journey till this day, and understanding that we were
within, not knowing whether he should have such another opportunity, he
was willing to try his good fortune before he set out; and this made him
come booted and spurred, as I saw him.

He dropped a hint in commendation of the people of the house; but it was
in such a way, as to give no room to suspect that he thought it necessary
to inquire after the character of persons, who make so genteel an
appearance, as he observed they do.

And here let me remark, that my beloved might collect another
circumstance in favour of the people below, had she doubted their
characters, from the silence of her uncle's inquirist on Tuesday among
the neighbours.

Capt.   'And now, Sir, that I believe I have satisfied you in every thing
relating to my commission, I hope you will permit me to repeat my
question--which is--'


Enter Dorcas again, out of breath.

Sir, the gentleman will step up to you.  [My lady is impatient.  She
wonders at your honour's delay.  Aside.]

Excuse me, Captain, for one moment.

I have staid my full time, Mr. Lovelace.  What may result from my
question and your answer, whatever it shall be, may take us up time.--
And you are engaged.  Will you permit me to attend you in the morning,
before I set out on my return?

You will then breakfast with me, Captain?

It must be early if I do.  I must reach my own house to-morrow night, or
I shall make the best of wives unhappy.  And I have two or three places
to call at in my way.

It shall be by seven o'clock, if you please, Captain.  We are early
folks.  And this I will tell you, that if ever I am reconciled to a
family so implacable as I have always found the Harlowes to be, it must
be by the mediation of so cool and so moderate a gentleman as yourself.

And so, with the highest civilities on both sides, we parted.  But for
the private satisfaction of so good a man, I left him out of doubt that
we were man and wife, though I did not directly aver it.



LETTER VI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT.


This Captain Tomlinson is one of the happiest as well as one of the best
men in the world.  What would I give to stand as high in my beloved's
opinion as he does! but yet I am as good a man as he, were I to tell my
own story, and have equal credit given to it.  But the devil should have
had him before I had seen him on the account he came upon, had I thought
I should not have answered my principal end in it.  I hinted to thee in
my last what that was.

But to the particulars of the conference between my fair-one and me, on
her hasty messages; which I was loth to come to, because she has had an
half triumph over me in it.

After I had attended the Captain down to the very passage, I returned to
the dining-room, and put on a joyful air, on my beloved's entrance into
it--O my dearest creature, said I, let me congratulate you on a prospect
so agreeable to your wishes!  And I snatched her hand, and smothered it
with kisses.

I was going on; when interrupting me, You see, Mr. Lovelace, said she,
how you have embarrassed yourself by your obliquities!  You see, that you
have not been able to return a direct answer to a plain and honest
question, though upon it depends all the happiness, on the prospect of
which you congratulate me!

You know, my best love, what my prudent, and I will say, my kind motives
were, for giving out that we were married.  You see that I have taken no
advantage of it; and that no inconvenience has followed it.  You see that
your uncle wants only to be assured from ourselves that it is so--

Not another word on this subject, Mr. Lovelace.  I will not only risk,
but I will forfeit, the reconciliation so near my heart, rather than I
will go on to countenance a story so untrue!

My dearest soul--Would you have me appear--

I would have you appear, Sir, as you are!  I am resolved that I will
appear to my uncle's friend, and to my uncle, as I am.

For one week, my dearest life! cannot you for one week--only till the
settlements--

Not for one hour, with my own consent.  You don't know, Sir, how much I
have been afflicted, that I have appeared to the people below what I am
not.  But my uncle, Sir, shall never have it to upbraid me, nor will I to
upbraid myself, that I have wilfully passed upon him in false lights.

What, my dear, would you have me say to the Captain to-morrow morning?  I
have given him room to think--

Then put him right, Mr. Lovelace.  Tell the truth.  Tell him what you
please of the favour of your relations to me: tell him what you will
about the settlements: and if, when drawn, you will submit them to his
perusal and approbation, it will show him how much you are in earnest.

My dearest life!--Do you think that he would disapprove of the terms I
have offered?

No.

Then may I be accursed, if I willingly submit to be trampled under foot
by my enemies!

And may I, Mr. Lovelace, never be happy in this life, if I submit to
the passing upon my uncle Harlowe a wilful and premeditated falshood for
truth!  I have too long laboured under the affliction which the rejection
of all my friends has given me, to purchase my reconciliation with them
now at so dear a price as this of my veracity.

The women below, my dear--

What are the women below to me?--I want not to establish myself with
them.  Need they know all that passes between my relations and you and
me?

Neither are they any thing to me, Madam.  Only, that when, for the sake
of preventing the fatal mischiefs which might have attended your
brother's projects, I have made them think us married, I would not appear
to them in a light which you yourself think so shocking.  By my soul,
Madam, I had rather die, than contradict myself so flagrantly, after I
have related to them so many circumstances of our marriage.

Well, Sir, the women may believe what they please.  That I have given
countenance to what you told them is my error.  The many circumstances
which you own one untruth has drawn you in to relate, is a justification
of my refusal in the present case.

Don't you see, Madam, that your uncle wishes to find that we are married?
May not the ceremony be privately over, before his mediation can take
place?

Urge this point no further, Mr. Lovelace.  If you will not tell the
truth, I will to-morrow morning (if I see Captain Tomlinson) tell it
myself.  Indeed I will.

Will you, Madam, consent that things pass as before with the people
below?  This mediation of Tomlinson may come to nothing.  Your brother's
schemes may be pursued; the rather, that now he will know (perhaps from
your uncle) that you are not under a legal protection.--You will, at
least, consent that things pass here as before?--

To permit this, is to go on in an error, Mr. Lovelace.  But as the
occasion for so doing (if there can be in your opinion an occasion that
will warrant an untruth) will, as I presume, soon be over, I shall the
less dispute that point with you.  But a new error I will not be guilty
of, if I can avoid it.

Can I, do you think, Madam, have any dishonourable view in the step I
supposed you would not scruple to take towards a reconciliation with your
own family?  Not for my own sake, you know, did I wish you to take it;
for what is it to me, if I am never reconciled to your family?  I want no
favours from them.

I hope, Mr. Lovelace, there is no occasion, in our present not
disagreeable situation, to answer such a question.  And let me say, that
I shall think my prospects still more agreeable, if, to-morrow morning
you will not only own the very truth, but give my uncle's friend such an
account of the steps you have taken, and are taking, as may keep up my
uncle's favourable intentions towards me.  This you may do under what
restrictions of secrecy you please.  Captain Tomlinson is a prudent man;
a promoter of family-peace, you find; and, I dare say, may be made a
friend.

I saw there was no help.  I saw that the inflexible Harlowe spirit was
all up in her.--A little witch!--A little--Forgive me, Love, for calling
her names!  And so I said, with an air, We have had too many
misunderstandings, Madam, for me to wish for new ones: I will obey you
without reserve.  Had I not thought I should have obliged you by the
other method, (especially as the ceremony might have been over before any
thing could have operated from your uncle's intentions, and of
consequence no untruth persisted in,) I would not have proposed it.  But
think not, my beloved creature, that you shall enjoy, without condition,
this triumph over my judgment.

And then, clasping my arms about her, I gave her averted cheek (her
charming lip designed) a fervent kiss.--And your forgiveness of this
sweet freedom [bowing] is that condition.

She was not mortally offended.  And now must I make out the rest as well
as I can.  But this I will tell thee, that although her triumph has not
diminished my love for her, yet it has stimulated me more than ever to
revenge, as thou wilt be apt to call it.  But victory, or conquest, is
the more proper word.

There is a pleasure, 'tis true, in subduing one of these watchful
beauties.  But by my soul, Belford, men of our cast take twenty times the
pains to be rogues than it would cost them to be honest; and dearly, with
the sweat of our brows, and to the puzzlement of our brains, (to say
nothing of the hazards we run,) do we earn our purchase; and ought not
therefore to be grudged our success when we meet with it--especially as,
when we have obtained our end, satiety soon follows; and leaves us little
or nothing to show for it.  But this, indeed, may be said of all worldly
delights.--And is not that a grave reflection from me?

I was willing to write up to the time.  Although I have not carried my
principal point, I shall make something turn out in my favour from
Captain Tomlinson's errand.  But let me give thee this caution; that thou
do not pretend to judge of my devices by parts; but have patience till
thou seest the whole.  But once more I swear, that I will not be
out-Norris'd by a pair of novices.  And yet I am very apprehensive, at
times, of the consequences of Miss Howe's smuggling scheme.

My conscience, I should think, ought not to reproach me for a
contrivance, which is justified by the contrivances of two such girls as
these: one of whom (the more excellent of the two) I have always, with
her own approbation, as I imagine, proposed for my imitation.

But here, Jack, is the thing that concludes me, and cases my heart with
adamant: I find, by Miss Howe's letters, that it is owing to her, that I
have made no greater progress with my blooming fair-one.  She loves me.
The ipecacuanha contrivance convinces me that she loves me.  Where there
is love there must be confidence, or a desire of having reason to
confide.  Generosity, founded on my supposed generosity, has taken hold
of her heart.  Shall I not now see (since I must forever be unhappy, if I
marry her, and leave any trial unessayed) what I can make of her love,
and her newly-raised confidence?--Will it not be to my glory to succeed?
And to her's and to the honour of her sex, if I cannot?--Where then will
be the hurt to either, to make the trial?  And cannot I, as I have often
said,
reward her when I will by marriage?

'Tis late, or rather early; for the day begins to dawn upon me.  I am
plaguy heavy.  Perhaps I need not to have told thee that.  But will only
indulge a doze in my chair for an hour; then shake myself, wash and
refresh.  At my time of life, with such a constitution as I am blessed
with, that's all that's wanted.

Good night to me!--It cannot be broad day till I am
awake.--Aw-w-w-whaugh--pox of this yawning!

Is not thy uncle dead yet?

What's come to mine, that he writes not to my last?--Hunting after more
wisdom of nations, I suppose!--Yaw-yaw-yawning again!--Pen, begone!



LETTER VII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, MAY 29.


Now have I established myself for ever in my charmer's heart.

The Captain came at seven, as promised, and ready equipped for his
journey.  My beloved chose not to give us her company till our first
conversation was over--ashamed, I suppose, to be present at that part of
it which was to restore her to her virgin state by my confession, after
her wifehood had been reported to her uncle.  But she took her cue,
nevertheless, and listened to all that passed.

The modestest women, Jack, must think, and think deeply sometimes.  I
wonder whether they ever blush at those things by themselves, at which
they have so charming a knack of blushing in company.  If not; and if
blushing be a sign of grace or modesty; have not the sex as great a
command over their blushes as they are said to have over their tears?
This reflection would lead me a great way into female minds, were I
disposed to pursue it.

I told the Captain, that I would prevent his question; and accordingly
(after I had enjoined the strictest secrecy, that no advantage might be
given to James Harlowe, and which he had answered for as well on Mr.
Harlowe's part as his own) I acknowledged nakedly and fairly the whole
truth--to wit, 'That we were not yet married.  I gave him hints of the
causes of procrastination.  Some of them owing to unhappy
misunderstandings: but chiefly to the Lady's desire of previous
reconciliation with her friends; and to a delicacy that had no example.'

Less nice ladies than this, Jack, love to have delays, wilful and studied
delays, imputed to them in these cases--yet are indelicate in their
affected delicacy: For do they not thereby tacitly confess, that they
expect to be the greatest estgainers in wedlock; and that there is
self-denial in the pride they take in delaying?

'I told him the reason of our passing to the people below as married--yet
as under a vow of restriction, as to consummation, which had kept us both
to the height, one of forbearing, the other of vigilant punctilio; even
to the denial of those innocent freedoms, which betrothed lovers never
scruple to allow and to take.

'I then communicated to him a copy of my proposal of settlement; the
substance of her written answer; the contents of my letter of invitation
to Lord M. to be her nuptial-father; and of my Lord's generous reply.
But said, that having apprehensions of delay from his infirmities, and my
beloved choosing by all means (and that from principles of unrequited
duty) a private solemnization, I had written to excuse his Lordship's
presence; and expected an answer every hour.

'The settlements, I told him, were actually drawing by Counsellor
Williams, of whose eminence he must have heard--'

He had.

'And of the truth of this he might satisfy himself before he went out of
town.

'When these were drawn, approved, and engrossed, nothing, I said, but
signing, and the nomination of my happy day, would be wanting.  I had a
pride, I declared, in doing the highest justice to so beloved a creature,
of my own voluntary motion, and without the intervention of a family from
whom I had received the greatest insults.  And this being our present
situation, I was contented that Mr. John Harlowe should suspend his
reconciliatory purposes till our marriage were actually solemnized.'

The Captain was highly delighted with all I said: Yet owned, that as his
dear friend Mr. Harlowe had expressed himself greatly pleased to hear
that we were actually married, he could have wished it had been so.  But,
nevertheless, he doubted not that all would be well.

He saw my reasons, he said, and approved of them, for making the
gentlewomen below [whom again he understood to be good sort of people]
believe that the ceremony had passed; which so well accounted for what
the lady's maid had told Mr. Harlowe's friend.  Mr. James Harlowe, he
said, had certainly ends to answer in keeping open the breach; and as
certainly had formed a design to get his sister out of my hands.
Wherefore it as much imported his worthy friend to keep this treaty as
secret, as it did me; at least till he had formed his party, and taken
his measures.  Ill will and passion were dreadful misrepresenters.  It
was amazing to him, that animosity could be carried so high against a man
capable of views so pacific and so honourable, and who had shown such a
command of his temper, in this whole transaction, as I had done.
Generosity, indeed, in every case, where love of stratagem and intrigue
(I would excuse him) were not concerned, was a part of my character.

He was proceeding, when, breakfast being ready, in came the empress of my
heart, irradiating all around her, as with a glory--a benignity and
graciousness in her aspect, that, though natural to it, had been long
banished from it.

Next to prostration lowly bowed the Captain.  O how the sweet creature
smiled her approbation of him!  Reverence from one begets reverence from
another.  Men are more of monkeys in imitation than they think
themselves.--Involuntarily, in a manner, I bent my knee--My dearest
life--and made a very fine speech on presenting the Captain to her.  No
title myself, to her lip or cheek, 'tis well he attempted not either.  He
was indeed ready to worship her;--could only touch her charming hand.

I have told the Captain, my dear creature--and then I briefly repeated
(as if I had supposed she had not heard it) all I had told him.

He was astonished, that any body could be displeased one moment with such
an angel.  He undertook her cause as the highest degree of merit to
himself.

Never, I must need say, did an angel so much look the angel.  All placid,
serene, smiling, self-assured: a more lovely flush than usual heightening
her natural graces, and adding charms, even to radiance, to her charming
complexion.

After we had seated ourselves, the agreeable subject was renewed, as we
took our chocolate.  How happy should she be in her uncle's restored
favour!

The Captain engaged for it--No more delays, he hoped, on her part!  Let
the happy day be but once over, all would then be right.  But was it
improper to ask for copies of my proposals, and of her answer, in order
to show them to his dear friend, her uncle?

As Mr. Lovelace pleased.--O that the dear creature would always say so!

It must be in strict confidence then, I said.  But would it not be better
to show her uncle the draught of the settlements, when drawn?

And will you be so good as to allow of this, Mr. Lovelace?

There, Belford!  We were once the quarrelsome, but now we are the polite,
lovers.

Indeed, my dear creature, I will, if you desire it, and if Captain
Tomlinson will engage that Mr. Harlowe shall keep them absolutely a
secret; that I may not be subjected to the cavil and controul of any
others of a family that have used me so very ill.

Now, indeed, Sir, you are very obliging.

Dost think, Jack, that my face did not now also shine?

I held out my hand, (first consecrating it with a kiss,) for her's.  She
condescended to give it me.  I pressed it to my lips: You know not
Captain Tomlinson, (with an air,) all storms overblown, what a happy
man--

Charming couple! [his hands lifted up,] how will my good friend rejoice!
O that he were present!  You know not, Madam, how dear you still are to
your uncle Harlowe!

I am still unhappy ever to have disobliged him!

Not too much of that, however, fairest, thought I!

The Captain repeated his resolution of service, and that in so acceptable
a manner, that the dear creature wished that neither he, nor any of his,
might ever want a friend of equal benevolence.

Nor any of this, she said; for the Captain brought it in, that he had
five children living, by one of the best wives and mothers, whose
excellent management made him as happy as if his eight hundred pounds a
year (which was all he had to boast of) were two thousand.

Without economy, the oracular lady said, no estate was large enough.
With it, the least was not too small.

Lie still, teasing villain! lie still.--I was only speaking to my
conscience, Jack.

And let me ask you, Mr. Lovelace, said the Captain; yet not so much from
doubt, as that I may proceed upon sure grounds--You are willing to
co-operate with my dear friend in a general reconciliation?

Let me tell you, Mr. Tomlinson, that if it can be distinguished, that my
readiness to make up with a family, of whose generosity I have not had
reason to think highly, is entirely owing to the value I have for this
angel of a woman, I will not only co-operate with Mr. John Harlowe, as
you ask; but I will meet with Mr. James Harlowe senior, and his lady, all
the way.  And furthermore, to make the son James and his sister Arabella
quite easy, I will absolutely disclaim any further interest, whether
living or dying, in any of the three brothers' estates; contenting myself
with what my beloved's grandfather had bequeathed to her: for I have
reason to be abundantly satisfied with my own circumstances and
prospects--enough rewarded, were she not to bring a shilling in dowry, in
a woman who has a merit superior to all the goods of fortune.--True as
the Gospel, Belford!--Why had not this scene a real foundation?

The dear creature, by her eyes, expressed her gratitude, before her lips
could utter it.  O Mr. Lovelace, said she--you have infinitely--And there
she stopt.

The Captain run over in my praise.  He was really affected.

O that I had not such a mixture of revenge and pride in my love, thought
I!--But, (my old plea,) cannot I make her amends at any time?  And is not
her virtue now in the height of its probation?--Would she lay aside, like
the friends of my uncontending Rosebud, all thoughts of defiance--Would
she throw herself upon my mercy, and try me but one fortnight in the life
of honour--What then?--I cannot say, What then--

Do not despise me, Jack, for my inconsistency--in no two letters perhaps
agreeing with myself--Who expects consistency in men of our
character?--But I am mad with love--fired by revenge--puzzled with my own
devices--my invention is my curse--my pride my punishment--drawn five or
six ways at once, can she possibly be so unhappy as I?--O why, why, was
this woman so divinely excellent!--Yet how know I that she is?  What have
been her trials?  Have I had the courage to make a single one upon her
person, though a thousand upon her temper?--Enow, I hope, to make her
afraid of ever more disobliging me more!--


***


I must banish reflection, or I am a lost man.  For these two hours past
have I hated myself for my own contrivances.  And this not only from what
I have related to thee; but for what I have further to relate.  But I
have now once more steeled my heart.  My vengeance is uppermost; for I
have been reperusing some of Miss Howe's virulence.  The contempt they
have both held me in I cannot bear.

The happiest breakfast-time, my beloved owned, that she had ever known
since she had left her father's house.  [She might have let this alone.]
The Captain renewed all his protestations of service.  He would write me
word how his dear friend received the account he should give him of the
happy situation of our affairs, and what he thought of the settlements,
as soon as I should send him the draughts so kindly promised.  And we
parted with great professions of mutual esteem; my beloved putting up
vows for the success of his generous mediation.

When I returned from attending the Captain down stairs, which I did to
the outward door, my beloved met me as I entered the dining-room;
complacency reigning in every lovely feature.

'You see me already,' said she, 'another creature.  You know not, Mr.
Lovelace, how near my heart this hoped-for reconciliation is.  I am now
willing to banish every disagreeable remembrance.  You know not, Sir, how
much you have obliged me.  And O Mr. Lovelace, how happy I shall be, when
my heart is lightened from the all-sinking weight of a father's curse!
When my dear mamma--You don't know, Sir, half the excellencies of my dear
mamma! and what a kind heart she has, when it is left to follow its own
impulses--When this blessed mamma shall once more fold me to her
indulgent bosom!  When I shall again have uncles and aunts, and a brother
and sister, all striving who shall show most kindness and favour to the
poor outcast, then no more an outcast--And you, Mr. Lovelace, to behold
all this, with welcome--What though a little cold at first? when they
come to know you better, and to see you oftener, no fresh causes of
disgust occurring, and you, as I hope, having entered upon a new course,
all will be warmer and warmer love on both sides, till every one will
perhaps wonder, how they came to set themselves against you.'

Then drying her tears with her handkerchief, after a few moments pausing,
on a sudden, as if recollecting that she had been led by her joy to an
expression of it which she had not intended I should see, she retired to
her chamber with precipitation; leaving me almost as unable to stand it
as herself.

In short, I was--I want words to say how I was--my nose had been made to
tingle before; my eyes have before been made to glisten by this
soul-moving beauty; but so very much affected, I never was--for, trying
to check my sensibility, it was too strong for me, and I even sobbed--
Yes, by my soul, I audibly sobbed, and was forced to turn from her before
she had well finished her affecting speech.

I want, methinks, now I have owned the odd sensation, to describe it to
thee--the thing was so strange to me--something choking, as it were, in
my throat--I know not how--yet, I must needs say, though I am out of
countenance upon the recollection, that there was something very pretty
in it; and I wish I could know it again, that I might have a more perfect
idea of it, and be better able to describe it to thee.

But this effect of her joy on such an occasion gives me a high notion of
what that virtue must be [What other name can I call it?] which in a mind
so capable of delicate transport, should be able to make so charming a
creature, in her very bloom, all frost and snow to every advance of love
from the man she hates not.  This must be all from education too--Must it
not, Belford?  Can education have stronger force in a woman's heart than
nature?--Sure it cannot.  But if it can, how entirely right are parents
to cultivate their daughters' minds, and to inspire them with notions of
reserve and distance to our sex: and indeed to make them think highly of
their own! for pride is an excellent substitute, let me tell thee, where
virtue shines not out, as the sun, in its own unborrowed lustre.



LETTER VIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


And now it is time to confess (and yet I know that thy conjectures are
aforehand with my exposition) that this Captain Tomlinson, who is so
great a favourite with my charmer, and who takes so much delight in
healing breaches, and reconciling differences, is neither a greater man
nor a less than honest Patrick M'Donald, attended by a discarded footman
of his own finding out.

Thou knowest what a various-lifed rascal he is; and to what better hopes
born and educated.  But that ingenious knack of forgery, for which he was
expelled the Dublin-University, and a detection since in evidenceship,
have been his ruin.  For these have thrown him from one country to
another; and at last, into the way of life, which would make him a fit
husband for Miss Howe's Townsend with her contrabands.  He is, thou
knowest, admirably qualified for any enterprize that requires adroitness
and solemnity.  And can there, after all, be a higher piece of justice,
than to keep one smuggler in readiness to play against another?

'Well, but, Lovelace, (methinks thou questionest,) how camest thou to
venture upon such a contrivance as this, when, as thou hast told me, the
Lady used to be a month at a time at this uncle's; and must therefore, in
all probability, know, that there was not a Captain Tomlinson in all the
neighbourhood, at least no one of the name so intimate with him as this
man pretends to be?'

This objection, Jack, is so natural a one, that I could not help
observing to my charmer, that she must surely have heard her uncle speak
of this gentleman.  No, she said, she never had.  Besides she had not
been at her uncle Harlowe's for near ten months [this I had heard from
her before]: and there were several gentlemen who used the same green,
whom she knew not.

We are all very ready, thou knowest, to believe what she likes.

And what was the reason, thinkest thou, that she had not been of so long
a time at this uncle's?--Why, this old sinner, who imagines himself
entitled to call me to account for my freedoms with the sex, has lately
fallen into familiarities, as it is suspected, with his housekeeper; who
assumes airs upon it.--A cursed deluding sex!--In youth, middle age, or
dotage, they take us all in.

Dost thou not see, however, that this housekeeper knows nothing, nor is
to know any thing, of the treaty of reconciliation designed to be set on
foot; and therefore the uncle always comes to the Captain, the Captain
goes not to the uncle?  And this I surmised to the lady.  And then it was
a natural suggestion, that the Captain was the rather applied to, as he
is a stranger to the rest of the family--Need I tell thee the meaning of
all this?

But this intrigue of the antient is a piece of private history, the truth
of which my beloved cares not to own, and indeed affects to disbelieve:
as she does also some puisny gallantries of her foolish brother; which,
by way of recrimination, I have hinted at, without naming my informant in
their family.

'Well but, methinks, thou questionest again, Is it not probable that Miss
Howe will make inquiry after such a man as Tomlinson?--And when she
cannot--'

I know what thou wouldst say--but I have no doubt, that Wilson will be so
good, if I desire it, as to give into my own hands any letter that may be
brought by Collins to his house, for a week to come.  And now I hope thou
art satisfied.

I will conclude with a short story.

'Two neighbouring sovereigns were at war together, about some pitiful
chuck-farthing thing or other; no matter what; for the least trifles will
set princes and children at loggerheads.  Their armies had been drawn up
in battalia some days, and the news of a decisive action was expected
every hour to arrive at each court.  At last, issue was joined; a bloody
battle was fought; and a fellow who had been a spectator of it, arriving,
with the news of a complete victory, at the capital of one of the princes
some time before the appointed couriers, the bells were set a ringing,
bonfires and illuminations were made, and the people went to bed
intoxicated with joy and good liquor.  But the next day all was reversed:
The victorious enemy, pursuing his advantage, was expected every hour at
the gates of the almost defenceless capital.  The first reporter was
hereupon sought for, and found; and being questioned, pleaded a great
deal of merit, in that he had, in so dismal a situation, taken such a
space of time from the distress of his fellow-citizens, and given it to
festivity, as were the hours between the false good news and the real
bad.'

Do thou, Belford, make the application.  This I know, that I have given
greater joy to my beloved, than she had thought would so soon fall to her
share.  And as the human life is properly said to be chequerwork, no
doubt but a person of her prudence will make the best of it, and set off
so much good against so much bad, in order to strike as just a balance as
possible.


[The Lady, in three several letters, acquaints her friend with the most
material passages and conversations contained in those of Mr. Lovelace's
preceding.  These are her words, on relating what the commission of the
pretended Tomlinson was, after the apprehensions that his distant inquiry
had given her:]

At last, my dear, all these doubts and fears were cleared up, and
banished; and, in their place, a delightful prospect was opened to me.
For it comes happily out, (but at present it must be an absolute secret,
for reasons which I shall mention in the sequel,) that the gentleman was
sent by my uncle Harlowe [I thought he could not be angry with me for
ever]: all owing to the conversation that passed between your good Mr.
Hickman and him.  For although Mr. Hickman's application was too harshly
rejected at the time, my uncle could not but think better of it
afterwards, and of the arguments that worthy gentleman used in my favour.

Who, upon a passionate repulse, would despair of having a reasonable
request granted?--Who would not, by gentleness and condescension,
endeavour to leave favourable impressions upon an angry mind; which, when
it comes coolly to reflect, may induce it to work itself into a
condescending temper?  To request a favour, as I have often said, is one
thing; to challenge it as our due, is another.  And what right has a
petitioner to be angry at a repulse, if he has not a right to demand what
he sues for as a debt?


[She describes Captain Tomlinson, on his breakfast-visit, to be, a grave,
good sort of man.  And in another place, a genteel man  of great gravity,
and a good aspect; she believes upwards of fifty years of age.  'I liked
him, says she, as soon as I saw him.'

As her projects are now, she says, more favourable than heretofore, she
wishes, that her hopes of Mr. Lovelace's so-often-promised reformation
were better grounded than she is afraid they can be.]

We have both been extremely puzzled, my dear, says she, to reconcile some
parts of Mr. Lovelace's character with other parts of it: his good with
his bad; such of the former, in particular, as his generosity to his
tenants; his bounty to the innkeeper's daughter; his readiness to put me
upon doing kind things by my good Norton, and others.

A strange mixture in his mind, as I have told him! for he is certainly
(as I have reason to say, looking back upon his past behaviour to me in
twenty instances) a hard-hearted man.--Indeed, my dear, I have thought
more than once, that he had rather see me in tears than give me reason to
be pleased with him.

My cousin Morden says, that free livers are remorseless.*  And so they
must be in the very nature of things.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XIX.  See also Mr. Lovelace's own confession of the
delight he takes in a woman's tears, in different parts of his letters.


Mr. Lovelace is a proud man.  We have both long ago observed that he is.
And I am truly afraid, that his very generosity is more owing to his
pride and his vanity, that that philanthropy (shall I call it?) which
distinguishes a beneficent mind.

Money he values not, but as a mean to support his pride and his
independence.  And it is easy, as I have often thought, for a person to
part with a secondary appetite, when, by so doing, he can promote or
gratify a first.

I am afraid, my dear, that there must have been some fault in his
education.  His natural bias was not, perhaps (as his power was likely to
be large) to do good and beneficent actions; but not, I doubt, from
proper motives.

If he had, his generosity would not have stopt at pride, but would have
struck into humanity; and then would he not have contented himself with
doing praiseworthy things by fits and starts, or, as if relying on the
doctrine of merits, he hoped by a good action to atone for a bad one;*
but he would have been uniformly noble, and done the good for its own
sake.


* That the Lady judges rightly of him in this place, see Vol. I. Letter
XXXIV. where, giving the motive for his generosity to his Rosebud, he
says--'As I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very capital
enormity, to do some good by way of atonement; and as I believe I am a
pretty deal indebted on that score; I intend to join an hundred pounds to
Johnny's aunt's hundred pounds, to make one innocent couple happy.'--
Besides which motive, he had a further view in answer in that instance of
his generosity; as may be seen in Vol. II. Letters XXVI. XXVII. XXVIII.
See also the note, Vol. II. pp. 170, 171.

To show the consistence of his actions, as they now appear, with his
views and principles, as he lays them down in his first letters, it may
be not amiss to refer the reader to his letters, Vol. I. No. XXXIV. XXXV.

See also Vol. I. Letter XXX.--and Letter XL. for Clarissa's early opinion
of Mr. Lovelace.--Whence the coldness and indifference to him, which he
so repeatedly accuses her of, will be accounted for, more to her glory,
than to his honour.


O my dear! what a lot have I drawn! pride, this poor man's virtue; and
revenge, his other predominating quality!--This one consolation, however,
remains:--He is not an infidel, and unbeliever: had he been an infidel,
there would have been no room at all for hope of him; (but priding
himself, as he does, in his fertile invention) he would have been utterly
abandoned, irreclaimable, and a savage.


[When she comes to relate those occasions, which Mr. Lovelace in his
narrative acknowledges himself to be affected by, she thus expresses
herself:]

He endeavoured, as once before, to conceal his emotion.  But why, my
dear, should these men (for Mr. Lovelace is not singular in this) think
themselves above giving these beautiful proofs of a feeling heart?  Were
it in my power again to choose, or to refuse, I would reject the man with
contempt, who sought to suppress, or offered to deny, the power  of being
visibly affected upon proper occasions, as either a savage-hearted
creature, or as one who was so ignorant of the principal glory of the
human nature, as to place his pride in a barbarous insensibility.

These lines translated from Juvenal by Mr. Tate, I have been often
pleased with:

         Compassion proper to mankind appears:
      Which Nature witness'd, when she lent us tears.
      Of tender sentiments we only give
      These proofs: To weep is our prerogative:
      To show by pitying looks, and melting eyes,
      How with a suff'ring friend we sympathise.
         Who can all sense of other ills escape,
         Is but a brute at best, in human shape.

It cannot but yield me some pleasure, hardly as I have sometimes thought
of the people of the house, that such a good man as Captain Tomlinson had
spoken well of them, upon inquiry.

And here I stop a minute, my dear, to receive, in fancy, your kind
congratulation.

My next, I hope, will confirm my present, and open still more agreeable
prospects.  Mean time be assured, that there cannot possibly any good
fortune befal me, which I shall look upon with equal delight to that I
have in your friendship.

My thankful compliments to your good Mr. Hickman, to whose kind invention
I am so much obliged on this occasion, conclude me, my dearest Miss Howe,

Your ever affectionate and grateful
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER IX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 30.


I have a letter from Lord M.  Such a one as I would wish for, if I
intended matrimony.  But as matters are circumstanced, I cannot think of
showing it to my beloved.

My Lord regrets, 'that he is not to be the Lady's nuptial father.  He
seems apprehensive that I have still, specious as my reasons are, some
mischief in my head.'

He graciously consents, 'that I may marry when I please; and offers one
or both of my cousins to assist my bride, and to support her spirits on
the occasion; since, as he understands, she is so much afraid to venture
with me.

'Pritchard, he tells me, has his final orders to draw up deeds for
assigning over to me, in perpetuity, 1000L. per annum: which he will
execute the same hour that the lady in person owns her marriage.'

He consents, 'that the jointure be made from my own estate.'

He wishes, 'that the Lady would have accepted of his draught; and
commends me for tendering it to her.  But reproaches me for my pride in
not keeping it myself.  What the right side gives up, the left, he says,
may be the better for.'

The girls, the left-sided girls, he means.

With all my heart.  If I can have my Clarissa, the devil take every thing
else.

A good deal of other stuff writes the stupid peer; scribbling in several
places half a dozen lines, apparently for no other reason but to bring in
as many musty words in an old saw.

If thou sawest, 'How I can manage, since my beloved will wonder that I
have not an answer from my Lord to such a letter as I wrote to him; and
if I own I have one, will expect that I should shew it to her, as I did
my letter?--This I answer--'That I can be informed by Pritchard, that my
Lord has the gout in his right-hand; and has ordered him to attend me in
form, for my particular orders about the transfer:'  And I can see
Pritchard, thou knowest, at the King's Arms, or wherever I please, at an
hour's warning; though he be at M. Hall, I in town; and he, by word of
mouth, can acquaint me with every thing in my Lord's letter that is
necessary for my charmer to know.

Whenever it suits me, I can resolve the old peer to his right hand, and
then can make him write a much more sensible letter than this that he has
now sent me.

Thou knowest, that an adroitness in the art of manual imitation, was one
of my earliest attainments.  It has been said, on this occasion, that had
I been a bad man in meum and tuum matters, I should not have been fit to
live.  As to the girls, we hold it no sin to cheat them.  And are we not
told, that in being well deceived consists the whole of human happiness?


WEDNESDAY, MAY 31.

All still happier and happier.  A very high honour done me: a chariot,
instead of a coach, permitted, purposely to indulge me in the subject of
subjects.

Our discourse in this sweet airing turned upon our future manner of life.
The day is bashfully promised me.  Soon was the answer to my repeated
urgency.  Our equipage, our servants, our liveries, were parts of the
delightful subject.  A desire that the wretch who had given me
intelligence out of the family (honest Joseph Leman) might not be one of
our menials; and her resolution to have her faithful Hannah, whether
recovered or not; were signified; and both as readily assented to.

Her wishes, from my attentive behaviour, when with her at St. Paul's,*
that I would often accompany her to the Divine Service, were greatly
intimated, and as readily engaged for.  I assured her, that I ever had
respected the clergy in a body; and some individuals of them (her Dr.
Lewen for one) highly: and that were not going to church an act of
religion, I thought it [as I told thee once] a most agreeable sight to
see rich and poor, all of a company, as I might say, assembled once a
week in one place, and each in his or her best attire, to worship the God
that made them.  Nor could it be a hardship upon a man liberally
educated, to make one on so solemn an occasion, and to hear the harangue
of a man of letters, (though far from being the principal part of the
service, as it is too generally looked upon to be,) whose studies having
taken a different turn from his own, he must always have something new to
say.


* See Vol. IV. Letter V.
** Ibid.


She shook her head, and repeated the word new: but looked as if willing
to be satisfied for the present with this answer.  To be sure, Jack, she
means to do great despight to his Satanic majesty in her hopes of
reforming me.  No wonder, therefore, if he exerts himself to prevent her,
and to be revenged.  But how came this in!--I am ever of party against
myself.--One day, I fancy, I shall hate myself on recollecting what I am
about at this instant.  But I must stay till then.  We must all of us do
something to repent of.

The reconciliation-prospect was enlarged upon.  If her uncle Harlowe will
but pave the way to it, and if it can be brought about, she shall be
happy.--Happy, with a sigh, as it is now possible she can be!

She won't forbear, Jack!

I told her, that I had heard from Pritchard, just before we set out on
our airing, and expected him in town to-morrow from Lord M. to take my
directions.  I spoke with gratitude of my Lord's kindness to me; and with
pleasure of Lady Sarah's, Lady Betty's, and my two cousins Montague's
veneration for her: as also of his Lordship's concern that his gout
hindered him from writing a reply with his own hand to my last.

She pitied my Lord.  She pitied poor Mrs. Fretchville too; for she had
the goodness to inquire after her.  The dear creature pitied every body
that seemed to want pity.  Happy in her own prospects, she had leisure to
look abroad, and wishes every body equally happy.

It is likely to go very hard with Mrs. Fretchville.  Her face, which she
had valued herself upon, will be utterly ruined.  'This good, however, as
I could not but observe, she may reap from so great an evil--as the
greater malady generally swallows up the less, she may have a grief on
this occasion, that may diminish the other grief, and make it tolerable.'

I had a gentle reprimand for this light turn on so heavy an evil--'For
what was the loss of beauty to the loss of a good husband?'--Excellent
creature!

Her hopes (and her pleasure upon those hopes) that Miss Howe's mother
would be reconciled to her, were also mentioned.  Good Mrs. Howe was her
word, for a woman so covetous, and so remorseless in her covetousness,
that no one else will call her good.  But this dear creature has such an
extension in her love, as to be capable of valuing the most insignificant
animal related to those whom she respects.  Love me, and love my dog, I
have heard Lord M. say.--Who knows, but that I may in time, in compliment
to myself, bring her to think well of thee, Jack?

But what am I about?  Am I not all this time arraigning my own heart?--I
know I am, by the remorse I feel in it, while my pen bears testimony to
her excellence.  But yet I must add (for no selfish consideration shall
hinder me from doing justice to this admirable creature) that in this
conversation she demonstrated so much prudent knowledge in every thing
that relates to that part of the domestic management which falls under
the care of a mistress of a family, that I believe she has no equal of
her years in the world.

But, indeed, I know not the subject on which she does not talk with
admirable distinction; insomuch that could I but get over my prejudices
against matrimony, and resolve to walk in the dull beaten path of my
ancestors, I should be the happiest of men--and if I cannot, I may be ten
times more to be pitied than she.

My heart, my heart, Belford, is not to be trusted--I break off, to
re-peruse some of Miss Howe's virulence.


***


Cursed letters, these of Miss Howe, Jack!--Do thou turn back to those of
mine, where I take notice of them--I proceed--

Upon the whole, my charmer was all gentleness, all ease, all serenity,
throughout this sweet excursion.  Nor had she reason to be otherwise: for
it being the first time that I had the honour of her company alone, I was
resolved to encourage her, by my respectfulness, to repeat the favour.

On our return, I found the counsellor's clerk waiting for me, with a
draught of the marriage-settlements.

They are drawn, with only the necessary variations, from those made for
my mother.  The original of which (now returned by the counsellor) as
well as the new draughts, I have put into my beloved's hands.

These settlements of my mother made the lawyer's work easy; nor can she
have a better precedent; the great Lord S. having settled them, at the
request of my mother's relations; all the difference, my charmer's are
100l. per annum more than my mother's.

I offered to read to her the old deed, while she looked over the draught;
for she had refused her presence at the examination with the clerk: but
this she also declined.

I suppose she did not care to hear of so many children, first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh sons, and as many daughters, to
be begotten upon the body of the said Clarissa Harlowe.

Charming matrimonial recitativoes!--though it is always said lawfully
begotten too--as if a man could beget children unlawfully upon the body
of his own wife.--But thinkest thou not that these arch rogues the
lawyers hereby intimate, that a man may have children by his wife before
marriage?--This must be what they mean.  Why will these sly fellows put
an honest man in minds of such rogueries?--but hence, as in  numberless
other instances, we see, that law and gospel are two very different
things.

Dorcas, in our absence, tried to get at the wainscot-box in the dark
closet.  But it cannot be done without violence.  And to run a risk of
consequence now, for mere curiosity-sake, would be inexcusable.

Mrs. Sinclair and the nymphs are all of opinion, that I am now so much a
favourite, and have such a visible share in her confidence, and even in
her affections, that I may do what I will, and plead for excuse violence
of passion; which, they will have it, makes violence of action pardonable
with their sex; as well as allowed extenuation with the unconcerned of
both sexes; and they all offer their helping hands.  Why not? they say:
Has she not passed for my wife before them all?--And is she not in a fine
way of being reconciled to her friends?--And was not the want of that
reconciliation the pretence for postponing the consummation?

They again urge me, since it is so difficult to make night my friend, to
an attempt in the day.  They remind me, that the situation of their house
is such, that no noises can be heard out of it; and ridicule me for
making it necessary for a lady to be undressed.  It was not always so
with me, poor old man! Sally told me; saucily flinging her handkerchief
in my face.



LETTER X

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JUNE 2.


Notwithstanding my studied-for politeness and complaisance for some days
past; and though I have wanted courage to throw the mask quite aside; yet
I have made the dear creature more than once look about her, by the warm,
though decent expression of my passion.  I have brought her to own, that
I am more than indifferent with her: but as to LOVE, which I pressed her
to acknowledge, what need of acknowledgments of that sort, when a woman
consents to marrying?--And once repulsing me with displeasure, the proof
of true love I was vowing for her, was RESPECT, not FREEDOM.  And
offering to defend myself, she told me, that all the conception she had
been able to form of a faulty passion, was, that it must demonstrate
itself as mine sought to do.

I endeavoured to justify my passion, by laying over-delicacy at her door.
Over-delicacy, she said, was not my fault, if it were her's.  She must
plainly tell me, that I appeared to her incapable of distinguishing what
were the requisites of a pure mind.  Perhaps, had the libertine
presumption to imagine, that there was no difference in heart, nor any
but what proceeded from difference of education and custom, between the
pure and impure--and yet custom alone, as she observed, if I did so
think, would make a second nature, as well in good as in bad habits.


***


I have just now been called to account for some innocent liberties which
I thought myself entitled to take before the women; as they suppose us to
be married, and now within view of consummation.

I took the lecture very hardly; and with impatience wished for the happy
day and hour when I might call her all my own, and meet with no check
from a niceness that had no example.

She looked at me with a bashful kind of contempt.  I thought it contempt,
and required the reason for it; not being conscious of offence, as I told
her.

This is not the first time, Mr. Lovelace, said she, that I have had cause
to be displeased with you, when you, perhaps, have not thought yourself
exceptionable.--But, Sir, let me tell you, that the married state, in my
eye, is a state of purity, and [I think she told me] not of
licentiousness; so, at least, I understood her.

Marriage-purity, Jack!--Very comical, 'faith--yet, sweet dears, half the
female world ready to run away with a rake, because he is a rake; and for
no other reason; nay, every other reason against their choice of such a
one.

But have not you and I, Belford, seen young wives, who would be thought
modest! and, when maids, were fantastically shy; permit freedoms in
public from their uxorious husbands, which have shown, that both of them
have forgotten what belongs either to prudence or decency? while every
modest eye has sunk under the shameless effrontery, and every modest face
been covered with blushes for those who could not blush.

I once, upon such an occasion, proposed to a circle of a dozen, thus
scandalized, to withdraw; since they must needs see that as well the
lady, as the gentleman, wanted to be in private.  This motion had its
effect upon the amorous pair; and I was applauded for the check given to
their licentiousness.

But, upon another occasion of this sort, I acted a little more in
character.  For I ventured to make an attempt upon a bride, which I
should not have had the courage to make, had not the unblushing
passiveness with which she received her fond husband's public toyings
(looking round her with triumph rather than with shame, upon every lady
present) incited my curiosity to know if the same complacency might not
be shown to a private friend. 'Tis true, I was in honour obliged to keep
the secret.  But I never saw the turtles bill afterwards, but I thought
of number two to the same female; and in my heart thanked the fond
husband for the lesson he had taught his wife.

From what I have said, thou wilt see, that I approve of my beloved's
exception to public loves.  That, I hope, is all the charming icicle
means by marriage-purity, but to return.

From the whole of what I have mentioned to have passed between my beloved
and me, thou wilt gather, that I have not been a mere dangler, a Hickman,
in the passed days, though not absolutely active, and a Lovelace.

The dear creature now considers herself as my wife-elect.  The unsaddened
heart, no longer prudish, will not now, I hope, give the sable turn to
every address of the man she dislikes not.  And yet she must keep up so
much reserve, as will justify past inflexibilities.  'Many and many a
pretty soul would yield, were she not afraid that the man she favoured
would think the worse of her for it.'  That is also a part of the rake's
creed.  But should she resent ever so strongly, she cannot now break with
me; since, if she does, there will be an end of the family
reconciliation; and that in a way highly discreditable to herself.


SATURDAY, JUNE 3.

Just returned from Doctors Commons.  I have been endeavouring to get a
license.  Very true, Jack.  I have the mortification to find a
difficulty, as the lady is of rank and fortune, and as there is no
consent of father or next friend, in obtaining this all-fettering
instrument.

I made report of this difficulty.  'It is very right,' she says, 'that
such difficulties should be made.'--But not to a man of my known fortune,
surely, Jack, though the woman were the daughter of a duke.

I asked, if she approved of the settlements?  She said, she had compared
them with my mother's, and had no objection to them.  She had written to
Miss Howe upon the subject, she owned; and to inform her of our present
situation.*


* As this letter of the Lady to Miss Howe contains no new matter, but
what may be collected from one of those of Mr. Lovelace, it is omitted.


***


Just now, in high good humour, my beloved returned me the draughts of the
settlements: a copy of which I have sent to Captain Tomlinson.  She
complimented me, 'that she never had any doubt of my honour in cases of
this nature.'

In matters between man and man nobody ever had, thou knowest.

I had need, thou wilt say, to have some good qualities.

Great faults and great virtues are often found in the same person.  In
nothing very bad, but as to women: and did not one of them begin with
me.*


* See Vol. I. Letter XXXI.


We have held, that women have no souls.  I am a very Turk in this point,
and willing to believe they have not.  And if so, to whom shall I be
accountable for what I do to them?  Nay, if souls they have, as there is
no sex in ethereals, nor need of any, what plea can a lady hold of
injuries done her in her lady-state, when there is an end of her
lady-ship?



LETTER XI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, JUNE 5.


I am now almost in despair of succeeding with this charming frost-piece
by love or gentleness.--A copy of the draughts, as I told thee, has been
sent to Captain Tomlinson; and that by a special messenger.  Engrossments
are proceeding with.  I have been again at the Commons.--Should in all
probability have procured a license by Mallory's means, had not Mallory's
friend, the proctor, been suddenly sent for to Chestnut, to make an old
lady's will.  Pritchard has told me by word of mouth, though my charmer
saw him not, all that was necessary for her to know in the letter my Lord
wrote, which I could not show her: and taken my directions about the
estates to be made over to me on my nuptials.--Yet, with all these
favourable appearances, no conceding moment to be found, no improvable
tenderness to be raised.

But never, I believe, was there so true, so delicate a modesty in the
human mind as in that of this lady.  And this has been my security all
along; and, in spite of Miss Howe's advice to her, will be so still;
since, if her delicacy be a fault, she can no more overcome it than I can
my aversion to matrimony.  Habit, habit, Jack, seest thou not? may
subject us both to weaknesses.  And should she not have charity for me,
as I have for her?

Twice indeed with rapture, which once she called rude, did I salute her;
and each time resenting the freedom, did she retire; though, to do her
justice, she favoured me again with her presence at my first entreaty,
and took no notice of the cause of her withdrawing.

Is it policy to show so open a resentment for innocent liberties, which,
in her situation, she must so soon forgive?

Yet the woman who resents not initiatory freedoms must be lost.  For love
is an encroacher.  Love never goes backward.  Love is always aspiring.
Always must aspire.  Nothing but the highest act of love can satisfy an
indulged love.  And what advantages has a lover, who values not breaking
the peace, over his mistress who is solicitous to keep it!

I have now at this instant wrought myself up, for the dozenth time, to a
half-resolution.  A thousand agreeable things I have to say to her.  She
is in the dining-room.  Just gone up.  She always expects me when there.


***


High displeasure!--followed by an abrupt departure.

I sat down by her.  I took both her hands in mine.  I would have it so.
All gentle my voice.  Her father mentioned with respect.  Her mother with
reverence.  Even her brother amicably spoken of.  I never thought I could
have wished so ardently, as I told her I did wish, for a reconciliation
with her family.

A sweet and grateful flush then overspread her fair face; a gentle sigh
now-and-then heaved her handkerchief.

I perfectly longed to hear from Captain Tomlinson.  It was impossible for
the uncle to find fault with the draught of the settlements.  I would
not, however, be understood, by sending them down, that I intended to put
it in her uncle's power to delay my happy day.  When, when was it to be?

I would hasten again to the Commons; and would not return without the
license.

The Lawn I proposed to retire to, as soon as the happy ceremony was over.
This day and that day I proposed.

It was time enough to name the day, when the settlements were completed,
and the license obtained.  Happy should she be, could the kind Captain
Tomlinson obtain her uncle's presence privately.

A good hint!--It may perhaps be improved upon--either for a delay or a
pacifier.

No new delays for Heaven's sake, I besought her; and reproached her
gently for the past.  Name but the day--(an early day, I hoped it would
be, in the following week)--that I might hail its approach, and number
the tardy hours.

My cheek reclined on her shoulder--kissing her hands by turns.  Rather
bashfully than angrily reluctant, her hands sought to be withdrawn; her
shoulder avoiding my reclined cheek--apparently loth, and more loth to
quarrel with me; her downcast eye confessing more than her lips can
utter.  Now surely, thought I, is my time to try if she can forgive a
still bolder freedom than I had ever yet taken.

I then gave her struggling hands liberty.  I put one arm round her waist:
I imprinted a kiss on her sweet lip, with a Be quiet only, and an averted
face, as if she feared another.

Encouraged by so gentle a repulse, the tenderest things I said; and then,
with my other hand, drew aside the handkerchief that concealed the beauty
of beauties, and pressed with my burning lips the most charming breast
that ever my ravished eyes beheld.

A very contrary passion to that which gave her bosom so delightful a
swell, immediately took place.  She struggled out of my encircling arms
with indignation.  I detained her reluctant hand.  Let me go, said she.
I see there is no keeping terms with you.  Base encroacher!  Is this the
design of your flattering speeches?  Far as matters have gone, I will for
ever renounce you.  You have an odious heart.  Let me go,  I tell you.

I was forced to obey, and she flung from me, repeating base, and adding
flattering, encroacher.


***


In vain have I urged by Dorcas for the promised favour of dining with her.
She would not dine at all.  She could not.

But why makes she every inch of her person thus sacred?--So near the time
too, that she must suppose, that all will be my own by deed of purchase
and settlement?

She has read, no doubt, of the art of the eastern monarchs, who sequester
themselves from the eyes of their subjects, in order to excite their
adoration, when, upon some solemn occasions, they think fit to appear in
public.

But let me ask thee, Belford, whether (on these solemn occasions) the
preceding cavalcade; here a greater officer, and there a great minister,
with their satellites, and glaring equipages; do not prepare the eyes of
the wondering beholders, by degrees, to bear the blaze of canopy'd
majesty (what though but an ugly old man perhaps himself? yet) glittering
in the collected riches of his vast empire?

And should not my beloved, for her own sake, descend, by degrees, from
goddess-hood into humanity?  If it be pride that restrains her, ought not
that pride to be punished?  If, as in the eastern emperors, it be art as
well as pride, art is what she of all women need not use.  If shame, what
a shame to be ashamed to communicate to her adorer's sight the most
admirable of her personal graces?

Let me perish, Belford, if I would not forego the brightest diadem in the
world, for the pleasure of seeing a twin Lovelace at each charming
breast, drawing from it his first sustenance; the pious task, for
physical reasons,* continued for one month and no more!


* In Pamela, Vol. III. Letter XXXII. these reasons are given, and are
worthy of every parent's consideration, as is the whole Letter, which
contains the debate between Mr. B. and his Pamela, on the important
subject of mothers being nurses to their own children.


I now, methinks, behold this most charming of women in this sweet office:
her conscious eye  now dropt on one, now on the other, with a sigh of
maternal tenderness, and then raised up to my delighted eye, full of
wishes, for the sake of the pretty varlets, and for her own sake, that I
would deign to legitimate; that I would condescend to put on the nuptial
fetters.



LETTER XII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY AFTERNOON.


A letter received from the worthy Captain Tomlinson has introduced me
into the presence of my charmer sooner than perhaps I should otherwise
have been admitted.

Sullen her brow, at her first entrance into the dining-room.  But I took
no notice of what had passed, and her anger of itself subsided.

'The Captain, after letting me know that he chose not to write till he
had promised the draught of the settlements, acquaint me, that his friend
Mr. John Harlowe, in their first conference (which was held as soon as he
got down) was extremely surprised, and even grieved (as he feared he
would be) to hear that we were not married.  The world, he said, who knew
my character, would be very censorious, were it owned, that we had lived
so long together unmarried in the same lodgings; although our marriage
were now to be ever so publicly celebrated.

'His nephew James, he was sure, would make a great handle of it against
any motion that might be made towards a reconciliation; and with the
greater success, as there was not a family in the kingdom more jealous of
their honour than theirs.'

This is true of the Harlowes, Jack: they have been called The proud
Harlowes: and I have ever found, that all young honour is supercilious
and touchy.

But seest thou not how right I was in my endeavour to persuade my fair-
one to allow her uncle's friend to think us married; especially as he
came prepared to believe it; and as her uncle hoped it was so?--But
nothing on earth is so perverse as a woman, when she is set upon carrying
a point, and has a meek man, or one who loves his peace, to deal with.

My beloved was vexed.  She pulled out her handkerchief: but was more
inclined to blame me than herself.

Had you kept your word, Mr. Lovelace, and left me when we came to
town--And there she stopt; for she knew, that it was her own fault that
we were not married before we left the country; and how could I leave her
afterwards, while her brother was plotting to carry her off by violence?

Nor has this brother yet given over his machinations.

For, as the Captain proceeds, 'Mr. John Harlowe owned to him (but in
confidence) that his nephew is at this time busied in endeavouring to
find out where we are; being assured (as I am not to be heard of at any
of my relations, or at my usual lodgings) that we are together.  And that
we are not married is plain, as he will have it, from Mr. Hickman's
application so lately made to her uncle; and which was seconded by Mrs.
Norton to her mother.  And her brother cannot bear that I should enjoy
such a triumph unmolested.'

A profound sigh, and the handkerchief again lifted to the eye.  But did
not the sweet soul deserve this turn upon her, for feloniously resolving
to rob me of herself, had the application made by Hickman succeeded?

I read on to the following effect:

'Why (asked Mr. Harlowe) was it said to his other inquiring friend, that
we were married; and that by his niece's woman, who ought to know? who
could give convincing reasons, no doubt'--

Here again she wept; took a turn across the room; then returned--Read on,
says she--

Will you, my dearest life, read it yourself?

I will take the letter with me, by-and-by--I cannot see to read it just
now, wiping her eyes--read on--let me hear it all--that I may know your
sentiments upon this letter, as well as give my own.

'The Captain then told uncle John the reasons that induced me to give out
that we were married; and the conditions on which my beloved was brought
to countenance it; which had kept us at the most punctilious distance.

'But still Mr. Harlowe objected my character.  And went away
dissatisfied.  And the Captain was also so much concerned, that he cared
not to write what the result of his first conference was.

'But in the next, which was held on receipt of the draughts, at the
Captain's house, (as the former was, for the greater secrecy,) when the
old gentleman had read them, and had the Captain's opinion, he was much
better pleased.  And yet he declared, that it would not be easy to
persuade any other person of his family to believe so favourably of the
matter, as he was now willing to believe, were they to know that we had
lived so long together unmarried.

'And then the Captain says, his dear friend made a proposal:--It was
this--That we should marry out of hand, but as privately as possible, as
indeed he found we intended, (for he could have no objection to the
draughts)--but yet, he expected to have present one trusty friend of his
own, for his better satisfaction'--

Here I stopt, with a design to be angry--but she desiring me to read on,
I obeyed.

'--But that it should pass to every one living, except to that trusty
person, to himself, and to the Captain, that we were married from the
time that we had lived together in one house; and that this time should
be made to agree with that of Mr. Hickman's application to him from Miss
Howe.'

This, my dearest life, said I, is a very considerate proposal.  We have
nothing to do but to caution the people below properly on this head.  I
did not think your uncle Harlowe capable of hitting upon such a charming
expedient as this.  But you see how much his heart is in the
reconciliation.

This was the return I met with--You have always, as a mark of your
politeness, let me know how meanly you think of every one in my family.

Yet thou wilt think, Belford, that I could forgive her for the reproach.

'The Captain does not know, says he, how this proposal will be relished
by us.  But for his part, he thinks it an expedient that will obviate
many difficulties, and may possibly put an end to Mr. James Harlowe's
further designs: and on this account he has, by the uncle's advice,
already declared to two several persons, by whose means it may come to
that young gentleman's, that he [Captain Tomlinson] has very great reason
to believe that we were married soon after Mr. Hickman's application was
rejected.

'And this, Mr. Lovelace, (says the Captain,) will enable you to pay a
compliment to the family, that will not be unsuitable to the generosity
of some of the declarations you were pleased to make to the lady before
me, (and which Mr. John Harlowe may make some advantage of in favour of a
reconciliation,) in that you were entitled to make the demand.'  An
excellent contriver, surely, she must think this worthy Mr. Tomlinson to
be!

But the Captain adds, 'that if either the lady or I disapprove of his
report of our marriage, he will retract it.  Nevertheless, he must tell
me, that Mr. John Harlowe is very much set upon this way of proceeding;
as the only one, in his opinion, capable of being improved into a general
reconciliation.  But if we do acquiesce in it, he beseeches my fair-one
not to suspend my day, that he may be authorized in what he says, as to
the truth of the main fact.  [How conscientious this good man!]  Nor must
it be expected, he says, that her uncle will take one step towards the
wished-for reconciliation, till the solemnity is actually over.'

He adds, 'that he shall be very soon in town on other affairs; and then
proposes to attend us, and give us a more particular account of all that
has passed, or shall further pass, between Mr. Harlowe and him.'

Well, my dearest life, what say you to your uncle's expedient?  Shall I
write to the Captain, and acquaint him, that we have no objection to it?

She was silent for a few minutes.  At last, with a sigh, See, Mr.
Lovelace, said she, what you have brought me to, by treading after you in
such crooked paths!--See what disgrace I have incurred!--Indeed you have
not acted like a wise man.

My beloved creature, do you not remember, how earnestly I besought the
honour of your hand before we came to town?--Had I been then favoured--

Well, well, Sir; there has been much amiss somewhere; that's all I will
say at present.  And since what's past cannot be recalled, my uncle must
be obeyed, I think.

Charmingly dutiful!--I had nothing then to do, that I might not be
behind-hand with the worthy Captain and her uncle, but to press for the
day.  This I fervently did.  But (as I might have expected) she repeated
her former answer; to wit, That when the settlements were completed; when
the license was actually obtained; it would be time enough to name the
day: and, O Mr. Lovelace, said she, turning from me with a grace
inimitably tender, her handkerchief at her eyes, what a happiness, if my
dear uncle could be prevailed upon to be personally a father, on this
occasion, to the poor fatherless girl!

What's the matter with me!--Whence this dew-drop!--A tear!--As I hope to
be saved, it is a tear, Jack!--Very ready methinks!--Only on
reciting!--But her lovely image was before me, in the very attitude she
spoke the words--and indeed at the time she spoke them, these lines of
Shakespeare came into my head:

      Thy heart is big.  Get thee apart and weep!
      Passion, I see, is catching:--For my eye,
      Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
      Begin to water--

I withdrew, and wrote to the Captain to the following effect--'I desired
that he would be so good as to acquaint his dear friend that we entirely
acquiesced with what he had proposed; and had already properly cautioned
the gentlewomen of the house, and their servants, as well as our own: and
to tell him, That if he would in person give me the blessing of his dear
niece's hand, it would crown the wishes of both.  In this case, I
consented, that his own day, as I presumed it would be a short one,
should be ours: that by this means the secret would be with fewer
persons: that I myself, as well as he, thought the ceremony could not be
too privately performed; and this not only for the sake of the wise end
he had proposed to answer by it, but because I would not have Lord M.
think himself slighted; since that nobleman, as I had told him [the
Captain] had once intended to be our nuptial-father; and actually made
the offer; but that we had declined to accept of it, and that for no
other reason than to avoid a public wedding; which his beloved niece
would not come into, while she was in disgrace with her friends.  But
that if he chose not to do us this honour, I wished that Captain
Tomlinson might be the trusty person whom he would have be present on the
happy occasion.'

I showed this letter to my fair-one.  She was not displeased with it.
So, Jack, we cannot now move too fast, as to settlements and license: the
day is her uncle's day, or Captain Tomlinson's, perhaps, as shall best
suit the occasion.  Miss Howe's smuggling scheme is now surely provided
against in all events.

But I will not by anticipation make thee a judge of all the benefits that
may flow from this my elaborate contrivance.  Why will these girls put me
upon my master-strokes?

And now for a little mine which I am getting ready to spring.  The first
that I have sprung, and at the rate I go on (now a resolution, and now a
remorse) perhaps the last that I shall attempt to spring.

A little mine, I call it.  But it may be attended with great effects.  I
shall not, however, absolutely depend upon the success of it, having much
more effectual ones in reserve.  And yet great engines are often moved by
small springs.  A little spark falling by accident into a powder-magazine,
hath done more execution in a siege, than an hundred cannon.

Come the worst, the hymeneal torch, and a white sheet, must be my amende
honorable, as the French have it.



LETTER XIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, JUNE 6.

Unsuccessful as hitherto my application to you has been, I cannot for the
heart of me forbear writing once more in behalf of this admirable woman:
and yet am unable to account for the zeal which impels me to take her
part with an earnestness so sincere.

But all her merit thou acknowledgest; all thy own vileness thou
confessest, and even gloriest in it: What hope then of moving so hardened
a man?--Yet, as it is not too late, and thou art nevertheless upon the
crisis, I am resolved to try what another letter will do.  It is but my
writing in vain, if it do no good; and if thou wilt let me prevail, I
knowthou wilt hereafter think me richly entitled to thy thanks.

To argue with thee would be folly.  The case cannot require it.  I will
only entreat thee, therefore, that thou wilt not let such an excellence
lose the reward of her vigilant virtue.

I believe there never were libertines so vile, but purposed, at some
future period of their lives, to set about reforming: and let me beg of
thee, that thou wilt, in this great article, make thy future repentance
as easy, as some time hence thou wilt wish thou hadst made it.

If thou proceedest, I have no doubt that this affair will end tragically,
one way or another.  It must.  Such a woman must interest both gods and
men in her cause.  But what I most apprehend is, that with her own hand,
in resentment of the perpetrated outrage, she (like another Lucretia)
will assert the purity of her heart: or, if her piety preserve her from
this violence, that wasting grief will soon put a period to her days.
And, in either case, will not the remembrance of thy ever-during guilt,
and transitory triumph, be a torment of torments to thee?

'Tis a seriously sad thing, after all, that so fine a creature should
have fallen into such vile and remorseless hands: for, from thy cradle,
as I have heard thee own, thou ever delightedst to sport with and torment
the animal, whether bird or beast, that thou lovedst, and hadst a power
over.

How different is the case of this fine woman from that of any other whom
thou hast seduced!--I need not mention to thee, nor insist upon the
striking difference: justice, gratitude, thy interest, thy vows, all
engaging thee; and thou certainly loving her, as far as thou art capable
of love, above all her sex.  She not to be drawn aside by art, or to be
made to suffer from credulity, nor for want of wit and discernment, (that
will be another cutting reflection to so fine a mind as her's:) the
contention between you only unequal, as it is between naked innocence and
armed guilt.  In every thing else, as thou ownest, her talents greatly
superior to thine!--What a fate will her's be, if thou art not at last
overcome by thy reiterated remorses!

At first, indeed, when I was admitted into her presence,* (and till I
observed her meaning air, and heard her speak,) I supposed that she had
no very uncommon judgment to boast of: for I made, as I thought, but just
allowances for her blossoming youth, and for that loveliness of person,
and for that ease and elegance in her dress, which I imagined must have
taken up half her time and study to cultivate; and yet I had been
prepared by thee to entertain a very high opinion of her sense and her
reading.  Her choice of this gay fellow, upon such hazardous terms,
(thought I,) is a confirmation that her wit wants that maturity which
only years and experience can give it.  Her knowledge (argued I to
myself) must be all theory; and the complaisance ever consorting with an
age so green and so gay, will make so inexperienced a lady at least
forbear to show herself disgusted at freedoms of discourse in which those
present of her own sex, and some of ours, (so learned, so well read, and
so travelled,) allow themselves.


* See Vol. IV. Letter VII.


In this presumption I ran on; and having the advantage, as I conceited,
of all the company but you, and being desirous to appear in her eyes a
mighty clever fellow, I thought I showed away, when I said any foolish
things that had more sound than sense in them; and when I made silly
jests, which attracted the smiles of thy Sinclair, and the specious
Partington: and that Miss Harlowe did not smile too, I thought was owing
to her youth or affectation, or to a mixture of both, perhaps to a
greater command of her features.--Little dreamt I, that I was incurring
her contempt all the time.

But when, as I said, I heard her speak, which she did not till she had
fathomed us all; when I heard her sentiments on two or three subjects,
and took notice of the searching eye, darting into the very inmost cells
of our frothy brains; by my faith, it made me look about me; and I began
to recollect, and be ashamed of all I had said before; in short, was
resolved to sit silent, till every one had talked round, to keep my folly
in countenance.  And then I raised the subjects that she could join in,
and which she did join in, so much to the confusion and surprise of every
one of us!--For even thou, Lovelace, so noted for smart wit, repartee,
and a vein of raillery, that delighteth all who come near thee, sattest
in palpable darkness, and lookedst about thee, as well as we.

One instance only of this shall I remind thee of.

We talked of wit, and of it, and aimed at it, bandying it like a ball
from one to another, and resting it chiefly with thee, who wert always
proud enough and vain enough of the attribute; and then more especially
as thou hadst assembled us, as far as I know, principally to show the
lady thy superiority over us; and us thy triumph over her.  And then
Tourville (who is always satisfied with wit at second-hand; wit upon
memory: other men's wit) repeated some verses, as applicable to the
subject; which two of us applauded, though full of double entendre.
Thou, seeing the lady's serious air on one of those repetitions,
appliedst thyself to her, desiring her notions of wit: a quality, thou
saidst, which every one prized, whether flowing from himself, or found in
another.

Then it was that she took all our attention.  It was a quality much
talked of, she said, but, she believed, very little understood.  At
least, if she might be so free as to give her judgment of it from what
had passed in the present conversation, she must say, that wit with men
was one thing; with women another.

This startled us all:--How the women looked!--How they pursed their
mouths; a broad smile the moment before upon each, from the verses they
had heard repeated, so well understood, as we saw, by their looks!  While
I besought her to let us know, for our instruction, what wit with women:
for such I was sure it ought to be with men.

Cowley, she said, had defined it prettily by negatives.  Thou desiredst
her to repeat his definition.

She did; and with so much graceful ease, and beauty, and propriety of
accent, as would have made bad poetry delightful.

         A thousand diff'rent shapes it bears;
         Comely in thousand shapes appears.
         'Tis not a tale, 'tis not a jest,
         Admir'd with laughter at a feast,
      Nor florid talk, which must this title gain:
      The proofs of wit for ever must remain.
         Much less can that have any place
         At which a virgin hides her face.
      Such dross the fire must purge away:--'Tis just
      The author blush there, where the reader must.

Here she stopt, looking round upon her upon us all with conscious
superiority, as I thought.  Lord, how we stared!  Thou attemptedst to
give us thy definition of wit, that thou mightest have something to say,
and not seem to be surprised into silent modesty.

But as if she cared not to trust thee with the subject, referring to the
same author as for his more positive decision, she thus, with the same
harmony of voice and accent, emphatically decided upon it.

      Wit, like a luxurious vine,
      Unless to virtue's prop it join,
      Firm and erect, tow'rd heaven bound,
Tho' it with beauteous leaves and pleasant fruit be crown'd,
It lies deform'd, and rotting on the ground.

If thou recollectest this part of the conversation, and how like fools we
looked at one another; how much it put us out of conceit with ourselves,
and made us fear her, when  we found our conversation thus excluded from
the very character which our vanity had made us think unquestionably
ours; and if thou profitest properly by the recollection; thou wilt be of
my mind, that there is not so much wit in wickedness as we had flattered
ourselves there was.

And after all, I have been of opinion ever since that conversation, that
the wit of all the rakes and libertines down to little Johnny Hartop the
punster, consists mostly in saying bold and shocking things, with such
courage as shall make the modest blush, the impudent laugh, and the
ignorant stare.

And why dost thou think I mention these things, so mal-a-propos, as it
may seem!--Only, let me tell thee, as an instance (among many that might
be given from the same evening's conversation) of this fine woman's
superiority in those talents which ennoble nature, and dignify her
sex--evidenced not only to each of us, as we offended, but to the
flippant Partington, and the grosser, but egregiously hypocritical
Sinclair, in the correcting eye, the discouraging blush, in which was
mixed as much displeasure as modesty, and sometimes, as the occasion
called for it, (for we were some of us hardened above the sense of
feeling delicate reproof,) by the sovereign contempt, mingled with a
disdainful kind of pity, that showed at once her own conscious worth, and
our despicable worthlessness.

O Lovelace! what then was the triumph, even in my eye, and what is it
still upon reflection, of true jest, laughing impertinence, and an
obscenity so shameful, even to the guilty, that they cannot hint at it
but under a double meaning!

Then, as thou hast somewhere observed,* all her correctives avowed by her
eye.  Not poorly, like the generality of her sex, affecting ignorance of
meanings too obvious to be concealed; but so resenting, as to show each
impudent laugher the offence given to, and taken by a purity, that had
mistaken its way, when it fell into such company.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XLVIII.


Such is the woman, such is the angel, whom thou hast betrayed into thy
power, and wouldst deceive and ruin.---Sweet creature! did she but know
how she is surrounded, (as I then thought, as well as now think,) and
what is intended, how much sooner would death be her choice, than so
dreadful a situation!--'And how effectually would her story, were it
generally known, warn all the sex against throwing themselves into the
power of ours, let our vows, oaths, and protestations, be what they
will!'

But let me beg of thee, once more, my dear Lovelace, if thou hast any
regard for thine own honour, for the honour of thy family, for thy future
peace, or for my opinion of thee, (who yet pretend not to be so much
moved by principle, as by that dazzling merit which ought still more to
attract thee,) to be prevailed upon--to be--to be humane, that's all--
only, that thou wouldst not disgrace our common humanity!

Hardened as thou art, I know that they are the abandoned people in the
house who keep thee up to a resolution against her.  O that the sagacious
fair-one (with so much innocent charity in her own heart) had not so
resolutely held those women at distance!--that as she boarded there, she
had oftener tabled with them!  Specious as they are, in a week's time,
she would have seen through them; they could not have been always so
guarded, as they were when they saw her but seldom, and when they
prepared themselves to see her; and she would have fled their house as a
place infected.  And yet, perhaps, with so determined an enterprizer,
this discovery might have accelerated her ruin.

I know that thou art nice in thy loves.  But are there not hundreds of
women, who, though not utterly abandoned, would be taken with thee for
mere personal regards!  Make a toy, if thou wilt, of principle, with
respect to such of the sex as regard it as a toy; but rob not an angel of
those purities, which, in her own opinion, constitute the difference
between angelic and brutal qualities.

With regard to the passion itself, the less of soul in either man or
woman, the more sensual are they.  Thou, Lovelace, hast a soul, though a
corrupted one; and art more intent (as thou even gloriest) upon the
preparative stratagem, that upon the end of conquering.

See we not the natural bent of idiots and the crazed?  The very appetite
is body; and when we ourselves are most fools, and crazed, then are we
most eager in these pursuits.  See what fools this passion makes the
wisest men!  What snivellers, what dotards, when they suffer themselves
to be run away with by it!--An unpermanent passion!  Since, if (ashamed
of its more proper name) we must call it love, love gratified, is love
satisfied--and where consent on one side adds to the obligation on the
other.  What then but remorse can follow a forcible attempt?

Do not even chaste lovers choose to be alone in their courtship
preparations, ashamed to have even a child to witness to their foolish
actions, and more foolish expressions?  Is this deified passion, in its
greatest altitudes, fitted to stand the day?  Do not the lovers, when
mutual consent awaits their wills, retire to coverts, and to darkness, to
complete their wishes?  And shall such a sneaking passion as this, which
can be so easily gratified by viler objects, be permitted to debase the
noblest?

Were not the delays of thy vile purposes owing more to the awe which her
majestic virtue has inspired thee with, than to thy want of adroitness in
villany?  [I must write my free sentiments in this case; for have I not
seen the angel?]  I should be ready to censure some of thy contrivances
and pretences to suspend the expected day, as trite, stale, and (to me,
who know thy intention) poor; and too often resorted to, as nothing comes
of them to be gloried in; particularly that of Mennell, the vapourish
lady, and the ready-furnished house.

She must have thought so too, at times, and in her heart despised thee
for them, or love thee (ungrateful as thou art!) to her misfortune; as
well as entertain hope against probability.  But this would afford
another warning to the sex, were they to know her story; 'as it would
show them what poor pretences they must seem to be satisfied with, if
once they put themselves into the power of a designing man.'

If trial only was thy end, as once was thy pretence,* enough surely hast
thou tried this paragon of virtue and vigilance.  But I knew thee too
well, to expect, at the time, that thou wouldest stop there.  'Men of our
cast put no other bound to their views upon any of the sex, than what want
of power compels them to put.'  I knew that from one advantage gained,
thou wouldest proceed to attempt another.  Thy habitual aversion to
wedlock too well I knew; and indeed thou avowest thy hope to bring her to
cohabitation, in that very letter in which thou pretendest trial to be
thy principal view.**


* See Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
** Ibid.  See also Letters XVI. and XVII. of that volume.


But do not even thy own frequent and involuntary remorses, when thou hast
time, place, company, and every other circumstance, to favour thee in thy
wicked design, convince thee, that there can be no room for a hope so
presumptuous?--Why then, since thou wouldest choose to marry her rather
than lose her, wilt thou make her hate thee for ever?

But if thou darest to meditate personal trial, and art sincere in thy
resolution to reward her, as she behaves in it, let me beseech thee to
remove her from this vile house.  That will be to give her and thy
conscience fair play.  So entirely now does the sweet deluded excellence
depend upon her supposed happier prospects, that thou needest not to fear
that she will fly from thee, or that she will wish to have recourse to
that scheme of Miss Howe, which has put thee upon what thou callest thy
master-strokes.

But whatever be thy determination on this head; and if I write not in
time, but that thou hast actually pulled off the mask; let it not be one
of the devices, if thou wouldest avoid the curses of every heart, and
hereafter of thy own, to give her, no not for one hour, (be her
resentment ever so great,) into the power of that villanous woman, who
has, if possible, less remorse than thyself; and whose trade it is to
break the resisting spirit, and utterly to ruin the heart unpractised in
evil.--O Lovelace, Lovelace, how many dreadful stories could this horrid
woman tell the sex!  And shall that of a Clarissa swell the guilty list?

But this I might have spared.  Of this, devil as thou art, thou canst not
be capable.  Thou couldst not enjoy a triumph so disgraceful to thy
wicked pride, as well as to humanity.

Shouldest thou think, that the melancholy spectacle hourly before me has
made me more serious than usual, perhaps thou wilt not be mistaken.  But
nothing more is to be inferred from hence (were I even to return to my
former courses) but that whenever the time of cool reflection comes,
whether brought on by our own disasters, or by those of others, we shall
undoubtedly, if capable of thought, and if we have time for it, think in
the same manner.

We neither of us are such fools as to disbelieve a futurity, or to think,
whatever be our practice, that we came hither by chance, and for no end
but to do all the mischief we have it in our power to do.  Nor am I
ashamed to own, that in the prayers which my poor uncle makes me read to
him, in the absence of a very good clergyman who regularly attends him, I
do not forget to put in a word or two for myself.

If, Lovelace, thou laughest at me, thy ridicule will be more conformable
to thy actions than  to thy belief.--Devils believe and tremble.  Canst
thou be more abandoned than they?

And here let me add, with regard to my poor old man, that I often wish
thee present but for one half hour in a day, to see the dregs of a gay
life running off in the most excruciating tortures that the cholic, the
stone, and the surgeon's knife can unitedly inflict, and to hear him
bewail the dissoluteness of his past life, in the bitterest anguish of a
spirit every hour expecting to be called to its last account.--Yet, by
all his confessions, he has not to accuse himself, in sixty-seven years
of life, of half the very vile enormities which you and I have committed
in the last seven only.

I conclude with recommending to your serious consideration all I have
written, as proceeding from the heart and soul of

Your assured friend,
JOHN BELFORD



LETTER XIV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, JUNE 6.


Difficulties still to be got over in procuring this plaguy license.  I
ever hated, and ever shall hate, these spiritual lawyers, and their
court.

And now, Jack, if I have not secured victory, I have a retreat.

But hold--thy servant with a letter--


***


A confounded long one, though not a narrative one--Once more in behalf of
this lady?--Lie thee down, oddity!  What canst thou write that can have
force upon me at this crisis?--And have I not, as I went along, made thee
to say all that was necessary for thee to say?


***


Yet once more I will take thee up.

Trite, stale, poor, (sayest thou,) are some of my contrivances; that of
the widow particularly!--I have no patience with thee.  Had not that
contrivance its effect at that time, for a procrastination? and had I not
then reason to fear, that the lady would find enough to make her dislike
this house? and was it not right (intending what I intended) to lead her
on from time to time with a notion that a house of her own would be ready
for her soon, in order to induce her to continue here till it was?

Trite, stale, and poor!--Thou art a silly fellow, and no judge, when thou
sayest this.  Had I not, like a blockhead, revealed to thee, as I went
along, the secret purposes of my heart, but had kept all in till the event
had explained my mysteries, I would have defied thee to have been able,
any more than the lady, to have guessed at what was to befall her, till
it had actually come to pass.  Nor doubt I, in this case, that, instead
of presuming to reflect upon her for credulity, as loving me to her
misfortune, and for hoping against probability, thou wouldest have been
readier, by far, to censure her for nicety and over-scrupulousness.  And,
let me tell thee, that had she loved me as I wished her to love me, she
could not possibly have been so very apprehensive of my designs, nor so
ready to be influenced by Miss Howe's precautions, as she has always
been, although my general character made not for me with her.

But, in thy opinion, I suffer for that simplicity in my contrivances,
which is their principal excellence.  No machinery make I necessary.  No
unnatural flights aim I at.  All pure nature, taking advantage of nature,
as nature tends; and so simple my devices, that when they are known,
thou, even thou, imaginest thou couldest have thought of the same.  And
indeed thou seemest to own, that the slight thou puttest upon them is
owing to my letting thee into them before-hand--undistingushing as well
as ungrateful as thou art!

Yet, after all, I would not have thee think that I do not know my weak
places.  I have formerly told thee, that it is difficult for the ablest
general to say what he will do, or what he can do, when he is obliged to
regulate his motions by those of a watchful enemy.*  If thou givest due
weight to this consideration, thou wilt not wonder that I should make
many marches and countermarches, some of which may appear, to a slight
observer, unnecessary.


* See Vol. III. Letter XXXIX.


But let me cursorily enter into debate with thee on this subject, now I
am within sight of my journey's end.

Abundance of impertinent things thou tellest me in this letter; some of
which thou hadst from myself; others that I knew before.

All that thou sayest in this charming creature's praise is short of what
I have said and written on the inexhaustible subject.

Her virtue, her resistance, which are her merits, are my stimulatives.
have I not told thee so twenty times over?

Devil, as these girls between them call me, what of devil am I, but in my
contrivances?  I am not more a devil than others in the end I aim at; for
when I have carried my point, it is still but one seduction.  And I have
perhaps been spared the guilt of many seductions in the time.

What of uncommon would there be in this case, but for her
watchfulness!--As well as I love intrigue and stratagem, dost think that
I had not rather have gained my end with less trouble and less guilt?

The man, let me tell thee, who is as wicked as he can be, is a worse man
than I am.  Let me ask any rake in England, if, resolving to carry his
point, he would have been so long about it? or have had so much
compunction as I have had?

Were every rake, nay, were every man, to sit down, as I do, and write all
that enters into his head, or into his heart, and to accuse himself with
equal freedom and truth, what an army of miscreants should I have to keep
me in countenance!

It is a maxim with some, that if they are left alone with a woman, and
make not an attempt upon her, she will think herself affronted--Are not
such men as these worse than I am?  What an opinion must they have of the
whole sex!

Let me defend the sex I so dearly love.  If these elder brethren of ours
think they have general reason for their assertion, they must have kept
very bad company, or must judge of women's hearts by their own.  She must
be an abandoned woman, who will not shrink as a snail into its shell at a
gross and sudden attempt.  A modest woman must be naturally cold,
reserved, and shy.  She cannot be so much and so soon affected as
libertines are apt to imagine.  She must, at least, have some confidence
in the honour and silence of a man, before desire can possibly put forth
in her, to encourage and meet his flame.  For my own part, I have been
always decent in the company of women, till I was sure of them.  Nor have
I ever offered a great offence, till I have found little ones passed
over; and that they shunned me not, when they knew my character.

My divine Clarissa has puzzled me, and beat me out of my play: at one
time, I hope to overcome by intimidating her; at another, by love; by the
amorous see-saw, as I have called it.*  And I have only now to join
surprise to the other two, and see what can be done by all three.


* See Vol. III. Letter XVI.


And whose property, I pray thee, shall I invade, if I pursue my schemes
of love and vengeance?  Have not those who have a right to her renounced
that right?  Have they not wilfully exposed her to dangers?  Yet must
know, that such a woman would be considered as lawful prize by as many as
could have the opportunity to attempt her?--And had they not thus cruelly
exposed her, is she not a single woman?  And need I tell thee, Jack, that
men of our cast, the best of them [the worst stick at nothing] think it a
great grace and favour done to the married men, if they leave them their
wives to themselves;  and compound for their sisters, daughters, wards
and nieces?  Shocking as these principles must be to a reflecting mind,
yet such thou knowest are the principles of thousands (who would not act
so generously as I have acted by almost all of the sex, over whom I have
obtained a power); and as often carried into practice, as their
opportunities or courage will permit.--Such therefore have no right to
blame me.

Thou repeatedly pleadest her sufferings from her family.  But I have too
often answered this plea, to need to say any more now, than that she has
not suffered for my sake.  For has she not been made the victim of the
malice of her rapacious brother and envious sister, who only waited for
an occasion to ruin her with her other relations; and took this as the
first to drive her out of the house; and, as it happened, into my arms?--
Thou knowest how much against her inclination.

As for her own sins, how many has the dear creature to answer for to love
and to me!--Twenty times, and twenty times twenty, has she not told me,
that she refused not the odious Solmes in favour to me?  And as often has
she not offered to renounce me for the single life, if the implacables
would have received her on that condition?--Of what repetitions does thy
weak pity make me guilty?

To look a litter farther back: Canst thou forget what my sufferings were
from this haughty beauty in the whole time of my attendance upon her
proud motions, in the purlieus of Harlowe-place, and at the little White
Hart, at Neale, as we called it?--Did I not threaten vengeance upon her
then (and had I not reason?) for disappointing me of a promised
interview?

O Jack! what a night had I in the bleak coppice adjoining to her father's
paddock!  My linen and wig frozen; my limbs absolutely numbed; my fingers
only sensible of so much warmth as enabled me to hold a pen; and that
obtained by rubbing the skin off, and by beating with my hands my
shivering sides!  Kneeling on the hoar moss on one knee, writing on the
other, if the stiff scrawl could be called writing!  My feet, by the time
I had done, seeming to have taken root, and actually unable to support me
for some minutes!--Love and rage then kept my heart in motion, [and only
love and rage could do it,] or how much more than I did suffer must I
have suffered!

I told thee, at my melancholy return, what were the contents of the
letter I wrote.*  And I showed thee afterwards her tyrannical answer to
it.**  Thou, then, Jack, lovedst thy friend; and pitiedst thy poor
suffering Lovelace.  Even the affronted God of Love approved then of my
threatened vengeance against the fair promiser; though of the night of my
sufferings, he is become an advocate for her.


* See Vol. II. Letter XX.
** Ibid.


Nay, was it not he himself that brought to me my adorable Nemesis; and
both together put me upon this very vow, 'That I would never rest till I
had drawn in this goddess-daughter of the Harlowes to cohabit with me;
and that in the face of all their proud family?'

Nor canst thou forget this vow.  At this instant I have thee before me,
as then thou sorrowfully lookedst.  Thy strong features glowing with
compassion for me; thy lips twisted; thy forehead furrowed; thy whole
face drawn out from the stupid round into the ghastly oval; every muscle
contributing its power to complete the aspect grievous; and not one word
couldst thou utter, but Amen! to my vow.

And what of distinguishing love, or favour, or confidence, have I had
from her since, to make me forego this vow!

I renewed it not, indeed, afterwards; and actually, for a long season,
was willing to forget it; till repetitions of the same faults revived the
remembrance of the former.  And now adding to those the contents of some
of Miss Howe's virulent letters, so lately come at, what canst thou say
for the rebel, consistent with thy loyalty to thy friend?

Every man to his genius and constitution.  Hannibal was called The father
of warlike stratagems.  Had Hannibal been a private man, and turned his
plotting head against the other sex; or had I been a general, and, turned
mine against such of my fellow-creatures of my own, as I thought myself
entitled to consider as my enemies, because they were born and lived in a
different climate; Hannibal would have done less mischief; Lovelace
more.--That would have been the difference.

Not a sovereign on earth, if he be not a good man, and if he be of a
warlike temper, but must do a thousand times more mischief than I.  And
why?  Because he has it in his power to do more.

An honest man, perhaps thou'lt say, will not wish to have it in his power
to do hurt.  He ought not, let me tell him: for, if he have it, a
thousand to one but it makes him both wanton and wicked.

In what, then, am I so singularly vile?

In my contrivances thou wilt say, (for thou art my echo,) if not in my
proposed end of them.

How difficult does every man find it, as well as I, to forego a
predominant passion!  I have three passions that sway me by turns; all
imperial ones--love, revenge, ambition or a desire of conquest.

As to this particular contrivance of Tomlinson and the uncle, which
perhaps thou wilt think a black one; that had been spared, had not these
innocent ladies put me upon finding a husband for their Mrs. Townsend:
that device, therefore, is but a preventive one.  Thinkest thou that I
could bear to be outwitted?  And may not this very contrivance save a
world of mischief? for dost thou think I would have tamely given up the
lady to Townsend's tars?

What meanest thou, except to overthrow thy own plea, when thou sayest,
that men of our cast know no other bound to their wickedness, but want of
power; yet knowest this lady to be in mine?

Enough, sayest thou, have I tried this paragon of virtue.  Not so; for I
have not tried her at all--all I have been doing is but preparation to a
trial.

But thou art concerned for the means that I may have recourse to in the
trial, and for my veracity.

Silly fellow!--Did ever any man, thinkest thou, deceive a woman, but at
the expense of his veracity; how, otherwise, can he be said to deceive?

As to the means, thou dost not imagine that I expect a direct consent.
My main hope is but in a yielding reluctance; without which I will be
sworn, whatever rapes have been attempted, none ever were committed, one
person to one person.  And good Queen Bess of England, had she been
living, and appealed to, would have declared herself of my mind.

It would not be amiss for the sex to know what our opinions are upon this
subject.  I love to warn them.  I wish no man to succeed with them but
myself.  I told thee once, that though a rake, I am not a rake's friend.*


* See Vol. III. Letter XVIII.


Thou sayest, that I ever hated wedlock.  And true thou sayest.  And yet
as true, when thou tellest me, that I would rather marry than lose this
lady.  And will she detest me for ever, thinkest thou, if I try her, and
succeed not?--Take care--take care, Jack!--Seest thou not that thou
warnest me that I do not try without resolving to conquer?

I must add, that I have for some time been convinced that I have done
wrong to scribble to thee so freely as I have done (and the more so, if I
make the lady legally mine); for has not every letter I have written to
thee been a bill of indictment against myself?  I may partly curse my
vanity for it; and I think I will refrain for the future; for thou art
really very impertinent.

A good man, I own, might urge many of the things thou urgest; but, by my
soul, they come very awkwardly from thee.  And thou must be sensible,
that I can answer every tittle of what you writest, upon the foot of the
maxims we have long held and pursued.--By the specimen above, thou wilt
see that I can.

And pr'ythee tell me, Jack, what but this that follows would have been
the epitome of mine and my beloved's story, after ten years'
cohabitation, had I never written to thee upon the subject, and had I not
been my own accuser?

'Robert Lovelace, a notorious woman-eater, makes his addresses in an
honourable way to Miss Clarissa Harlowe; a young lady of the highest
merit--fortunes on both sides out of the question.

'After encouragement given, he is insulted by her violent brother; who
thinks it his interest to discountenance the match; and who at last
challenging him, is obliged to take his worthless life at his hands.

'The family, as much enraged, as if he had taken the life he gave, insult
him personally, and find out an odious lover for the young lady.

'To avoid a forced marriage, she is prevailed upon to take a step which
throws her into Mr. Lovelace's protection.

'Yet, disclaiming any passion for him, she repeatedly offers to renounce
him for ever, if, on that condition, her relations will receive her, and
free her from the address of the man she hates.

'Mr. Lovelace, a man of strong passions, and, as some say, of great
pride, thinks himself under very little obligation to her on this
account; and not being naturally fond of marriage, and having so much
reason to hate her relations, endeavours to prevail upon her to live with
him what he calls the life of honour; and at last, by stratagem, art, and
contrivance, prevails.

'He resolves never to marry any other woman: takes a pride to have her
called by his name: a church-rite all the difference between them: treats
her with deserved tenderness.  Nobody questions their marriage but those
proud relations of her's, whom he wishes to question it.  Every year a
charming boy.  Fortunes to support the increasing family with splendor.
A tender father.  Always a warm friend; a generous landlord; and a
punctual paymaster.  Now-and-then however, perhaps, indulging with a new
object, in order to bring him back with greater delight to his charming
Clarissa--his only fault, love of the sex--which, nevertheless, the women
say, will cure itself--defensible thus far, that he breaks no contracts
by his rovings.'--

And what is there so very greatly amiss, AS THE WORLD GOES, in all this?

Let me aver, that there are thousands and ten thousands, who have worse
stories to tell than this would appear to be, had I not interested thee
in the progress to my great end.  And besides, thou knowest that the
character I gave myself to Joseph Leman, as to my treatment of my
mistress, is pretty near the truth.*


* See Vol. III. Letter XLVIII.


Were I to be as much in earnest in my defence, as thou art warm in my
arraignment, I could convince thee, by other arguments, observations, and
comparisons, [Is not all human good and evil comparative?] that though
from my ingenuous temper (writing only to thee, who art master of every
secret of my heart) I am so ready to accuse myself in my narrations, yet
I have something to say for myself to myself, as I go along; though no
one else, perhaps, that was not a rake, would allow any weight to it.--
And this caution might I give to thousands, who would stoop for a stone
to throw at me: 'See that your own predominant passions, whatever they
be, hurry you not into as much wickedness as mine do me.  See, if ye
happen to be better than I in some things, that ye are not worse in
others; and in points too, that may be of more extensive bad consequence,
than that of seducing a girl, (and taking care of her afterwards,) who,
from her cradle, is armed with cautions against the delusions of men.'
And yet I am not so partial to my own follies as to think lightly of this
fault, when I allow myself to think.

Another grave thing I will add, now my hand is in: 'So dearly do I love
the sex, that had I found that a character for virtue had been generally
necessary to recommend me to them, I should have had a much greater
regard to my morals, as to the sex, than I have had.'

To sum all up--I am sufficiently apprized, that men of worthy and honest
hearts, who never allowed themselves in premeditated evil, and who take
into the account the excellencies of this fine creature, will and must
not only condemn, but abhor me, were they to know as much of me as thou
dost.  But, methinks, I would be glad to escape the censure of those men,
and of those women too, who have never known what capital trials and
temptations are; of those who have no genius for enterprise; of those who
want rather courage than will; and most particularly of those who have
only kept their secret better than I have kept, or wish to keep, mine.
Were those exceptions to take place, perhaps, Jack, I should have ten to
acquit to one that should condemn me.  Have I not often said, that human
nature is a rogue?


***


I threatened above to refrain writing to thee.  But take it not to heart,
Jack--I must write on, and cannot help it.



LETTER XV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.


Faith, Jack, thou hadst half undone me with thy nonsense, though I would
not own it on my yesterday's letter: my conscience of thy party before.--
But I think I am my own man again.

So near to execution my plot; so near springing my mine; all agreed upon
between the women and me; or I believe thou hadst overthrown me.

I have time for a few lines preparative to what is to happen in an hour
or two; and I love to write to the moment.

We have been extremely happy.  How many agreeable days have we known
together!--What may the next two hours produce.

When I parted with my charmer, (which I did, with infinite reluctance,
half an hour ago,) it was upon her promise that she would not sit up to
write or read.  For so engaging was the conversation to me, (and indeed
my behaviour throughout the whole of it was confessedly agreeable to
her,) that I insisted, if she did not directly retire to rest, that she
should add another happy hour to the former.

To have sat up writing or reading half the night, as she sometimes does,
would have frustrated my view, as thou wilt observe, when my little plot
unravels.


***


What--What--What now!--Bounding villain! wouldst thou choke me?--

I was speaking to my heart, Jack!--It was then at my throat.--And what is
all this for?--These shy women, how, when a man thinks himself near the
mark, do they tempest him!


***


Is all ready, Dorcas?  Has my beloved kept her word with me?--Whether are
these billowy heavings owing more to love or to fear?  I cannot tell, for
the soul of me, of which I have most.  If I can but take her before her
apprehension, before her eloquence, is awake--

Limbs, why thus convulsed?--Knees, till now so firmly knit, why thus
relaxed? why beat you thus together?  Will not these trembling fingers,
which twice have refused to direct the pen, fail me in the arduous
moment?

Once again, why and for what all these convulsions?  This project is not
to end in matrimony, surely!

But the consequences must be greater than I had thought of till this
moment--my beloved's destiny or my own may depend upon the issue of the
two next hours!

I will recede, I think!--


***


Soft, O virgin saint, and safe as soft, be thy slumbers!

I will now once more turn to my friend Belford's letter.  Thou shalt have
fair play, my charmer.  I will reperuse what thy advocate has to say for
thee.  Weak arguments will do, in the frame I am in!--

But, what, what's the matter!--What a double--But the uproar abates!--What
a double coward am I!--Or is it that I am taken in a cowardly minute? for
heroes have their fits of fear; cowards their brave moments; and virtuous
women, all but my Clarissa, their moment critical--

But thus coolly enjoying the reflection in a hurricane!--Again the
confusion is renewed--

What!  Where!--How came it!

Is my beloved safe--

O wake not too roughly, my beloved!



LETTER XVI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY MORNING, FIVE O'CLOCK, (JUNE 8.)


Now is my reformation secure; for I never shall love any other woman! Oh!
she is all variety!  She must ever be new to me!  Imagination cannot
form; much less can the pencil paint; nor can the soul of painting,
poetry, describe an angel so exquisitely, so elegantly lovely!--But I
will not by anticipation pacify thy impatience.  Although the subject is
too hallowed for profane contemplation, yet shalt thou have the whole
before thee as it passed: and this not from a spirit wantoning in
description upon so rich a subject; but with a design to put a bound to
thy roving thoughts.  It will be iniquity, greater than a Lovelace was
ever guilty of, to carry them farther than I shall acknowledge.

Thus then, connecting my last with the present, I lead to it.

Didst thou not, by the conclusion of my former, perceive the
consternation I was in, just as I was about to reperuse thy letter, in
order to prevail upon myself to recede from my purpose of awaking in
terrors my slumbering charmer?  And what dost think was the matter?

I'll tell thee--

At a little after two, when the whole house was still, or seemed to be
so, and, as it proved, my Clarissa in bed, and fast asleep; I also in a
manner undressed (as indeed I was for an hour before) and in my gown and
slippers, though, to oblige thee, writing on!--I was alarmed by a
trampling noise over head, and a confused buz of mixed voices, some
louder than others, like scolding, and little short of screaming.  While
I was wondering what could be the matter, down stairs ran Dorcas, and at
my door, in an accent rather frightedly and hoarsely inward than shrilly
clamorous, she cried out Fire!  Fire!  And this the more alarmed me, as
she seemed to endeavour to cry out louder, but could not.

My pen (its last scrawl a benediction on my beloved) dropped from my
fingers; and up started I; and making but three steps to the door,
opening it, cried out, Where!  Where! almost as much terrified as the
wench; while she, more than half undrest, her petticoats in her hand,
unable to speak distinctly, pointed up stairs.

I was there in a moment, and found all owing to the carelessness of Mrs.
Sinclair's cook-maid, who having sat up to read the simple History of
Dorastus and Faunia, when she should have been in bed, had set fire to an
old pair of calico window-curtains.

She had had the presence of mind, in her fright, to tear down the half-
burnt vallens, as well as curtains, and had got them, though blazing,
into the chimney, by the time I came up; so that I had the satisfaction
to find the danger happily over.

Mean time Dorcas, after she had directed me up stairs, not knowing the
worst was over, and expecting every minute the house would be in a blaze,
out of tender regard for her lady, [I shall for ever love the wench for
it,] ran to her door, and rapping loudly at it, in a recovered voice,
cried out, with a shrillness equal to her love, Fire!  Fire!  The house is
on fire!--Rise, Madam!--This instant rise--if you would not be burnt in
your bed!

No sooner had she made this dreadful out-cry, but I heard her lady's
door, with hasty violence, unbar, unbolt, unlock, and open, and my
charmer's voice sounding like that of one going into a fit.

Thou mayest believe that I was greatly affected.  I trembled with concern
for her, and hastened down faster than the alarm of fire had made me run
up, in order to satisfy her that all the danger was over.

When I had flown down to her chamber-door, there I beheld the most
charming creature in the world, supporting herself on the arm of the
gasping Dorcas, sighing, trembling, and ready to faint, with nothing on
but an under petticoat, her lovely bosom half open, and her feet just
slipped into her shoes.  As soon as she saw me, she panted, and
struggled to speak; but could only say, O Mr. Lovelace! and down was
ready to sink.

I clasped her in my arms with an ardour she never felt before: My dearest
life! fear nothing: I have been up--the danger is over--the fire is got
under--and how, foolish devil, [to Dorcas,] could you thus, by your
hideous yell, alarm and frighten my angel!

O Jack! how her sweet bosom, as I clasped her to mine, heaved and panted!
I could even distinguish her dear heart flutter, flutter, against mine;
and, for a few minutes, I feared she would go into fits.

Lest the half-lifeless charmer should catch cold in this undress, I
lifted her to her bed, and sat down by her upon the side of it,
endeavouring with the utmost tenderness, as well of action as expression,
to dissipate her terrors.

But what did I get by this my generous care of her, and my successful
endeavour to bring her to herself?--Nothing (ungrateful as she was!) but
the most passionate exclamations: for we had both already forgotten the
occasion, dreadful as it was, which had thrown her into my arms: I, from
the joy of encircling the almost disrobed body of the loveliest of her
sex; she, from the greater terrors that arose from finding herself in my
arms, and both seated on the bed, from which she had been so lately
frighted.

And now, Belford, reflect upon the distance at which the watchful charmer
had hitherto kept me: reflect upon my love, and upon my sufferings for
her: reflect upon her vigilance, and how long I had laid in wait to elude
it; the awe I had stood in, because of her frozen virtue and
over-niceness; and that I never before was so happy with her; and then
think how ungovernable must be my transports in those happy moments!--And
yet, in my own account, I was both decent and generous.

But, far from being affected, as I wished, by an address so fervent,
(although from a man from whom she had so lately owned a regard, and with
whom, but an hour or two before, she had parted with so much
satisfaction,) I never saw a bitterer, or more moving grief, when she
came fully to herself.

She appealed to Heaven against my treachery, as she called it; while I,
by the most solemn vows, pleaded my own equal fright, and the reality of
the danger that had alarmed us both.

She conjured me, in the most solemn and affecting manner, by turns
threatening and soothing, to quit her apartment, and permit her to hide
herself from the light, and from every human eye.

I besought her pardon, yet could not avoid offending; and repeatedly
vowed, that the next morning's sun should witness our espousals.  But
taking, I suppose, all my protestations of this kind as an indication
that I intended to proceed to the last extremity, she would hear nothing
that I said; but, redoubling her struggles to get from me, in broken
accents, and exclamations the most vehement, she protested, that she
would not survive what she called a treatment so disgraceful and
villanous; and, looking all wildly round her, as if for some instrument
of mischief, she espied a pair of sharp-pointed scissors on a chair by
the bed-side, and endeavoured to catch them up, with design to make her
words good on the spot.

Seeing her desperation, I begged her to be pacified; that she would hear
me speak but one word; declaring that I intended no dishonour to her: and
having seized the scissors, I threw them into the chimney; and she still
insisting vehemently upon my distance, I permitted her to take the chair.

But, O the sweet discomposure!--Her bared shoulders, and arms so
inimitably fair and lovely: her spread hands crossed over her charming
neck; yet not half concealing its glossy beauties: the scanty coat, as
she rose from me, giving the whole of her admirable shape, and fine-
turn'd limbs: her eyes running over, yet seeming to threaten future
vengeance:
and at last her lips uttering what every indignant look and glowing
feature portended: exclaiming as if I had done the worst I could do, and
vowing never to forgive me; wilt thou wonder if I resumed the incensed,
the already too-much-provoked fair-one?

I did; and clasped her once more to my bosom: but, considering the
delicacy of her frame, her force was amazing, and showed how much in
earnest she was in her resentment; for it was with the utmost difficulty
that I was able to hold her: nor could I prevent her sliding through my
arms, to fall upon her knees: which she did at my feet: and there in the
anguish of her soul, her streaming eyes lifted up to my face with
supplicating softness, hands folded, dishevelled hair; for her night
head-dress having fallen off in her struggling, her charming tresses fell
down in naturally shining ringlets, as if officious to conceal the
dazzling beauties of her neck and shoulders; her lovely bosom too heaving
with sighs, and broken sobs, as if to aid her quivering lips in pleading
for her--in this manner, but when her grief gave way to her speech, in
words pronounced with that emphatical propriety, which distinguishes this
admirable creature in her elocution from all the women I ever heard
speak, did she implore my compassion and my honour.

'Consider me, dear Lovelace,' [dear was her charming word!] 'on my knees
I beg you to consider me as a poor creature who has no protector but you;
who has no defence but your honour: by that honour! by your humanity! by
all you have vowed!  I conjure you not to make me abhor myself! not to
make me vile in my own eyes!'

I mentioned to-morrow as the happiest day of my life.

Tell me not of to-morrow.  If indeed you mean me honourably, now, this
very instant NOW! you must show it, and be gone! you can never in a whole
long life repair the evils you NOW make me suffer!

Wicked wretch!--Insolent villain!--yes, she called me insolent villain,
although so much in my power!  And for what!--only for kissing (with
passion indeed) her inimitable neck, her lips, her cheeks, her forehead,
and her streaming eyes, as this assemblage of beauties offered itself at
once to my ravished sight; she continuing kneeling at my feet as I sat.

If I am a villain, Madam!--And then my grasping, but trembling hand--I
hope I did not hurt the tenderest and loveliest of all her beauties--If I
am a villain, Madam--

She tore my ruffle, shrunk from my happy hand, with amazing force and
agility, as with my other arm I would have encircled her waist.

Indeed you are!--the worst of villains!--Help! dear, blessed people! and
screamed out--No help for a poor creature!

Am I then a villain, Madam?--Am I then a villain, say you?--and clasped
both my arms about her, offering to raise her to my bounding heart.

Oh! no!--And yet you are!--And again I was her dear Lovelace!--her hands
again clasped over her charming bosom:--Kill me! kill me!--if I am odious
enough in your eyes to deserve this treatment: and I will thank you!--Too
long, much too long has my life been a burden to me!--Or, (wildly looking
all round her,) give me but the means, and I will instantly convince you
that my honour is dearer to me than my life!

Then, with still folded hands, and fresh streaming eyes, I was her
blessed Lovelace; and she would thank me with her latest breath if I
would permit her to make that preference, or free her from farther
indignities.

I sat suspended for a moment: by my soul, thought I, thou art, upon full
proof, an angel and no woman! still, however, close clasping her to my
bosom, as I raised her from her knees, she again slid through my arms,
and dropped upon them.--'See, Mr. Lovelace!--Good God! that I should live
to see this hour, and to bear this treatment!--See at your feet a poor
creature, imploring your pity; who, for your sake, is abandoned of all
the world.  Let not my father's curse thus dreadfully operate! be not you
the inflicter, who have been the cause of it: but spare me, I beseech
you, spare me!--for how have I deserved this treatment from you? for your
own sake, if not for my sake, and as you would that God Almighty, in your
last hour, should have mercy upon you, spare me!'

What heart but must have been penetrated!

I would again have raised the dear suppliant from her knees; but she
would not be raised, till my softened mind, she said, had yielded to her
prayer, and bid her rise to be innocent.

Rise then, my angel! rise, and be what you are, and all you wish to be!
only pronounce me pardoned for what has passed, and tell me you will
continue to look upon me with that eye of favour and serenity which I
have been blessed with for some days past, and I will submit to my
beloved conqueress, whose power never was at so great an height with me,
as now, and retire to my apartment.

God Almighty, said she, hear your prayers in your most arduous moments,
as you have heard mine! and now leave me, this moment leave me, to my own
recollection: in that you will leave me to misery enough, and more than
you ought to wish to your bitterest enemy.

Impute not every thing, my best beloved, to design, for design it was
not--

O Mr. Lovelace!

Upon my soul, Madam, the fire was real--[and so it was, Jack!]--The
house, my dearest life, might have been consumed by it, as you will be
convinced in the morning by ocular demonstration.

O Mr. Lovelace!--

Let my passion for you, Madam, and the unexpected meeting of you at your
chamber-door, in an attitude so charming--

Leave me, leave me, this moment!--I beseech you leave me; looking wildly
and in confusion about her, and upon herself.

Excuse me, my dearest creature, for those liberties which, innocent as
they were, your too great delicacy may make you take amiss--

No more! no more!--leave me, I beseech you! again looking upon herself,
and round her, in a sweet confusion--Begone! begone!

Then weeping, she struggled vehemently to withdraw her hands, which all
the while I held between mine.--Her struggles!--O what additional charms,
as I now reflect, did her struggles give to every feature, every limb, of
a person so sweetly elegant and lovely!

Impossible, my dearest life, till you pronounce my pardon!--Say but you
forgive me!--say but you forgive me!

I beseech you to be gone! leave me to myself, that I may think what I can
do, and what I ought to do.

That, my dearest creature, is not enough.  You must tell me that I am
forgiven; that you will see me to-morrow as if nothing had happened.

And then I clasped her again in my arms, hoping she would not forgive
me--

I will--I do forgive you--wretch that you are!

Nay, my Clarissa! and is it such a reluctant pardon, mingled with a word
so upbraiding, that I am to be put off with, when you are thus (clasping
her close to me) in my power?

I do, I do forgive you!

Heartily?

Yes, heartily!

And freely?

Freely!

And will you look upon me to-morrow as if nothing had passed?

Yes, yes!

I cannot take these peevish affirmatives, so much like intentional
negatives!--Say, you will, upon your honour.

Upon my honour, then--Oh! now, begone! begone!--and never never--

What! never, my angel!--Is this forgiveness?

Never, said she, let what has passed be remembered more!

I insisted upon one kiss to seal my pardon--and retired like a fool, a
woman's fool, as I was!--I sneakingly retired!--Couldst thou have
believed it?

But I had no sooner entered my own apartment, than reflecting upon the
opportunity I had lost, and that all I had gained was but an increase of
my own difficulties; and upon the ridicule I should meet with below upon
a weakness so much out of my usual character; I repented, and hastened
back, in hope that, through the distress of mind which I left her in, she
had not so soon fastened the door; and I was fully resolved to execute
all my purposes, be the consequence what it would; for, thought I, I have
already sinned beyond cordial forgiveness, I doubt; and if fits and
desperation ensue, I can but marry at last, and then I shall make her
amends.

But I was justly punished; for her door was fast: and hearing her sigh
and sob, as if her heart would burst, My beloved creature, said I,
rapping gently, [the sobbings then ceasing,] I want but to say three
words to you, which must be the most acceptable you ever heard from me.
Let me see you out for one moment.

I thought I heard her coming to open the door, and my heart leapt in that
hope; but it was only to draw another bolt, to make it still the faster;
and she either could not or would not answer me, but retired to the
farther end of her apartment, to her closet, probably; and, more like a
fool than before, again I sneaked away.

This was mine, my plot! and this was all I made of it!--I love her more
than ever!--And well I may!--never saw I polished ivory so beautiful as
her arms and shoulders; never touched I velvet so soft as her skin: her
virgin bosom--O Belford, she is all perfection! then such an elegance!--
In her struggling losing her shoe, (but just slipt on, as I told thee,)
her pretty foot equally white and delicate as the hand of any other
woman, or even her own hand!

But seest thou not that I have a claim of merit for a grace that every
body hitherto had denied me? and that is for a capacity of being moved by
prayers and tears--Where, where, on this occasion, was the callous, where
the flint, by which my heart was said to be surrounded?

This, indeed, is the first instance, in the like case, that ever I was
wrought upon.  But why? because, I never before encountered a resistance
so much in earnest: a resistance, in short, so irresistible.

What a triumph has her sex obtained in my thoughts by this trial, and
this resistance?

But if she can now forgive me--can!--she must.  Has she not upon her
honour already done it?--But how will the dear creature keep that part of
her promise which engages her to see me in the morning as if nothing had
happened?

She would give the world, I fancy, to have the first interview over!--She
had not best reproach me--yet not to reproach me!--what a charming
puzzle!--Let her break her word with me at her peril.  Fly me she
cannot--no appeals lie from my tribunal--What friend has she in the
world, if my compassion exert not itself in her favour?--and then the
worthy Captain Tomlinson, and her uncle Harlowe, will be able to make all
up for me, be my next offence what it may.

As to thy apprehensions of her committing any rashness upon herself,
whatever she might have done in her passion, if she could have seized
upon her scissors, or found any other weapon, I dare say there is no fear
of that from her deliberate mind.  A man has trouble enough with these
truly pious, and truly virtuous girls; [now I believe there are such;] he
had need to have some benefit from, some security in, the rectitude of
their minds.

In short, I fear nothing in this lady but grief: yet that's a slow
worker, you know; and gives time to pop in a little joy between its
sullen fits.



LETTER XVII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY MORNING, EIGHT O'CLOCK.


Her chamber-door has not yet been opened.  I must not expect she will
breakfast with me.  Nor dine with me, I doubt.  A little silly soul, what
troubles does she make to herself by her over-niceness!--All I have done
to her, would have been looked upon as a frolic only, a romping bout, and
laughed off by nine parts in ten of the sex accordingly.  The more she
makes of it, the more painful to herself, as well as to me.

Why now, Jack, were it not better, upon her own notions, that she seemed
not so sensible as she will make herself to be, if she is very angry?

But perhaps I am more afraid than I need.  I believe I am.  From her
over-niceness arises my fear, more than from any extraordinary reason for
resentment.  Next time, she may count herself very happy, if she come off
no worse.

The dear creature was so frightened, and so fatigued, last night, no
wonder she lies it out this morning.

I hope she has had more rest than I have had.  Soft and balmy, I hope,
have been her slumbers, that she may meet me in tolerable temper.  All
sweetly blushing and confounded--I know how she will look!--But why
should she, the sufferer, be ashamed, when I, the trespasser, am not?

But custom is a prodigious thing.  The women are told how much their
blushes heighten their graces: they practise for them therefore: blushes
come as hastily when they call for them, as their tears: aye, that's it!
While we men, taking blushes for a sign of guilt or sheepishness, are
equally studious to suppress them.


***


By my troth, Jack, I am half as much ashamed to see the women below, as
my fair-one can be to see me.  I have not yet opened my door, that I may
not be obtruded upon my them.

After all, what devils may one make of the sex!  To what a height of--
what shall I call it?--must those of it be arrived, who once loved a man
with so much distinction, as both Polly and Sally loved me; and yet can
have got so much above the pangs of jealousy, so much above the
mortifying reflections that arise from dividing and sharing with new
objects the affections of them they prefer to all others, as to wish for,
and promote a competitorship in his love, and make their supreme delight
consist in reducing others to their level!--For thou canst not imagine,
how even Sally Martin rejoiced last night in the thought that the lady's
hour was approaching.


PAST TEN O'CLOCK.

I never longed in my life for any thing with so much impatience as to see
my charmer.  She has been stirring, it seems, these two hours.

Dorcas just now tapped at her door, to take her morning commands.

She had none for her, was the answer.

She desired to know, if she would not breakfast?

A sullen and low-voiced negative received Dorcas.

I will go myself.


***


Three different times tapped I at the door, but had no answer.

Permit me, dearest creature, to inquire after your health.  As you have
not been seen to-day, I am impatient to know how you do.

Not a word of answer; but a deep sigh, even to sobbing.

Let me beg of you, Madam, to accompany me up another pair of stairs--
you'll rejoice to see what a happy escape we have all had.

A happy escape indeed, Jack!--For the fire had scorched the window-board,
singed the hangings, and burnt through the slit-deal linings of the
window-jambs.

No answer, Madam!--Am I not worthy of one word?--Is it thus you keep your
promise with me?--Shall I not have the favour of your company for two
minutes [only for two minutes] in the dining-room?

Hem!--and a deep sigh!--were all the answer.

Answer me but how you do!  Answer me but that you are well!  Is this the
forgiveness that was the condition of my obedience?

Then, with a faintish, but angry voice, begone from my door!--Wretch!
inhuman, barbarous, and all that is base and treacherous! begone from my
door!  Nor tease thus a poor creature, entitled to protection, not
outrage.

I see, Madam, how you keep your word with me--if a sudden impulse, the
effects of an unthought-of accident, cannot be forgiven--

O the dreadful weight of a father's curse, thus in the very letter of
it--

And then her voice dying away in murmurs inarticulate, I looked through
the key-hole, and saw her on her knees, her face, though not towards me,
lifted up, as well as hands, and these folded, depreciating, I suppose,
that gloomy tyrant's curse.

I could not help being moved.

My dearest life! admit me to your presence but for two minutes, and
confirm your promised pardon; and may lightning blast me on the spot, if
I offer any thing but my penitence, at a shrine so sacred!--I will
afterwards leave you for a whole day; till to-morrow morning; and then
attend you with writings, all ready to sign, a license obtained, or if it
cannot, a minister without one.  This once believe me!  When you see the
reality of the danger that gave occasion for this your unhappy
resentment, you will think less hardly of me.  And let me beseech you to
perform a promise on which I made a reliance not altogether ungenerous.

I cannot see you!  Would to Heaven I never had!  If I write, that's all I
can do.

Let your writing then, my dearest life, confirm your promise: and I will
withdraw in expectation of it.


PAST ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

She rung her bell for Dorcas; and, with her door in her hand, only half
opened, gave her a billet for me.

How did the dear creature look, Dorcas?

She was dressed.  She turned her face quite from me; and sighed, as if
her heart would break.

Sweet creature:--I kissed the wet wafer, and drew it from the paper with
my breath.

These are the contents.--No inscriptive Sir!  No Mr. Lovelace!


I cannot see you: nor will I, if I can help it.  Words cannot express the
anguish of my soul on your baseness and ingratitude.

If the circumstances of things are such, that I can have no way for
reconciliation with those who would have been my natural protectors from
such outrages, but through you, [the only inducement I have to stay a
moment longer in your knowledge,] pen and ink must be, at present, the
only means of communication between us.

Vilest of men, and most detestable of plotters! how have I deserved from
you the shocking indignities--but no more--only for your own sake, wish
not, at least for a week to come, to see

The undeservedly injured and insulted
CLARISSA HARLOWE


***


So thou seest, nothing could have stood me in stead, but this plot of
Tomlinson and her uncle!  To what a pretty pass, nevertheless, have I
brought myself!--Had Caesar been such a fool, he had never passed the
rubicon.  But after he had passed it, had he retreated re infecta,
intimidated by a senatorial edict, what a pretty figure would he have
made in history!--I might have known, that to attempt a robbery, and put
a person in bodily fear, is as punishable as if the robbery had been
actually committed.

But not to see her for a week!--Dear, pretty soul! how she anticipates me
in every thing!  The counsellor will have finished the writings to-day or
to-morrow, at furthest: the license with the parson, or the parson
without the license, must also be procured within the next four-and-
twenty hours; Pritchard is as good as ready with his indentures
tripartite: Tomlinson is at hand with a favourable answer from her uncle
--yet not to see her for a week!----Dear sweet soul;--her good angel is
gone a journey: is truanting at least.  But nevertheless, in thy week's
time, or in much less, my charmer, I doubt not to complete my triumph!

But what vexes me of all things is, that such an excellent creature
should break her word:--Fie, fie, upon her!--But nobody is absolutely
perfect! 'Tis human to err, but not to persevere--I hope my charmer
cannot be inhuman!



LETTER XVIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
KING'S ARMS, PALL-MALL, THURSDAY, TWO O'CLOCK.


Several billets passed between us before I went out, by the
internuncioship of Dorcas: for which reason mine are superscribed by her
married name.--She would not open her door to receive them; lest I should
be near it, I suppose: so Dorcas was forced to put them under the door
(after copying them for thee); and thence to take the answers.  Read
them, if thou wilt, at this place.


***


TO MRS. LOVELACE

Indeed, my dearest life, you carry this matter too far.  What will the
people below, who suppose us one as to the ceremony, think of so great a
niceness?  Liberties so innocent! the occasion so accidental!--You will
expose yourself as well as me.--Hitherto they know nothing of what has
passed.  And what indeed has passed to occasion all this resentment?--I
am sure you will not, by a breach of your word of honour, give me reason
to conclude that, had I not obeyed you, I could have fared no worse.

Most sincerely do I repent the offence given to your delicacy--But must
I, for so accidental an occurrence, be branded by such shocking names?--
Vilest of men, and most detestable of plotters, are hard words!--From the
pen of such a lady too.

If you step up another pair of stairs, you will be convinced, that,
however detestable I may be to you, I am no plotter in this affair.

I must insist upon seeing you, in order to take your directions upon some
of the subjects we talked of yesterday in the evening.

All that is more than necessary is too much.  I claim your promised
pardon, and wish to plead it on my knees.

I beg your presence in the dining-room for one quarter of an hour, and I
will then leave you for the day, I am,

My dearest life,
Your ever adoring and truly penitent
LOVELACE.


***


TO MR. LOVELACE

I will not see you.  I cannot see you.  I have no directions to give you.
Let Providence decide for me as it pleases.

The more I reflect upon your vileness, your ungrateful, your barbarous
vileness, the more I am exasperated against you.

You are the last person whose judgment I will take upon what is or is not
carried too far in matters of decency.

'Tis grievous to me to write, or even to think of you at present.  Urge
me no more then.  Once more, I will not see you.  Nor care I, now you
have made me vile to myself, what other people think of me.


***


TO MRS. LOVELACE

Again, Madam, I remind you of your promise: and beg leave to say, I
insist upon the performance of it.

Remember, dearest creature, that the fault of a blameable person cannot
warrant a fault in one more perfect.  Overniceness may be underniceness!

I cannot reproach myself with any thing that deserves this high
resentment.

I own that the violence of my passion for you might have carried me
beyond fit bounds--but that your commands and adjurations had power over
me at such a moment, I humbly presume to say, deserves some
consideration.

You enjoin me not to see you for a week.  If I have not your pardon
before Captain Tomlinson comes to town, what shall I say to him?

I beg once more your presence in the dining-room.  By my soul, Madam, I
must see you.

I want to consult you about the license, and other particulars of great
importance.  The people below think us married; and I cannot talk to you
upon such subjects with the door between us.

For Heaven's sake, favour me with your presence for a few minutes: and I
will leave you for the day.

If I am to be forgiven, according to your promise, the earlier
forgiveness will be most obliging, and will save great pain to yourself,
as well as to

Your truly contrite and afflicted
LOVELACE.


***


TO MR. LOVELACE

The more you tease me, the worse it will be for you.

Time is wanted to consider whether I ever should think of you at all.

At present, it is my sincere wish, that I may never more see your face.

All that can afford you the least shadow of favour from me, arises from
the hoped-for reconciliation with my real friends, not my Judas
protector.

I am careless at present of consequences.  I hate myself: And who is it I
have reason to value?--Not the man who could form a plot to disgrace his
own hopes, as well as a poor friendless creature, (made friendless by
himself,) by insults not to be thought of with patience.


***


TO MRS. LOVELACE

MADAM,
I will go to the Commons, and proceed in every particular as if I had not
the misfortune to be under your displeasure.

I must insist upon it, that however faulty my passion, on so unexpected
an incident, made me appear to a lady of your delicacy, yet my compliance
with your entreaties at such a moment [as it gave you an instance of your
power over me, which few men could have shown] ought, duly considered, to
entitle me to the effects of that solemn promise which was the condition
of my obedience.

I hope to find you in a kinder, and, I will say, juster disposition on my
return.  Whether I get the license, or not, let me beg of you to make the
soon you have been pleased to bid me hope for, to-morrow morning.  This
will reconcile every thing, and make me the happiest of men.

The settlements are ready to sign, or will be by night.

For Heaven's sake, Madam, do not carry your resentment into a displeasure
so disproportionate to the offence.  For that would be to expose us both
to the people below; and, what is of infinite more consequence to us, to
Captain Tomlinson.  Let us be able, I beseech you, Madam, to assure him,
on his next visit, that we are one.

As I have no hope to be permitted to dine with you, I shall not return
till evening: and then, I presume to say, I expect [your promise
authorizes me to use the word] to find you disposed to bless, by your
consent for to-morrow,

Your adoring
LOVELACE.


***


What pleasure did I propose to take, how to enjoy the sweet confusion in
which I expected to find her, while all was so recent!--But she must, she
shall, see me on my return.  It were better to herself, as well as for
me, that she had not made so much ado about nothing.  I must keep my anger
alive, lest it sink into compassion.  Love and compassion, be the
provocation ever so great, are hard to be separated: while anger converts
what would be pity, without it, into resentment.  Nothing can be lovely
in a man's eye with which he is thoroughly displeased.

I ordered Dorcas, on putting the last billet under the door, and finding
it taken up, to tell her, that I hoped an answer to it before I went out.

Her reply was verbal, tell him that I care not whither he goes, nor what
he does.--And this, re-urged by Dorcas, was all she had to say to me.

I looked through the key-hole at my going by her door, and saw her on her
knees, at her bed's feet, her head and bosom on the bed, her arms
extended; [sweet creature how I adore her!] and in an agony she seemed to
be, sobbing, as I heard at that distance, as if her heart would break.--
By my soul, Jack, I am a pityful fellow!  Recollection is my enemy!--
Divine excellence!--Happy with her for so many days together!  Now so
unhappy!--And for what?--But she is purity herself.  And why, after all,
should I thus torment--but  I must not trust myself with myself, in the
humour I am in.


***


Waiting here for Mowbray and Mallory, by whose aid I am to get the
license, I took papers out of my pocket, to divert myself; and thy last
popt officiously the first into my hand.  I gave it the honour of a
re-perusal; and this revived the subject with me, with which I had
resolved not to trust myself.

I remember, that the dear creature, in her torn answer to my proposals,
says, condescension is not meanness.  She better knows how to make this
out, than any mortal breathing.  Condescension indeed implies dignity:
and dignity ever was there in her condescension.  Yet such a dignity as
gave grace to the condescension; for there was no pride, no insult, no
apparent superiority, indicated by it.--This, Miss Howe confirms to be a
part of her general character.*


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXIII.


I can tell her, how she might behave, to make me her own for ever.  She
knows she cannot fly me.  She knows she must see me sooner or later; the
sooner the more gracious.--I would allow her to resent [not because the
liberties I took with her require resentment, were she not a CLARISSA;
but as it becomes her particular niceness to resent]: but would she show
more love than abhorrence of me in her resentment; would she seem, if it
were but to seem, to believe the fire no device, and all that followed
merely accidental; and descend, upon it, to tender expostulation, and
upbraiding for the advantage I would have taken of her surprise; and
would she, at last, be satisfied (as well she may) that it was attended
with no further consequence; and place some generous confidence in my
honour, [power loves to be trusted, Jack;] I think I would put an end to
all her trials, and pay her my vows at the altar.

Yet, to have taken such bold steps, as with Tomlinson and her uncle--to
have made such a progress--O Belford, Belford, how I have puzzled myself,
as well as her!--This cursed aversion to wedlock how it has entangled
me!--What contradictions has it made me guilty of!

How pleasing to myself, to look back upon the happy days I gave her;
though mine would doubtless have been unmixedly so, could I have
determined to lay aside my contrivances, and to be as sincere all the
time, as she deserved that I should be!

If I find this humour hold but till to-morrow morning, [and it has now
lasted two full hours, and I seem, methinks, to have pleasure in
encouraging it,] I will make thee a visit, I think, or get thee to come
to me; and then will I--consult thee upon it.

But she will not trust me.  She will not confide in my honour.  Doubt, in
this case, is defiance.  She loves me not well enough to forgive me
generously.  She is so greatly above me!  How can I forgive her for a
merit so mortifying to my pride!  She thinks, she knows, she has told me,
that she is above me.  These words are still in my ears, 'Be gone,
Lovelace!--My soul is above thee, man!--Thou hast a proud heart to
contend with!--My soul is above thee, man!'*  Miss Howe thinks her above
me too.  Thou, even thou, my friend, my intimate friend and companion,
art of the same opinion.  Then I fear her as much as I love her.--How
shall my pride bear these reflections?  My wife (as I have often said,
because it so often recurs to my thoughts) to be so much my superior!--
Myself to be considered but as the second person in my own family!--Canst
thou teach me to bear such a reflection as this!--To tell me of my
acquisition in her, and that she, with all her excellencies, will be mine
in full property, is a mistake--it cannot be so--for shall I not be
her's; and not my own?--Will not every act of her duty (as I cannot
deserve it) be  a condescension, and a triumph over me?--And must I owe
it merely to her goodness that she does not despise me?--To have her
condescend to bear with my follies!--To wound me with an eye of pity!--A
daughter of the Harlowes thus to excel the last, and as I have heretofore
said, not the meanest of the Lovelaces**--forbid it!


* See Vol. IV. Letter XLVII.
** See Vol. III. Letter XVIII.


Yet forbid it not--for do I not now--do I not every moment--see her
before me all over charms, and elegance and purity, as in the struggles
of the past midnight?  And in these struggles, heart, voice, eyes, hand,
and sentiments, so greatly, so gloriously consistent with the character
she has sustained from her cradle to the present hour?

But what advantages do I give thee?

Yet have I not always done her justice?  Why then thy teasing
impertinence?

However, I forgive thee, Jack--since (so much generous love am I capable
of!) I had rather all the world should condemn me, than that her
character should suffer the least impeachment.

The dear creature herself once told me, that there was a strange mixture
in my mind.*  I have been called Devil and Beelzebub, between the two
proud beauties: I must indeed be a Beelzebub, if I had not some tolerable
qualities.


* See Vol. III. Letter XXXIII.


But as Miss Howe says, the suffering time of this excellent creature is
her shining time.*  Hitherto she has done nothing but shine.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXIII.


She called me villain, Belford, within these few hours.  And what is the
sum of the present argument; but that had I not been a villain in her
sense of the word, she had not been such an angel?

O Jack, Jack!  This midnight attempt has made me mad; has utterly undone
me!  How can the dear creature say, I have made her vile in her own eyes,
when her behaviour under such a surprise, and her resentment under such
circumstances, have so greatly exalted her in mine?

Whence, however, this strange rhapsody?--Is it owing to my being here?
That I am not at Sinclair's?  But if there be infection in that house,
how has my beloved escaped it?

But no more in this strain!--I will see what her behaviour will be on my
return--yet already do I begin to apprehend some little sinkings, some
little retrogradations: for I have just now a doubt arisen, whether, for
her own sake, I should wish her to forgive me lightly, or with
difficulty?


***


I am in a way to come at the wished-for license.

I have now given every thing between my beloved and me a full
consideration; and my puzzle is over.  What has brought me to a speedier
determination is, that I think I have found out what she means by the
week's distance at which she intends to hold me.  It is, that she may
have time to write to Miss Howe, to put in motion that cursed scheme of
her's, and to take measures upon it which shall enable her to abandon and
renounce me for ever.  Now, Jack, if I obtain not admission to her
presence on my return; but am refused with haughtiness; if her week be
insisted upon (such prospects before her); I shall be confirmed in my
conjecture; and it will be plain to me, that weak at best was that love,
which could give place to punctilio, at a time when that all-reconciling
ceremony, as she must think, waits her command:--then will I recollect
all her perversenesses; then will I re-peruse Miss Howe's letters, and
the transcripts from others of them; give way to my aversion to the life
of shackles: and then shall she be mine in my own way.

But, after all, I am in hopes that she will have better considered of
every thing by the evening; that her threat of a week's distance was
thrown out in the heat of passion; and that she will allow, that I have
as much cause to quarrel with her for breach of her word, as she has with
me for breach of the peace.

These lines of Rowe have got into my head; and I shall repeat them very
devoutly all the way the chairman shall poppet me towards her by-and-by.

      Teach me, some power, the happy art of speech,
      To dress my purpose up in gracious words;
      Such as may softly steal upon her soul,
      And never waken the tempestuous passions.



LETTER XIX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY EVENING, JUNE 8.


O for a curse to kill with!--Ruined!  Undone!  Outwitted!
Tricked!--Zounds, man, the lady has gone off!--Absolutely gone off!
Escaped!--

Thou knowest not, nor canst conceive, the pangs that wring my heart!--
What can I do!--O Lord, O Lord, O Lord!

And thou, too, who hast endeavoured to weaken my hands, wilt but clap thy
dragon's wings at the tidings!

Yet I must write, or I shall go distracted!  Little less have I been
these two hours; dispatching messengers to every stage, to every inn, to
every waggon or coach, whether flying or creeping, and to every house
with a bill up, for five miles around.

The little hypocrite, who knows not a soul in this town, [I thought I was
sure of her at any time,] such an unexperienced traitress--giving me hope
too, in her first billet, that her expectation of the family-
reconciliation would withhold her from taking such a step as this--curse
upon her contrivances!--I thought, that it was owing to her bashfulness,
to her modesty, that, after a few innocent freedoms, she could not look
me in the face; when, all the while, she was impudently [yes, I say,
impudently, though she be Clarissa Harlowe] contriving to rob me of the
dearest property I had ever purchased--purchased by a painful servitude
of many months; fighting through the wild-beasts of her family for her,
and combating with a wind-mill virtue, which hath cost me millions of
perjuries only to attempt; and which now, with its damn'd air-fans, has
tost me a mile and a half beyond hope!--And this, just as I had arrived
within view of the consummation of all my wishes!

O Devil of Love!  God of Love no more--how have I deserved this of
thee!--Never before the friend of frozen virtue?--Powerless demon, for
powerless thou must be, if thou meanedest not to frustrate my hopes; who
shall henceforth kneel at thy altars!--May every enterprising heart
abhor, despise, execrate, renounce thee, as I do!--But, O Belford,
Belford, what signifies cursing now!


***


How she could effect this her wicked escape is my astonishment; the whole
sisterhood having charge of her;--for, as yet, I have not had patience
enough to inquire into the particulars, nor to let a soul of them
approach me.

Of this I am sure, or I had not brought her hither, there is not a
creature belonging to this house, that could be corrupted either by
virtue or remorse: the highest joy every infernal nymph, of this worse
than infernal habitation, could have known, would have been to reduce
this proud beauty to her own level.--And as to my villain, who also had
charge of her, he is such a seasoned varlet, that he delights in mischief
for the sake of it: no bribe could seduce him to betray his trust, were
there but wickedness in it!--'Tis well, however, he was out of my way
when the cursed news was imparted to me!--Gone, the villain! in quest of
her: not to return, nor to see my face [so it seems he declared] till he
has heard some tidings of her; and all the out-of-place varlets of his
numerous acquaintance are summoned and employed in the same business.

To what purpose brought I this angel (angel I must yet call her) to this
hellish house?--And was I not meditating to do her deserved honour?  By
my soul, Belford, I was resolved--but thou knowest what I had
conditionally resolved--And now, who can tell into what hands she may
have fallen!

I am mad, stark mad, by Jupiter, at the thoughts of this!--Unprovided,
destitute, unacquainted--some villain, worse than myself, who adores her
not as I adore her, may have seized her, and taken advantage of her
distress!--Let me perish, Belford, if a whole hecatomb of innocents, as
the little plagues are called, shall atone for the broken promises and
wicked artifices of this cruel creature!


***


Going home, as I did, with resolutions favourable to her, judge thou of
my distraction, when her escape was first hinted to me, although but in
broken sentences.  I knew not what I said, nor what I did.  I wanted to
kill somebody.  I flew out of one room into another, who broke the matter
to me.  I charged bribery and corruption, in my first fury, upon all; and
threatened destruction to old and young, as they should come in my way.

Dorcas continues locked up from me: Sally and Polly have not yet dared to
appear: the vile Sinclair--

But here comes the odious devil.  She taps at the door, thought that's
only a-jar, whining and snuffling, to try, I suppose, to coax me into
temper.


***


What a helpless state, where a man can only execrate himself and others;
the occasion of his rage remaining; the evil increasing upon reflection;
time itself conspiring to deepen it!--O how I curs'd her!

I have her now, methinks, before me, blubbering--how odious does sorrow
make an ugly face!--Thine, Jack, and this old beldam's, in penitentials,
instead of moving compassion, must evermore confirm hatred; while beauty
in tears, is beauty heightened, and what my heart has ever delighted to
see.----

'What excuse!--Confound you, and your cursed daughters, what excuse can
you make?--Is she not gone--Has she not escaped?--But before I am quite
distracted, before I commit half a hundred murders, let me hear how it
was.'----


***


I have heard her story!--Art, damn'd, confounded, wicked, unpardonable
art, is a woman of her character--But show me a woman, and I'll show thee
a plotter!--This plaguy sex is art itself: every individual of it is a
plotter by nature.

This is the substance of the old wretch's account.

She told me, 'That I had no sooner left the vile house, than Dorcas
acquainted the syren' [Do, Jack, let me call her names!--I beseech thee,
Jack, to permit me to call her names!] 'that Dorcas acquainted her lady
with it; and that I had left word, that I was gone to doctors-commons,
and should be heard of for some hours at the Horn there, if inquired
after by the counsellor, or anybody else: that afterwards I should be
either at the Cocoa-tree, or King's-Arms, and should not return till
late.  She then urged her to take some refreshment.

'She was in tears when Dorcas approached her; her saucy eyes swelled with
weeping: she refused either to eat or drink; sighed as if her heart would
break.'--False, devilish grief! not the humble, silent, grief, that only
deserves pity!--Contriving to ruin me, to despoil me of all that I held
valuable, in the very midst of it.

'Nevertheless, being resolved not to see me for a week at least, she
ordered her to bring up three or four French rolls, with a little butter,
and a decanter of water; telling her, she would dispense with her
attendance; and that should be all she should live upon in the interim.
So artful creature! pretending to lay up for a week's siege.'--For, as to
substantial food, she, no more than other angels--Angels! said I--the
devil take me if she be any more an angel!--for she is odious in my eyes;
and I hate her mortally!

But O Lovelace, thou liest!--She is all that is lovely.  All that is
excellent!

But is she, can she be gone!--Oh! how Miss Howe will triumph!--But if
that little fury receive her, fate shall make me rich amends; for then
will I contrive to have them both.

I was looking back for connection--but the devil take connection; I have
no business with it: the contrary best befits distraction, and that will
soon be my lot!

'Dorcas consulted the old wretch about obeying her: O yes, by all means;
for Mr. Lovelace knew how to come at her at any time: and directed a
bottle of sherry to be added.

'This cheerful compliance so obliged her, that she was prevailed upon to
go up, and look at the damage done by the fire; and seemed not only
shocked by it, but, as they thought, satisfied it was no trick; as she
owned she had at first apprehended it to be.  All this made them secure;
and they laughed in their sleeves, to think what a childish way of
showing her resentment she had found out; Sally throwing out her
witticisms, that Mrs. Lovelace was right, however, not to quarrel with
her bread and butter.'

Now this very childishness, as they imagined it, in such a genius, would
have made me suspect either her head, after what had happened the night
before; or her purpose, when the marriage was (so far as she knew) to be
completed within the week in which she was resolved to secrete herself
from me in the same house.

'She sent Will. with a letter to Wilson's, directed to Miss Howe,
ordering him to inquire if there were not one for her there.

'He only pretended to go, and brought word there was none; and put her
letter in his pocket for me.

'She then ordered  him to carry another (which she gave him) to the Horn
Tavern to me.--All this done without any seeming hurry: yet she appeared
to be very solemn; and put her handkerchief frequently to her eyes.

'Will. pretended to come to me with this letter.  But thou the dog had
the sagacity to mistrust something on her sending him out a second time;
(and to me, whom she had refused to see;) which he thought extraordinary;
and mentioned his mistrusts to Sally, Polly, and Dorcas; yet they made
light of his suspicions; Dorcas assuring them all, that her lady seemed
more stupid with her grief, than active; and that she really believed she
was a little turned in her head, and knew not what she did.  But all of
them depended upon her inexperience, her open temper, and upon her not
making the least motion towards going out, or to have a coach or chair
called, as sometimes she had done; and still more upon the preparations
she had made for a week's siege, as I may call it.

'Will. went out, pretending to bring the letter to me; but quickly
returned; his heart still misgiving him, on recollecting my frequent
cautions, that he was not to judge for himself, when he had positive
orders; but if any doubt occurred, from circumstances I could not
foresee, literally to follow them, as the only way to avoid blame.

'But it must have been in this little interval, that she escaped; for
soon after his return, they made fast the street-door and hatch, the
mother and the two nymphs taking a little turn into the garden; Dorcas
going up stairs, and Will. (to avoid being seen by his lady, or his voice
heard) down into the kitchen.

'About half an hour after, Dorcas, who had planted herself where she
could see her lady's door open, had the curiosity to go look through the
keyhole, having a misgiving, as she said, that the lady might offer some
violence to herself, in the mood she had been in all day; and finding the
key in the door, which was not very usual, she tapped at it three or four
times, and having no answer, opened it, with Madam, Madam, did you call?
--Supposing her in her closet.

'Having no answer, she stept forward, and was astonished to find she was
not there.  She hastily ran into the dining-room, then into my
apartments; searched every closet; dreading all the time to behold some
sad catastrophe.

'Not finding her any where, she ran down to the old creature, and her
nymphs, with a Have you seen my lady?--Then she's gone!--She's no where
above!

'They were sure she could not be gone out.

'The whole house was in an uproar in an instant; some running up-stairs,
some down, from the upper rooms to the lower; and all screaming, How
should they look me in the face!

'Will. cried out, he was a dead man: he blamed them; they him; and every
one was an accuser, and an excuser, at the same time.

'When they had searched the whole house, and every closet in it, ten
times over, to no purpose, they took it into their heads to send to all
the porters, chairmen, and hackney-coachmen, that had been near the house
for two hours past, to inquire if any of them saw such a young lady;
describing her.

'This brought them some light: the only dawning for hope, that I can
have, and which keeps me from absolute despair.  One of the chairmen gave
them this account: That he saw such a one come out of the house a little
before four (in a great hurry, and as if frighted) with a little parcel
tied up in a handkerchief, in her hand: that he took notice to his
fellow, who plied her without her answering, that she was a fine young
lady: that he'd warrant, she had either a husband, or very cross parents;
for that her eyes seemed swelled with crying.  Upon which, a third fellow
replied, that it might be a doe escaped from mother Damnable's park.
This Mrs. Sinclair told me with a curse, and a wish that she had a better
reputation; so handsomely as she lived, and so justly as she paid every
body for what she bought; her house visited by the best and civilest of
gentlemen; and no noise or brawls ever heard or known in it.

'From these appearances, the fellow who gave this information, had the
curiosity to follow her, unperceived.  She often looked back.  Every body
who passed her, turned to look after her; passing their verdict upon her
tears, her hurry, and her charming person; till coming to a stand of
coaches, a coachman plied her; was accepted; alighted; opened the
coach-door in a hurry, seeing her hurry; and in it she stumbled for
haste; and, as the fellow believed, hurt her shin with the stumble.'

The devil take me, Belford, if my generous heart is not moved for her,
notwithstanding her wicked deceit, to think what must be her reflections
and apprehensions at the time:--A mind so delicate, heeding no censures;
yet, probably afraid of being laid hold of by a Lovelace in every one she
saw!  At the same time, not knowing to what dangers she was about to
expose herself; nor of whom she could obtain shelter; a stranger to the
town, and to all its ways; the afternoon far gone: but little money; and
no clothes but those she had on!

It is impossible, in this little interval since last night, that Miss
Howe's Townsend could be co-operating.

But how she must abhor me to run all these risques; how heartily she must
detest me for my freedoms of last night!  Oh! that I had given her
greater reason for a resentment so violent!--As to her virtue, I am too
much enraged to give her the merit due to that.  To virtue it cannot be
owing that she should fly from the charming prospects that were before
her; but to malice, hatred, contempt, Harlowe pride, (the worst of
pride,) and to all the deadly passions that ever reigned in a female
breast--and if I can but recover her--But be still, be calm, be hushed,
my stormy passions; for is it not Clarissa [Harlowe must I say?] that
thus far I rave against?

'The fellow heard her say, drive fast! very fast!  Where, Madam?  To
Holborn-bars, answered she; repeating, Drive very fast!--And up she
pulled both the windows: and he lost sight of the coach in a minute.

'Will., as soon as he had this intelligence, speeded away in hopes to
trace her out; declaring, that he would never think of seeing me, till he
had heard some tidings of his lady.'

And now, Belford, all my hope is, that this fellow (who attended us in
our airing to Hampstead, to Highgate, to Muswell-hill, to Kentish-town)
will hear of her at some one or other of those places.  And on this I the
rather build, as I remember she was once, after our return, very
inquisitive about the stages, and their prices; praising the conveniency
to passengers in their going off every hour; and this in Will.'s hearing,
who was then in attendance.  Woe be to the villain, if he recollect not
this!


***


I have been traversing her room, meditating, or taking up every thing she
but touched or used: the glass she dressed at, I was ready to break, for
not giving me the personal image it was wont to reflect of her, whose
idea is for ever present with me.  I call for her, now in the tenderest,
now in the most reproachful terms, as if within hearing: wanting her, I
want my own soul, at least every thing dear to it.  What a void in my
heart! what a chilness in my blood, as if its circulation was arrested!
From her room to my own; in the dining-room, and in and out of every
place where I have seen the beloved of my heart, do I hurry; in none can
I tarry; her lovely image in every one, in some lively attitude, rushing
cruelly upon me, in differently remembered conversations.

But when in my first fury, at my return, I went up two pairs of stairs,
resolved to find the locked-up Dorcas, and beheld the vainly-burnt
window-board, and recollected my baffled contrivances, baffled by my own
weak folly, I thought my distraction completed; and down I ran as one
frighted at a spectre, ready to howl for vexation; my head and my temples
shooting with a violence I had never felt before; and my back aching as
if the vertebrae were disjointed, and falling in pieces.

But now that I have heard the mother's story, and contemplated the
dawning hopes given by the chairman's information, I am a good deal
easier, and can make cooler reflections.  Most heartily pray I for
Will.'s success, every four or five minutes.  If I lose her, all my rage
will return with redoubled fury.  The disgrace to be thus outwitted by a
novice, an infant in stratagem and contrivance, added to the violence of
my passion for her, will either break my heart, or (what saves many a
heart, in evils insupportable) turn my brain.  What had I to do to go out
a license-hunting, at least till I had seen her, and made up matters with
her?  And indeed, were it not the privilege of a principal to lay all his
own faults upon his underlings, and never be to blame himself, I should
be apt to reflect, that I am more in fault than any body.  And, as the
sting of this reflection will sharpen upon me, if I recover her not, how
shall I ever be able to bear it?

If ever--


[Here Mr. Lovelace lays himself under a curse, too shocking to be
repeated, if he revenge not himself upon the Lady, should he once more
get her into his hands.]


***


I have just now dismissed the sniveling toad Dorcas, who was introduced
to me for my pardon by the whining mother.  I gave her a kind of negative
and ungracious forgiveness.  Yet I shall as violently curse the two
nymphs, by-and-by, for the consequences of my own folly: and if this will
be a good way too to prevent their ridicule upon me, for losing so
glorious an opportunity as I had last night, or rather this morning.

I have corrected, from the result of the inquiries made of the chairman,
and from Dorcas's observations before the cruel creature escaped, a
description of her dress; and am resolved, if I cannot otherwise hear of
her, to advertise her in the gazette, as an eloped wife, both by her
maiden and acknowledged name; for her elopement will soon be known by
every enemy: why then should not my friends be made acquainted with it,
from whose inquiries and informations I may expect some tidings of her?

'She had on a brown lustring night-gown, fresh, and looking like new, as
every thing she wears does, whether new or not, from an elegance natural
to her.  A beaver hat, a black ribbon about her neck, and blue knots on
her breast.  A quilted petticoat of carnation-coloured satin; a rose
diamond ring, supposed on her finger; and in her whole person and
appearance, as I shall express it, a dignity, as well as beauty, that
commands the repeated attention of every one who sees her.'

The description of her person I shall take a little more pains about.  My
mind must be more at ease, before I undertake that.  And I shall
threaten, 'that if, after a certain period given for her voluntary
return, she be not heard of, I will prosecute any person who presumes to
entertain, harbour, abet, or encourage her, with all the vengeance that
an injured gentleman and husband may be warranted to take by law, or
otherwise.'


***


Fresh cause of aggravation!--But for this scribbling vein, or I should
still run mad.

Again going into her chamber, because it was her's, and sighing over the
bed, and every piece of furniture in it, I cast my eye towards the
drawers of the dressing-glass, and saw peep out, as it were, in one of
the half-drawn drawers, the corner of a letter.  I snatched it out, and
found it superscribed, by her, To Mr. Lovelace.  The sight of it made my
heart leap, and I trembled so, that I could hardly open the seal.

How does this damn'd love unman me!--but nobody ever loved as I love!--It
is even increased by her unworthy flight, and my disappointment.
Ungrateful creature, to fly from a passion thus ardently flaming! which,
like the palm, rises the more for being depressed and slighted.

I will not give thee a copy of this letter.  I owe her not so much
service.

But wouldst thou think, that this haughty promise-breaker could resolve
as she does, absolutely and for ever to renounce me for what passed last
night?  That she could resolve to forego all her opening prospects of
reconciliation; the reconciliation with a worthless family, on which she
has set her whole heart?--Yet she does--she acquits me of all obligation
to her, and herself of all expectations from me--And for what?--O that
indeed I had given her real cause!  Damn'd confounded niceness, prudery,
affectation, or pretty ignorance, if not affectation!--By my soul,
Belford, I told thee all--I  was more indebted to her struggles, than to
my own forwardness.  I cannot support my own reflections upon a decency
so ill-requited.--She could not, she would not have been so much a
Harlowe in her resentment.  All she feared had then been over; and her
own good sense, and even modesty, would have taught her to make the best
of it.

But if ever again I get her into my hands, art, and more art, and
compulsion too, if she make it necessary, [and 'tis plain that nothing
else will do,] shall she experience from the man whose fear of her has
been above even his passion for her; and whose gentleness and forbearance
she has thus perfidiously triumphed over.  Well, says the Poet,

      'Tis nobler like a lion to invade
      When appetite directs, and seize my prey,
      Than to wait tamely, like a begging dog,
      Till dull consent throws out the scraps of love.

Thou knowest what I have so lately vowed--and yet, at times [cruel
creature, and ungrateful as cruel!] I can subscribe with too much truth
to those lines of another Poet:

      She reigns more fully in my soul than ever;
      She garrisons my breast, and mans against me
      Ev'n my own rebel thoughts, with thousand graces,
      Ten thousand charms, and new-discovered beauties!



LETTER XX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


A letter is put into my hands by Wilson himself.--Such a letter!

A letter from Miss Howe to her cruel friend!--

I made no scruple to open it.

It is a miracle that I fell not into fits at the reading of it; and at
the thought of what might have been the consequence, had it come into the
hands of this Clarissa Harlowe.  Let my justly-excited rage excuse my
irreverence.

Collins, though not his day, brought it this afternoon to Wilson's, with
a particular desire that it might be sent with all speed to Miss
Beaumont's lodgings, and given, if possible, into her own hands.  He had
before been here (at Mrs. Sinclair's with intent to deliver it to the
lady with his own hand; but was told [too truly told!] that she was
abroad; but that they would give her any thing he should leave for her
the moment she returned.)  But he cared not to trust them with his
business, and went away to Wilson's, (as I find by the description of him
at both places,) and there left the letter; but not till he had a second
time called here, and found her not come in.

The letter [which I shall enclose; for it is too long to transcribe] will
account to thee for Collins's coming hither.

O this devilish Miss Howe;--something must be resolved upon and done with
that little fury!


***


Thou wilt see the margin of this cursed letter crowded with indices
[>>>].  I put them to mark the places which call for vengeance upon the
vixen writer, or which require animadversion.  Return thou it to me the
moment thou hast perused it.

Read it here; and avoid trembling for me, if thou canst.


TO MISS LAETITIA BEAUMONT
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

          You will perhaps think that I have been too
     long silent.  But I had begun two letters at differ-
     ent times since my last, and written a great deal
>>>  each time; and with spirit enough, I assure you;
     incensed as I was against the abominable wretch you
     are with; particularly on reading your's of the 21st
     of the past month.*


* See Vol. IV. Letter XLVI.


>>>        The first I intended to keep open till I could
     give you some account of my proceedings with Mrs.
     Townsend.  It was some days before I saw her:
     and this intervenient space giving me time to re-
     peruse what I had written, I thought it proper to lay
>>>  that aside, and to write in a style a little less fervent;
>>>  for you would have blamed me, I know, for the free-
     dom of some of my expressions.  [Execrations, if
     you please.]  And when I had gone a good way
     in the second, the change in your prospects, on his
     communicating to you Miss Montague's letter, and
     his better behaviour, occasioning a change in your
     mind, I laid that aside also.  And in this uncer-
     tainty, thought I would wait to see the issue of
     affairs between you before I wrote again; believing
     that all would soon be decided one way or other.

          I had still, perhaps, held this resolution, [as every
     appearance, according to your letters, was more and
     more promising,] had not the two passed days fur-
     nished me with intelligence which it highly imports
     you to know.

          But I must stop here, and take a little walk, to
     try to keep down that just indignation which rises
     to my pen, when I am about to relate to you what
     I must communicate.


     ***

          I am not my own mistress enough--then my
     mother--always up and down--and watching as if
     I were writing to a fellow.  But I will try if I can
     contain myself in tolerable bounds.

         The women of the house where you are--O my
     dear, the women of the house--but you never
     thought highly of them--so it cannot be very sur-
>>>  prising--nor would you have staid so long with
     them, had not the notion of removing to one of your
     own, made you less uneasy, and less curious about
     their characters, and behaviour.  Yet I could now
     wish, that you had been less reserved among them
>>>  --But I tease you--In short, my dear, you are
     certainly in a devilish house!--Be assured that the
     woman is one of the vilest women--nor does
     she go to you by her right name--[Very true!]--
     Her name is not Sinclair, nor is the street she lives
     in Dover-street.  Did you never go out by your-
     self, and discharge the coach or chair, and return
>>>  by another coach or chair?  If you did, [yet I
     don't remember that you ever wrote to me, that
     you did,] you would never have found your way to
     the vile house, either by the woman's name, Sin-
     clair, or by the street's name, mentioned by that
     Doleman in his letter about the lodgings.*


* Vol. III. Letters XXXVIII. and XXXIX.


         The wretch might indeed have held out these
     false lights a little more excusably, had the house
     been an honest house; and had his end only been
     to prevent mischief from your brother.  But this
     contrivance was antecedent, as I think, to your
     brother's project; so that no excuse can be made
>>>  for his intentions at the time--the man, whatever he
     may now intend, was certainly then, even then, a
     villain in his heart.


     ***


>>>      I am excessively concerned that I should be pre-
     vailed upon, between your over-niceness, on one
     hand, and my mother's positiveness, on the other, to
     be satisfied without knowing how to direct to you
     at your lodgings.  I think too, that the proposal
     that I should be put off to a third-hand knowledge,
     or rather veiled in a first-hand ignorance, came from
     him, and that it was only acquiesced in by you, as
     it was by me,* upon needless and weak considera-
     tions; because, truly, I might have it to say, if
     challenged, that I knew not where to send to you!
     I am ashamed of myself!--Had this been at first
     excusable, it could not be a good reason for going
     on in the folly, when you had no liking to the
>>>  house, and when he began to play tricks, and delay
     with you.--What! I was to mistrust myself, was
     I?  I was to allow it to be thought, that I could
>>>  not keep my own secret?--But the house to be
>>>  taken at this time, and at that time, led us both on
>>>  --like fools, like tame fools, in a string.  Upon my
     life, my dear, this man is a vile, a contemptible
     villain--I must speak out!--How has he laughed
     in his sleeve at us both, I warrant, for I can't tell
     how long!


* See Vol. III. Letter LVI. par. 12. and Letter LVIII. par. 12.--Where
the reader will observe, that the proposal came from herself; which, as
it was also mentioned by Mr. Lovelace, (towards the end of Letter I. in
Vol. IV.) she may be presumed to have forgotten.  So that Clarissa had a
double inducement for acquiescing with the proposed method of carrying on
the correspondence between Miss Howe and herself by Wilson's conveyance,
and by the name of Laetitia Beaumont.


         And yet who could have thought that a man of
>>>  fortune, and some reputation, [this Doleman, I
     mean--not your wretch, to be sure!] formerly a
     rake, indeed, [I inquired after him long ago; and
     so was the easier satisfied;] but married to a
     woman of family--having had a palsy-blow--and,
>>>  one would think, a penitent, should recommend
     such a house [why, my dear, he could not inquire
     of it, but must find it to be bad] to such a man as
     Lovelace, to bring his future, nay, his then supposed,
     bride to?


     ***


>>>      I write, perhaps, with too much violence, to be
     clear, but I cannot help it.  Yet I lay down my
     pen, and take it up every ten minutes, in order to
     write with some temper--my mother too, in and
     out--What need I, (she asks me,) lock myself in,
     if I am only reading past correspondencies?  For
>>>  that is my pretence, when she comes poking in with
     her face sharpened to an edge, as I may say, by a
     curiosity that gives her more pain than pleasure.--
>>>  The Lord forgive me; but I believe I shall huff
     her next time she comes in.


     ***


         Do you forgive me too, my dear--my mother
     ought; because she says, I am my father's girl; and
     because I am sure I am her's.  I don't kow what
     to do--I don't know what to write next--I have
     so much to write, yet have so little patience, and so
     little opportunity.

         But I will tell you how I came by my intelli-
>>>  gence.  That being a fact, and requiring the less
     attention, I will try to account to you for that.

         Thus, then, it came about: 'Miss Lardner
     (whom you have seen at her cousin Biddulph's)
     saw you at St. James's Church on Sunday was fort-
     night.  She kept you in her eye during the whole
     time; but could not once obtain the notice of your's,
     though she courtesied to you twice.  She thought to
     pay her compliments to you when the service was
     over, for she doubted not but you were married--
>>>  and for an odd reason--because you came to church
     by yourself.  Every eye, (as usual, wherever you
     are, she said,) was upon you; and this seeming to
     give you hurry, and you being nearer the door than
     she, you slid out, before she could get to you.--But
     she ordered her servant to follow you till you were
     housed.  This servant saw you step into a chair,
     which waited for you; and you ordered the men to
     carry you to the place where they took you up.

         'The next day, Miss Lardner sent the same
     servant, out of mere curiosity, to make private in-
     quiry whether Mr. Lovelace were, or were not,
     with you there.--And this inquiry brought out,
>>>  from different people, that the house was suspected
     to be one of those genteel wicked houses, which
     receive and accommodate fashionable people of both
     sexes.

         'Miss Lardner, confounded at this strange intel-
     ligence, made further inquiry; enjoining secrecy
     to the servant she had sent, as well as to the gentle-
>>>  man whom she employed; who had it confirmed
     from a rakish friend, who knew the house; and
     told him, that there were two houses: the one in
     which all decent appearances were preserved, and guests
     rarely admitted; the other, the receptacle of those
     who were absolutely engaged, and broken to the
     vile yoke.'

>>>      Say--my dear creature--say--Shall I not exe-
     crate the wretch?--But words are weak--What
     can I say, that will suitably express my abhorrence
     of such a villain as he must have been, when he
     meditated to carry a Clarissa to such a place!

         'Miss Lardner kept this to herself some days,
     not knowing what to do; for she loves you, and
     admires you of all women.  At last she revealed it,
     but in confidence, to Miss Biddulph, by letter.
     Miss Biddulph, in like confidence, being afraid it
     would distract me, were I to know it, communi-
     cated it to Miss Lloyd; and so, like a whispered
     scandal, it passed through several canals, and then
     it came to me; which was not till last Monday.'

         I thought I should have fainted upon the surpris-
     ing communication.  But rage taking place, it blew
     away the sudden illness.  I besought Miss Lloyd
     to re-enjoin secrecy to every one.  I told her that
>>>  I would not for the world that my mother, or any
     of your family, should know it.  And I instantly
     caused a trusty friend to make what inquiries he
     could about Tomlinson.

>>>      I had thoughts to have done it before I had this
     intelligence: but not imagining it to be needful, and
     little thinking that you could be in such a house, and
     as you were pleased with your changed prospects, I
>>>  forbore.  And the rather forbore, as the matter is
     so laid, that Mrs. Hodges is supposed to know
     nothing of the projected treaty of accommodation;
     but, on the contrary, that it was designed to be a
     secret to her, and to every body but immediate
     parties; and it was Mrs. Hodges that I had pro-
     posed to sound by a second hand.

>>>      Now, my dear, it is certain, without applying to
     that too-much-favoured housekeeper, that there is
     not such a man within ten miles of your uncle.--
     Very true!--One Tomkins there is, about four miles
     off; but he is a day-labourer: and one Thompson,
     about five miles distant the other way; but he is a
     parish schoolmaster, poor, and about seventy.

>>>      A man, thought but of L.800 a year, cannot come
     from one country to settle in another, but every
     body in both must know it, and talk of it.

>>>      Mrs. Hodges may yet be sounded at a distance,
     if you will.  Your uncle is an old man.  Old men
     imagine themselves under obligation to their para-
>>>  mours, if younger than themselves, and seldom
     keep any thing from their knowledge.  But if we
     suppose him to make secret of this designed treaty,
     it is impossible, before that treaty was thought of,
     but she must have seen him, at least have heard
     your uncle speak praisefully of a man he is said to
     be so intimate with, let him have been ever so little
     a while in those parts.

>>>      Yet, methinks, the story is so plausible--Tom-
     linson, as you describe him, is so good a man, and
     so much of a gentleman; the end to be answered
>>>  by his being an impostor, so much more than neces-
     sary if Lovelace has villany in his head; and as
>>>  you are in such a house--your wretch's behaviour
     to him was so petulant and lordly; and Tomlin-
     son's answer so full of spirit and circumstance;
>>>  and then what he communicated to you of Mr.
     Hickman's application to your uncle, and of Mrs.
     Norton's to your mother, [some of which particu-
>>>  lars, I am satisfied, his vile agent, Joseph Leman,
     could not reveal to his vile employer;] his press-
     ing on the marriage-day, in the name of your
     uncle, which it could not answer any wicked pur-
>>>  pose for him to do; and what he writes of your
     uncle's proposal, to have it thought that you were
     married from the time that you have lived in one
     house together; and that to be made to agree with
     the time of Mr. Hickman's visit to your uncle.
>>>  The insisting on a trusty person's being present at
     the ceremony, at that uncle's nomination--These
     things make me willing to try for a tolerable construc-
     tion to be made of all.  Though I am so much
     puzzled by what occurs on both sides of the ques-
>>>  tion, that I cannot but abhor the devilish wretch,
     whose inventions and contrivances are for ever em-
     ploying an inquisitive head, as mine is, without
     affording the means of absolute detection.

         But this is what I am ready to conjecture, that
     Tomlinson, specious as he is, is a machine of Love-
>>>  lace; and that he is employed for some end, which
     has not yet been answered.  This is certain, that
     not only Tomlinson, but Mennell, who, I think,
     attended you more than once at this vile house,
     must know it to be a vile house.

         What can you then think of Tomlinson's declar-
     ing himself in favour of it upon inquiry?

         Lovelace too must know it to be so; if not
     before he brought you to it, soon after.

>>>      Perhaps the company he found there, may be the
     most probable way of accounting for his bearing
     with the house, and for his strange suspensions of
     marriage, when it was in his power to call such an
     angel of a woman his.--

>>>      O my dear, the man is a villain!--the greatest
     of villains, in every light!--I am convinced that he
     is.--And this Doleman must be another of his
     implements!

>>>      There are so many wretches who think that to
     be no sin, which is one of the greatest and most
     ungrateful of all sins,--to ruin young creatures of
     our sex who place their confidence in them; that
     the wonder is less than the shame, that people, of
     appearance at least, are found to promote the horrid
     purposes of profligates of fortune and interest!

>>>      But can I think [you will ask with indignant
     astonishment] that Lovelace can have designs upon
     your honour?

>>>      That such designs he has had, if he still hold
     them or not, I can have no doubt, now that I know
     the house he has brought you to, to be a vile one.
     This is a clue that has led me to account for all his
     behaviour to you ever since you have been in his
     hands.

         Allow me a brief retrospection of it all.

         We both know, that pride, revenge, and a delight
     to tread in unbeaten paths, are principal ingredients
     in the character of this finished libertine.

>>>      He hates all your family--yourself excepted:
     and I have several times thought, that I have seen
>>>  him stung and mortified that love has obliged him
     to kneel at your footstool, because you are a Har-
     lowe.  Yet is this wretch a savage in love.--Love
>>>  that humanizes the fiercest spirits, has not been able
     to subdue his.  His pride, and the credit which a
>>>  few plausible qualities, sprinkled among his odious
     ones, have given him, have secured him too good
     a reception from our eye-judging, our undistinguish-
     ing, our self-flattering, our too-confiding sex, to
     make assiduity and obsequiousness, and a conquest
     of his unruly passions, any part of his study.

>>>      He has some reason for his animosity to all the
     men, and to one woman of your family.  He has
     always shown you, and his own family too, that he
>>>  prefers his pride to his interest.  He is a declared
     marriage-hater; a notorious intriguer; full of his
     inventions, and glorying in them: he never could
     draw you into declarations of love; nor till your
>>>  wise relations persecuted you as they did, to receive
     his addresses as a lover.  He knew that you pro-
     fessedly disliked him for his immoralities; he could
     not, therefore, justly blame you for the coldness
     and indifference of your behaviour to him.

>>>      The prevention of mischief was your first main
     view in the correspondence he drew you into.  He
     ought not, then, to have wondered that you declared
     your preference of the single life to any matrimonial
     engagement.  He knew that this was always your
>>>  preference; and that before he tricked you away
     so artfully.  What was his conduct to you
     afterwards, that you should of a sudden change
     it?

         Thus was your whole behaviour regular, con-
     sistent, and dutiful to those to whom by birth you
     owed duty; and neither prudish, coquettish, nor
     tyrannical to him.

>>>      He had agreed to go on with you upon those
     your own terms, and to rely only on his own merits
     and future reformation for your favour.

>>>      It was plain to me, indeed, to whom you com-
     municated all that you knew of your own heart,
     though not all of it that I found out, that love had
     pretty early gained footing in it.  And this you
     yourself would have discovered sooner than you
>>>  did, had not his alarming, his unpolite, his rough
     conduct, kept it under.

>>>      I knew by experience that love is a fire that is
     not to be played with without burning one's fingers:
     I knew it to be a dangerous thing for two single
     persons of different sexes to enter into familiarity
     and correspondence with each other: Since, as to
     the latter, must not a person be capable of premedi-
     tated art, who can sit down to write, and not write
     from the heart?--And a woman to write her heart
     to a man practised in deceit, or even to a man of
     some character, what advantage does it give him
     over her?

>>>      As this man's vanity had made him imagine, that
     no woman could be proof against love, when his
     address was honourable; no wonder that he
     struggled, like a lion held in toils, against a passion
     that he thought not returned.  And how could
     you, at first, show a return in love, to so fierce
     a spirit, and who had seduced you away by vile
     artifices, but to the approval of those artifices.

>>>      Hence, perhaps, it is not difficult to believe, that
     it became possible for such a wretch as this to give
     way to his old prejudices against marriage; and to
     that revenge which had always been a first passion
     with him.

         This is the only way, I think, to account for his
     horrid views in bringing you to a vile house.

         And now may not all the rest be naturally
     accounted for?--His delays--his teasing ways--
     his bringing you to bear with his lodging in the
     same house--his making you pass to the people of
>>>  it as his wife, though restrictively so, yet with hope,
     no doubt, (vilest of villains as he is!) to take you
>>>  at an advantage--his bringing you into the com-
     pany of his libertine companions--the attempt of
     imposing upon you that Miss Partington for a
     bedfellow, very probably his own invention for
     the worst of purposes--his terrifying you at many
     different times--his obtruding himself upon you
     when you went out to church; no doubt to prevent
     your finding out what the people of the house were
     --the advantages he made of your brother's foolish
     project with Singleton.

         See, my dear, how naturally all this follows from
>>>  the discovery made by Miss Lardner.  See how
     the monster, whom I thought, and so often called,
>>>  a fool, comes out to have been all the time one of
     the greatest villains in the world!

         But if this is so, what, [it would be asked by
     an indifferent person,] has hitherto saved you?
     Glorious creature!--What, morally speaking, but
     your watchfulness!  What but that, and the
     majesty of your virtue; the native dignity, which,
     in a situation so very difficult, (friendless, destitute,
     passing for a wife, cast into the company of crea-
     tures accustomed to betray and ruin innocent hearts,)
     has hitherto enabled you to baffle, over-awe, and
     confound, such a dangerous libertine as this; so
     habitually remorseless, as you have observed him
     to be; so very various in his temper, so inventive,
     so seconded, so supported, so instigated, too pro-
     bably, as he has been!--That native dignity, that
     heroism, I will call it, which has, on all proper
     occasions, exerted itself in its full lustre, unmingled
>>>  with that charming obligingness and condescending
     sweetness, which is evermore the softener of that
     dignity, when your mind is free and unapprehen-
     sive!

>>>      Let me stop to admire, and to bless my beloved
     friend, who, unhappily for herself, at an age so
     tender, unacquainted as she was with the world, and
     with the vile arts of libertines, having been called
     upon to sustain the hardest and most shocking trials,
     from persecuting relations on one hand, and from
     a villanous lover on the other, has been enabled to
     give such an illustrious example of fortitude and
     prudence as never woman gave before her; and
     who, as I have heretofore observed,* has made a
     far greater figure in adversity, than she possibly
     could have made, had all her shining qualities been
     exerted in their full force and power, by the con-
>>>  tinuance of that prosperous run of fortune which
     attended her for eighteen years of life out of
     nineteen.


* See Vol. IV. Letters XXIV.


     ***


>>>      But now, my dear, do I apprehend, that you
     are in greater danger than ever yet you have been
     in; if you are not married in a week; and yet stay
     in this abominable house.  For were you out of it,
     I own I should not be much afraid for you.

         These are my thoughts, on the most deliberate
>>>  consideration: 'That he is now convinced, that
     he has not been able to draw you off your guard:
     that therefore, if he can obtain no new advantage
     over you as he goes along, he is resolved to do you
     all the poor justice that it is in the power of such a
     wretch as he to do you.  He is the rather induced to
     this, as he sees that all his own family have warmly
     engaged themselves in your cause: and that it is
>>>  his highest interest to be just to you.  Then the
     horrid wretch loves you (as well he may) above all
     women.  I have no doubt of this: with such a love
>>>  as such a wretch is capable of: with such a love as
     Herod loved his Marianne.  He is now therefore,
     very probably, at last, in earnest.'

         I took time for inquiries of different natures, as
     I knew, by the train you are in, that whatever his
     designs are, they cannot ripen either for good or
>>>  evil till something shall result from this device
     of his about Tomlinson and your uncle.

         Device I have no doubt that it is, whatever this
     dark, this impenetrable spirit intends by it.

>>>      And yet I find it to be true, that Counsellor
     Williams (whom Mr. Hickman knows to be a man
     of eminence in his profession) has actually as good
>>>  as finished the settlements: that two draughts of
     them have been made; one avowedly to be sent to
     one Captain Tomlinson, as the clerk says:--and I
     find that a license has actually been more than once
     endeavoured to be obtained; and that difficulties
     have hitherto been made, equally to Lovelace's
>>>  vexation and disappointment.  My mother's proctor,
     who is very intimate with the proctor applied to
     by the wretch, has come at this information in
     confidence; and hints, that, as Mr. Lovelace is a
     man of high fortunes, these difficulties will probably
     be got over.

         But here follow the causes of my apprehension of
     your danger; which I should not have had a thought
>>>  of (since nothing very vile has yet been attempted)
     but on finding what a house you are in, and, on that
     discovery, laying together and ruminating on past
     occurrences.

         'You are obliged, from the present favourable
>>>  appearances, to give him your company whenever
     he requests it.--You are under a necessity of for-
     getting, or seeming to forget, past disobligations;
     and to receive his addresses as those of a betrothed
     lover.--You will incur the censure of prudery and
     affectation, even perhaps in your own apprehension,
     if you keep him at that distance which has hitherto
>>>  been your security.--His sudden (and as suddenly
     recovered) illness has given him an opportunity to
     find out that you love him.  [Alas! my dear, I
     knew you loved him!]  He is, as you relate, every
>>>  hour more and more an encroacher upon it.  He
     has seemed to change his nature, and is all love and
>>>  gentleness.  The wolf has put on the sheep's cloth-
     ing; yet more than once has shown his teeth, and
     his hardly-sheathed claws.  The instance you have
     given of his freedom with your person,* which you
     could not but resent; and yet, as matters are
     circumstanced between you, could not but pass
     over, when Tomlinson's letter called you into his
>>>  company,** show the advantage he has now over
     you; and also, that if he can obtain greater, he
     will.--And for this very reason (as I apprehend) it
>>>  is, that Tomlinson is introduced; that is to say, to
     give you the greater security, and to be a mediator,
     if mortal offence be given you by any villanous
     attempt.--The day seems not now to be so much
     in your power as it ought to be, since that now
     partly depends on your uncle, whose presence, at
     your own motion, he has wished on the occasion.
     A wish, were all real, very unlikely, I think, to be
     granted.'


* She means the freedom Mr. Lovelace took with her before the fire-plot.
See Vol. V. Letter XI.  When Miss Howe wrote this letter she could not
know of that.
** See Vol. V. Letter XII.


>>>      And thus situated, should he offer greater free-
     doms, must you not forgive him?

         I fear nothing (as I know who has said) that
     devil carnate or incarnate can fairly do against a
>>>  virtue so established.*--But surprizes, my dear, in
     such a house as you are in, and in such circum-
     stances as I have mentioned, I greatly fear! the
>>>  man one who has already triumphed over persons
     worthy of his alliance.

>>>      What then have you to do, but to fly this house,
     this infernal house!--O that your heart would let
     you fly the man!

>>>      If you should be disposed so to do, Mrs. Towns-
     end shall be ready at your command.--But if you
     meet with no impediments, no new causes of doubt,
     I think your reputation in the eye of the world,
>>>  though not your happiness, is concerned, that you
     should be his--and yet I cannot bear that these
     libertines should be rewarded for their villany with
     the best of the sex, when the worst of it are too
     good for them.

         But if you meet with the least ground for
     suspicion; if he would detain you at the odious
     house, or wish you to stay, now you know what
>>>  the people are; fly him, whatever your prospects
     are, as well as them.

         In one of your next airings, if you have no other
>>>  way, refuse to return with him.  Name me for your
     intelligencer, that you are in a bad house, and if you
     think you cannot now break with him, seem rather
>>>  to believe that he may not know it to be so; and
     that I do not believe he does: and yet this belief
     in us both must appear to be very gross.

         But suppose you desire to go out of town for the
     air, this sultry weather, and insist upon it?  You
     may plead your health for so doing.  He dare not
>>>  resist such a plea.  Your brother's foolish scheme,
     I am told, is certainly given up; so you need not
     be afraid on that account.

         If you do not fly the house upon reading of this,
     or some way or other get out of it, I shall judge of
     his power over you, by the little you will have over
     either him or yourself.

>>>      One of my informers has made such slight inquiries
     concerning Mrs. Fretchville.  Did he ever name
     to you the street or square she lived in?--I don't
>>>  remember that you, in any of your's, mentioned the
     place of her abode to me.  Strange, very strange,
     this, I think!  No such person or house can be
     found, near any of the new streets or squares, where
     the lights I had from your letters led me to imagine
>>>  her house might be.--Ask him what street the
     house is in, if he has not told you; and let me
>>>  know.  If he make a difficulty of that circumstance,
     it will amount to a detection.--And yet, I think,
     you will have enough without this.

         I shall send this long letter by Collins, who
     changes his day to oblige me; and that he may try
     (now I know where you are) to get it into your
     own hands.  If he cannot, he will leave it at
     Wilson's.  As none of our letters by that convey-
     ance have miscarried when you have been in more
     apparently disagreeable situations than you are in at
     present.  I hope that this will go safe, if Collins
     should be obliged to leave it there.

>>>      I wrote a short letter to you in my first agitations.
     It contained not above twenty lines, all full of fright,
     alarm, and execration.  But being afraid that my
     vehemence would too much affect you, I thought it
     better to wait a little, as well for the reasons already
     hinted at, as to be able to give you as many par-
     ticulars as I could, and my thoughts upon all.  And
     as they have offered, or may offer, you will be
     sufficiently armed to resist all his machinations, be
     what they will.

>>>      One word more.  Command me up, if I can be
     of the least service or pleasure to you.  I value
     not fame; I value not censure; nor even life itself,
     I verily think, as I do your honour, and your friend-
     ship--For, is not your honour my honour?  And
     is not your friendship the pride of my life?

         May Heaven preserve you, my dearest creature,
     in honour and safety, is the prayer, the hourly
     prayer, of

Your ever-faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.

THURSDAY MORN. 5.  I have
     written all night


***


TO MISS HOWE

MY DEAREST CREATURE,

How you have shocked, confounded, surprised, astonished me, by your
dreadful communication!--My heart is too weak to bear up against such a
stroke as this!--When all hope was with me!  When my prospects were so
much mended!--But can there be such villany in men, as in this vile
principal, and equally vile agent!

I am really ill--very ill--grief and surprise, and, now I will say,
despair, have overcome me!--All, all, you have laid down as conjecture,
appears to me now to be more than conjecture!

O that your mother would have the goodness to permit me the presence of
the only comforter that my afflicted, my half-broken heart, could be
raised by.  But I charge you, think not of coming up without her
indulgent permission.  I am too ill at present, my dear, to think of
combating with this dreadful man; and of flying from this horrid house!--
My bad writing will show you this.--But my illness will be my present
security, should he indeed have meditated villany.--Forgive, O forgive
me, my dearest friend, the trouble I have given you!--All must soon--But
why add I grief to grief, and trouble to trouble?--But I charge you, my
beloved creature, not to think of coming up without your mother's love,
to the truly desolate and broken-spirited

CLARISSA HARLOWE.


***


Well, Jack!--And what thinkest thou of this last letter?  Miss Howe
values not either fame or censure; and thinkest thou, that this letter
will not bring the little fury up, though she could procure no other
conveyance than her higgler's panniers, one for herself, the other for
her maid?  She knows whither to come now.  Many a little villain have I
punished for knowing more than I would have her know, and that by adding
to her knowledge and experience.  What thinkest thou, Belford, if, by
getting hither this virago, and giving cause for a lamentable letter from
her to the fair fugitive, I should be able to recover her?  Would she not
visit that friend in her distress, thinkest thou, whose intended visit to
her in her's brought her into the condition from which she herself had so
perfidiously escaped?

Let me enjoy the thought!

Shall I send this letter?--Thou seest I have left room, if I fail in the
exact imitation of so charming a hand, to avoid too strict a scrutiny.
Do they not both deserve it of me?  Seest thou now how the raving girl
threatens her mother?  Ought she not to be punished?  And can I be a
worse devil, or villain, or monster, that she calls me in the long letter
I enclose (and has called me in her former letters) were I to punish them
both as my vengeance urges me to punish them?  And when I have executed
that my vengeance, how charmingly satisfied may they both go down into
the country and keep house together, and have a much better reason than
their pride could give them, for living the single life they have both
seemed so fond of!

I will set about transcribing it this moment, I think.  I can resolve
afterwards.  Yet what has poor Hickman done to deserve this of me!--But
gloriously would it punish the mother (as well as daughter) for all her
sordid avarice; and for her undutifulness to honest Mr. Howe, whose heart
she actually broke.  I am on tiptoe, Jack, to enter upon this project.
Is not one country as good to me as another, if I should be obliged to
take another tour upon it?


***


But I will not venture.  Hickman is a good man, they tell me.  I love a
good man.  I hope one of these days to be a good man myself.  Besides, I
have heard within this week something of this honest fellow that shows he
has a soul; when I thought, if he had one, that it lay a little of the
deepest to emerge to notice, except on very extraordinary occasions; and
that then it presently sunk again into its cellula adiposa.--The man is a
plump man.--Didst ever see him, Jack?

But the principal reason that withholds me [for 'tis a tempting project!]
is, for fear of being utterly blown up, if I should not be quick enough
with my letter, or if Miss Howe should deliberate on setting out, to try
her mother's consent first; in which time a letter from my frighted
beauty might reach her; for I have no doubt, wherever she has refuged,
but her first work was to write to her vixen friend.  I will therefore go
on patiently; and take my revenge upon the little fury at my leisure.

But in spite of my compassion for Hickman, whose better character is
sometimes my envy, and who is one of those mortals that bring clumsiness
into credit with the mothers, to the disgrace of us clever fellows, and
often to our disappointment, with the daughters; and who has been very
busy in assisting these double-armed beauties against me; I swear by all
the dii majores, as well as minores, that I will have Miss Howe, if I
cannot have her more exalted friend!  And then, if there be as much
flaming love between these girls as they pretend, will my charmer profit
by her escape?

And now, that I shall permit Miss Howe to reign a little longer, let me
ask thee, if thou hast not, in the enclosed letter, a fresh instance,
that a great many of my difficulties with her sister-toast are owing to
this flighty girl?--'Tis true that here was naturally a confounded sharp
winter air; and if a little cold water was thrown into the path, no
wonder that it was instantly frozen; and that the poor honest traveller
found it next to impossible to keep his way; one foot sliding back as
fast as the other advanced, to the endangering of his limbs or neck.  But
yet I think it impossible that she should have baffled me as she has done
(novice as she is, and never before from under her parents' wings) had
she not been armed by a virago, who was formerly very near showing that
she could better advise than practise.  But this, I believe, I have said
more than once before.

I am loth to reproach myself, now the cruel creature has escaped me; For
what would that do, but add to my torment? since evils self-caused, and
avoidable, admit not of palliation or comfort.  And yet, if thou tellest
me, that all her strength was owing to my weakness, and that I have been
a cursed coward in this whole affair; why, then, Jack, I may blush, and
be vexed; but, by my soul, I cannot contradict thee.

But this, Belford, I hope--that if I can turn the poison of the enclosed
letter into wholesome ailment; that is to say, if I can make use of it to
my advantage; I shall have thy free consent to do it.

I am always careful to open covers cautiously, and to preserve seals
entire.  I will draw out from this cursed letter an alphabet.  Nor was
Nick Rowe ever half so diligent to learn Spanish, at the Quixote
recommendation of a certain peer, as I will be to gain the mastery of
this vixen's hand.



LETTER XXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
THURSDAY EVENING, JUNE 8.


After my last, so full of other hopes, the contents of this will surprise
you.  O my dearest friend, the man has at last proved himself to be a
villain!

It was with the utmost difficulty last night, that I preserved myself from
the vilest dishonour.  He extorted from me a promise of forgiveness,
and that I would see him next day, as if nothing had happened: but if it
were possible to escape from a wretch, who, as I have too much reason to
believe, formed a plot to fire the house, to frighten me, almost naked,
into his arms, how could I see him next day?

I have escaped--Heaven be praised that I have!--And now have no other
concern, than that I fly from the only hope that could have made such a
husband tolerable to me; the reconciliation with my friends, so agreeably
undertaken by my uncle.

All my present hope is, to find some reputable family, or person of my
own sex, who is obliged to go beyond sea, or who lives abroad; I care not
whether; but if I might choose, in some one of our American colonies--
never to be heard of more by my relations, whom I have so grievously
offended.

Nor let your generous heart be moved at what I write.  If I can escape
the dreadfullest part of my father's malediction, (for the temporary part
is already, in a manner, fulfilled, which makes me tremble in
apprehension of the other,) I shall think the wreck of my worldly
fortunes a happy composition.

Neither is there need of the renewal of your so-often-tendered goodness
to me: for I have with me rings and other valuables, that were sent me
with my clothes, which will turn into money to answer all I can want,
till Providence shall be pleased to put me into some want to help myself,
if, for my further punishment, my life is to be lengthened beyond my
wishes.

Impute not this scheme, my beloved friend, either to dejection on one
hand, or to that romantic turn on the other, which we have supposed
generally to obtain with our sex, from fifteen to twenty-two: for, be
pleased to consider my unhappy situation, in the light in which it really
must appear to every considerate person who knows it.  In the first
place, the man, who has endeavoured to make me, his property, will hunt
me as a stray: and he knows he may do so with impunity; for whom have I
to protect me from him?

Then as to my estate, the envied estate, which has been the original
cause of all my misfortunes, it shall never be mine upon litigated terms.
What is there in being enabled to boast, that I am worth more than I can
use, or wish to use?  And if my power is circumscribed, I shall not have
that to answer for, which I should have, if I did not use it as I ought:
which very few do.  I shall have no husband, of whose interest I ought to
be so regardful, as to prevent me doing more than justice to others, that
I may not do less for him.  If therefore my father will be pleased (as I
shall presume, in proper time, to propose to him) to pay two annuities
out of it, one to my dear Mrs. Norton, which may make her easy for the
remainder of her life, as she is now growing into years; the other of
50L. per annum, to the same good woman, for the use of my poor, as I had
the vanity to call a certain set of people, concerning whom she knows all
my mind; that so as few as possible may suffer by the consequences of my
error; God bless them, and give them heart's ease and content, with the
rest!

Other reasons for my taking the step I have hinted at, are these.

This wicked man knows I have no friend in the world but you: your
neighbourhood therefore would be the first he would seek for me in, were
you to think it possible for me to be concealed in it: and in this case
you might be subjected to inconveniencies greater even than those which
you have already sustained on my account.

From my cousin Morden, were he to come, I could not hope protection;
since, by his letter to me, it is evident, that my brother has engaged him
in his party: nor would I, by any means, subject so worthy a man to
danger; as might be the case, from the violence of this ungovernable
spirit.

These things considered, what better method can I take, than to go abroad
to some one of the English colonies; where nobody but yourself shall know
any thing of me; nor you, let me tell you, presently, nor till I am
fixed, and (if it please God) in a course of living tolerably to my mind?
For it is no small part of my concern, that my indiscretions have laid so
heavy a tax upon you, my dear friend, to whom, once, I hoped to give more
pleasure than pain.

I am at present at one Mrs. Moore's at Hampstead.  My heart misgave me at
coming to this village, because I had been here with him more than once:
but the coach hither was so ready a conveniency, that I knew not what to
do better.  Then I shall stay here no longer than till I can receive your
answer to this: in which you will be pleased to let me know, if I cannot
be hid, according to your former contrivance, [happy, had I given into it
at the time!] by Mrs. Townsend's assistance, till the heat of his search
be over.  The Deptford road, I imagine, will be the right direction to
hear of a passage, and to get safely aboard.

O why was the great fiend of all unchained, and permitted to assume so
specious a form, and yet allowed to conceal his feet and his talons, till
with the one he was ready to trample upon my honour, and to strike the
other into my heart!--And what had I done, that he should be let loose
particularly upon me!

Forgive me this murmuring question, the effect of my impatience, my
guilty impatience, I doubt: for, as I have escaped with my honour, and
nothing but my worldly prospects, and my pride, my ambition, and my
vanity, have suffered in this wretch of my hopefuller fortunes, may I not
still be more happy than I deserve to be?  And is it not in my own power
still, by the Divine favour, to secure the greatest stake of all?  And
who knows but that this very path into which my inconsideration has
thrown me, strewed as it is with briers and thorns, which tear in pieces
my gaudier trappings, may not be the right path to lead me into the great
road to my future happiness; which might have been endangered by evil
communication?

And after all, are there not still more deserving persons than I, who
never failed in any capital point of duty, than have been more humbled
than myself; and some too, by the errors of parents and relations, by the
tricks and baseness of guardians and trustees, and in which their own
rashness or folly had no part?

I will then endeavour to make the best of my present lot.  And join with
me, my best, my only friend, in praying, that my punishment may end here;
and that my present afflictions may be sanctified to me.

This letter will enable you to account for a line or two, which I sent to
Wilson's, to be carried to you, only for a feint, to get his servant out
of the way.  He seemed to be left, as I thought, for a spy upon me.  But
he returning too soon, I was forced to write a few lines for him to carry
to his master, to a tavern near Doctors Commons, with the same view: and
this happily answered my end.

I wrote early in the morning a bitter letter to the wretch, which I left
for him obvious enough; and I suppose he has it by this time.  I kept no
copy of it.  I shall recollect the contents, and give you the particulars
of all, at more leisure.

I am sure you will approve of my escape--the rather, as the people of the
house must be very vile: for they, and that Dorcas too, did hear me (I
know they did) cry out for help: if the fire had been other than a
villanous plot (although in the morning, to blind them, I pretended to
think it otherwise) they would have been alarmed as much as I; and have
run in, hearing me scream, to comfort me, supposing my terror was the
fire; to relieve me, supposing it was any thing else.  But the vile
Dorcas went away as soon as she saw the wretch throw his arms about me!--
Bless me, my dear, I had only my slippers and an under-petticoat on.  I
was frighted out of my bed, by her cries of fire; and that I should be
burnt to ashes in a moment--and she to go away, and never to return, nor
any body else!  And yet I heard women's voices in the next room; indeed
I did--an evident contrivance of them all:--God be praised, I am out of
their house!

My terror is not yet over: I can hardly think myself safe: every well-
dressed man I see from my windows, whether on horseback or on foot, I
think to be him.

I know you will expedite an answer.  A man and horse will be procured me
to-morrow early, to carry this.  To be sure, you cannot return an answer
by the same man, because you must see Mrs. Townsend first: nevertheless,
I shall wait with impatience till you can; having no friend but you to
apply to; and being such a stranger to this part of the world, that I
know not which way to turn myself; whither to go; nor what to do--What a
dreadful hand have I made of it!

Mrs. Moore, at whose house I am, is a widow, and of good character: and
of this one of her neighbours, of whom I bought a handkerchief, purposely
to make inquiry before I would venture, informed me.

I will not set my foot out of doors, till I have your direction: and I am
the more secure, having dropt words to the people of the house where the
coach set me down, as if I expected a chariot to meet me in my way to
Hendon; a village a little distance from this.  And when I left their
house, I walked backward and forward upon the hill; at first, not knowing
what to do; and afterwards, to be certain that I was not watched before I
ventured to inquire after a lodging.

You will direct for me, my dear, by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas.

Had I not made my escape when I did, I was resolved to attempt it again
and again.  He was gone to the Commons for a license, as he wrote me
word; for I refused to see him, notwithstanding the promise he extorted
from me.

How hard, how next to impossible, my dear, to avoid many lesser
deviations, when we are betrayed into a capital one!

For fear I should not get away at my first effort, I had apprized him,
that I would not set eye upon him under a week, in order to gain myself
time for it in different ways.  And were I so to have been watched as to
have made it necessary, I would, after such an instance of the connivance
of the women of the house, have run out into the street, and thrown
myself into the next house I could have entered, or claim protection from
the first person I had met--Women to desert the cause of a poor creature
of their own sex, in such a situation, what must they be!--Then, such
poor guilty sort of figures did they make in the morning after he was
gone out--so earnest to get me up stairs, and to convince me, by the
scorched window-boards, and burnt curtains and vallens, that the fire was
real--that (although I seemed to believe all they would have me believe)
I was more and more resolved to get out of their house at all adventures.

When I began, I thought to write but a few lines.  But, be my subject
what it will, I know not how to conclude when I write to you.  It was
always so: it is not therefore owing peculiarly to that most interesting
and unhappy situation, which you will allow, however, to engross at
present the whole mind of

Your unhappy, but ever-affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.


LETTER XXII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY MORNING, PAST TWO O'CLOCK.


Io Triumphe!--Io Clarissa, sing!--Once more, what a happy man thy
friend!--A silly dear novice, to be heard to tell the coachman where to
carry her!--And to go to Hampstead, of all the villages about London!--
The place where we had been together more than once!

Methinks I am sorry she managed no better!--I shall find the recovery of
her too easy a task, I fear!  Had she but known how much difficulty
enhances the value of any thing with me, and had she the least notion of
obliging me by it, she would never have stopt short at Hampstead, surely.

Well, but after al this exultation, thou wilt ask, If I have already got
back my charmer?--I have not;--But knowing where she is, is almost the
same thing as having her in my power.  And it delights me to think how
she will start and tremble when I first pop upon her!  How she will look
with conscious guilt, that will more than wipe off my guilt of Wednesday
night, when she sees her injured lover, and acknowledged husband, from
whom, the greatest of felonies, she would have stolen herself.

But thou wilt be impatient to know how I came by my lights.  Read the
enclosed letter, as I have told thee, I have given my fellow, in
apprehension of such an elopement; and that will tell thee all, and what
I may reasonably expect from the rascal's diligence and management, if he
wishes ever to see my face again.

I received it about half an hour ago, just as I was going to lie down in
my clothes, and it has made me so much alive, that, midnight as it is, I
have sent for a Blunt's chariot, to attend me here by day peep, with my
usual coachman, if possible; and knowing not what else to do with myself,
I sat down, and, in the joy of my heart, have not only written thus far,
but have concluded upon the measures I shall take when admitted to her
presence: for well am I aware of the difficulties I shall have to contend
with from her perverseness.


HONNERED SIR,

This is to sertifie your Honner, as how I am heer at Hamestet, where I
have found out my lady to be in logins at one Mrs. Moore's, near upon
Hamestet-Hethe.  And I have so ordered matters, that her ladyship cannot
stur but I must have notice of her goins and comins.  As I knowed I durst
not look into your Honner's fase, if I had not found out my lady, thoff
she was gone off the prems's in a quarter of an hour, as a man may say;
so I knowed you would be glad at hart to know I have found her out: and
so I send thiss Petur Patrick, who is to have 5 shillings, it being now
near 12 of the clock at nite; for he would not stur without a hearty
drink too besides: and I was willing all shulde be snug likeways at the
logins before I sent.

I have munny of youre Honner's; but I thought as how, if the man was
payed by me beforend, he mought play trix; so left that to your Honner.

My lady knows nothing of my being hereaway.  But I thoute it best not to
leve the plase, because she has taken the logins but for a fue nites.

If your Honner come to the Upper Flax, I will be in site all the day
about the tapp-house or the Hethe.  I have borrowed another cote, instead
of your Honner's liferie, and a blacke wigg; so cannot be knoen by my
lady, iff as howe she shuld see me: and have made as if I had the tooth-
ake; so with my hancriffe at my mothe, the teth which your Honner was
pleased to bett out with your Honner's fyste, and my dam'd wide mothe, as
your Honner notifys it to be, cannot be knoen to be mine.

The two inner letters I had from my lady, before she went off the prems's.
One was to be left at Mr. Wilson's for Miss Howe.  The next was
to be for your Honner.  But I knowed you was not at the plase directed;
and being afear'd of what fell out, so I kept them for your Honner, and
so could not give um to you, until I seed you.  Miss How's I only made
belief to her ladyship as I carried it, and sed as how there was nothing
left for hur, as she wished to knoe: so here they be bothe.

I am, may it please your Honner,
Your Honner's must dutiful,
And, wonce more, happy servant,
WM. SUMMERS.


***


The two inner letters, as Will. calls them, 'tis plain, were written for
no other purpose, but to send him out of the way with them, and one of
them to amuse me.  That directed to Miss Howe is only this:--


THURSDAY, JUNE 8.

I write this, my dear Miss Howe, only for a feint, and to see if it will
go current.  I shall write at large very soon, if not miserably
prevented!!!

CL. H.


***


Now, Jack, will not her feints justify mine!  Does she not invade my
province, thinkest thou?  And is it not now fairly come to--Who shall
most deceive and cheat the other?  So, I thank my stars, we are upon a
par at last, as to this point, which is a great ease to my conscience,
thou must believe.  And if what Hudibras tells us is true, the dear
fugitive has also abundance of pleasure to come.

      Doubtless the pleasure is as great
      In being cheated, as to cheat.
      As lookers-on find most delight,
      Who least perceive the juggler's sleight;
      And still the less they understand,
      The more admire the slight of hand.


***


This my dear juggler's letter to me; the other inner letter sent by Will.


THURSDAY, JUNE 8.

MR. LOVELACE,

Do not give me cause to dread your return.  If you would not that I
should hate you for ever, send me half a line by the bearer, to assure me
that you will not attempt to see me for a week to come.  I cannot look
you in the face without equal confusion and indignation.  The obliging me
in this, is but a poor atonement for your last night's vile behaviour.

You may pass this time in a journey to Lord M.'s; and I cannot doubt, if
the ladies of your family are as favourable to me, as you have assured me
they are, but that you will have interest enough to prevail with one of
them to oblige me with their company.  After your baseness of last night,
you will not wonder, that I insist upon this proof of your future honour.

If Captain Tomlinson comes mean time, I can hear what he has to say, and
send you an account of it.

But in less than a week if you see me, it must be owing to a fresh act of
violence, of which you know not the consequence.

Send me the requested line, if ever you expect to have the forgiveness
confirmed, the promise of which you extorted from

The unhappy
CL. H.


***


Now, Belford, what canst thou say in behalf of this sweet rogue of a
lady?  What canst thou say for her?  'Tis apparent, that she was fully
determined upon an elopement when she wrote it.  And thus would she make
me of party against myself, by drawing me in to give her a week's time to
complete it.  And, more wicked still, send me upon a fool's errand to
bring up one of my cousins.--When we came to have the satisfaction of
finding her gone off, and me exposed for ever!--What punishment can be
bad enough for such a little villain of a lady?

But mind, moreover, how plausibly she accounts by this billet, (supposing
she should not find an opportunity of eloping before I returned,) for the
resolution of not seeing me for a week; and for the bread and butter
expedient!--So childish as we thought it!

The chariot is not come; and if it were, it is yet too soon for every
thing but my impatience.  And as I have already taken all my measures,
and can think of nothing but my triumph, I will resume her violent
letter, in order to strengthen my resolutions against her.  I was before
in too gloomy a way to proceed with it.  But now the subject is all alive
to me, and my gayer fancy, like the sunbeams, will irradiate it, and turn
the solemn deep-green into a brighter verdure.

When I have called upon my charmer to explain some parts of her letter,
and to atone for others, I will send it, or a copy of it, to thee.

Suffice it at present to tell thee, in the first place, that she is
determined never to be my wife.--To be sure there ought to be no
compulsion in so material a case.  Compulsion was her parents' fault,
which I have censured so severely, that I shall hardly be guilty of the
same.  I am therefore glad I know her mind as to this essential point.

I have ruined her! she says.--Now that's a fib, take it her own way--if I
had, she would not, perhaps, have run away from me.

She is thrown upon the wide world!  Now I own that Hampstead-heath
affords very pretty and very extensive prospects; but 'tis not the wide
world neither.  And suppose that to be her grievance, I hope soon to
restore her to a narrower.

I am the enemy of her soul, as well as of her honour!--Confoundedly
severe!  Nevertheless, another fib!--For I love her soul very well; but
think no more of it in this case than of my own.

She is to be thrown upon strangers!--And is not that her own fault?--Much
against my will, I am sure!

She is cast from a state of independency into one of obligation.  She
never was in a state of independency; nor is it fit a woman should, of
any age, or in any state of life.  And as to the state of obligation,
there is no such thing as living without being beholden to somebody.
Mutual obligation is the very essence and soul of the social and
commercial life:--Why should she be exempt from it?  I am sure the person
she raves at desires not such an exemption; has been long dependent upon
her; and would rejoice to owe further obligations to her than he can
boast of hitherto.

She talks of her father's curse!--But have I not repaid him for it an
hundred fold in the same coin?  But why must the faults of other people
be laid at my door?  Have I not enow of my own?

But the grey-eyed dawn begins to peep--let me sum up all.

In short, then, the dear creature's letter is a collection of invectives
not very new to me: though the occasion for them, no doubt is new to her.
A little sprinkling of the romantic and contradictory runs through it.
She loves, and she hates; she encourages me to pursue her, by telling me
I safely may; and yet she begs I will not.  She apprehends poverty and
want, yet resolves to give away her estate; To gratify whom?--Why, in
short, those who have been the cause of her misfortunes.  And finally,
though she resolves never to be mine, yet she has some regrets at leaving
me, because of the opening prospects of a reconciliation with her
friends.

But never did morning dawn so tardily as this!--Neither is the chariot
yet come.


***


A gentleman to speak with me, Dorcas?--Who can want me thus early?

Captain Tomlinson, sayest thou?  Surely he must have traveled all night!
Early riser as I am, how could he think to find me up thus early?

Let but the chariot come, and he shall accompany me in it to the bottom
of the hill, (though he return to town on foot; for the Captain is all
obliging goodness,) that I may hear all he has to say, and tell him all
my mind, and lose no time.

Well, now I am satisfied that this rebellious flight will turn to my
advantage, as all crushed rebellions do to the advantage of a sovereign
in possession.


***


Dear Captain, I rejoice to see you--just in the nick of time--See!  See!

      The rosy-finger'd morn appears,
      And from her mantle shakes her tears:
      The sun arising mortals cheers,
      And drives the rising mists away,
      In promise of a glorious day.

Excuse me, Sir, that I salute you from my favourite bard.  He that rises
with the lark will sing with the lark.  Strange news since I saw you,
Captain!--Poor mistaken lady!--But you have too much goodness, I know, to
reveal to her uncle Harlowe the error of this capricious beauty.  It will
all turn out for the best.  You must accompany me part of the way.  I
know the delight you take in composing differences.  But 'tis the task of
the prudent to heal the breaches made by the rashness and folly of the
imprudent.


***


And now, (all around me so still and so silent,) the rattling of the
chariot-wheels at a street's distance do I hear!  And to this angel of a
woman I fly!

Reward, O God of Love!  [The cause is thy own!]  Reward thou, as it
deserves, my suffering perseverance!--Succeed my endeavours to bring back
to thy obedience this charming fugitive!  Make her acknowledge her
rashness; repent her insults; implore my forgiveness; beg to be
reinstated in my favour, and that I will bury in oblivion the remembrance
of her heinous offence against thee, and against me, thy faithful votary.


***


The chariot at the door!--I come!  I come!

I attend you, good Captain--

Indeed, Sir--

Pray, Sir--civility is not ceremony.


And now, dressed as a bridegroom, my heart elated beyond that of the most
desiring one, (attended by a footman whom my beloved never saw,) I am
already at Hampstead!



LETTER XXIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UPPER-FLASK, HAMPSTEAD.
FRI. MORN. 7 O'CLOCK. (JUNE 9.)


I am now here, and here have been this hour and half.--What an
industrious spirit have I!--Nobody can say that I eat the bread of
idleness.  I take true pains for all the pleasure I enjoy.  I cannot
but admire myself strangely; for certainly, with this active soul, I
should have made a very great figure in whatever station I had filled.
But had I been a prince, (to be sure I should have made a most noble
prince!) I should have led up a military dance equal to that of the great
Macedonian.  I should have added kingdom to kingdom, and despoiled all
my neighbour sovereigns, in order to have obtained the name of Robert the
Great!  And I would have gone to war with the Great Turk, and the
Persian, and Mogul, for the seraglios; for not one of those eastern
monarchs should have had a pretty woman to bless himself with till I had
done with her.

And now I have so much leisure upon my hands, that, after having informed
myself of all necessary particulars, I am set to my short-hand writing in
order to keep up with time as well as I can; for the subject is now
become worthy of me; and it is yet too soon, I doubt, to pay my
compliments to my charmer, after all her fatigues for two or three days
past.  And, moreover, I have abundance of matters preparative to my
future proceedings to recount, in order to connect and render all
intelligible.

I parted with the Captain at the foot of the hill, trebly instructed;
that is to say, as to the fact, to the probable, and to the possible.  If
my beloved and I can meet, and make up without the mediating of this
worthy gentleman, it will be so much the better.  As little foreign aid
as possible in my amorous conflicts has always been a rule with me;
though here I have been obliged to call in so much.  And who knows but it
may be the better for the lady the less she makes necessary?  I cannot
bear that she should sit so indifferent to me as to be in earnest to part
with me for ever upon so slight, or even upon any occasion.  If I find
she is--but no more threatenings till she is in my power--thou knowest
what I have vowed.

All Will.'s account, from the lady's flight to his finding her again, all
the accounts of the people of the house, the coachman's information to
Will., and so forth, collected together, stand thus:

'The Hampstead coach, when the dear fugitive came to it, had but two
passengers in it.  But she made the fellow to go off directly, paying for
the vacant places.

'The two passengers directing the coachman to set them down at the Upper
Flask, she bid him set her down there also.

'They took leave of her, [very respectfully, no doubt,] and she went into
the house, and asked, if she could not have a dish of tea, and a room to
herself for half an hour.

'They showed her up to the very room where I now am.  She sat at the very
table I now write upon; and, I believe, the chair I sit in was her's.'  O
Belford, if thou knowest what love is, thou wilt be able to account for
these minutiae.

'She seemed spiritless and fatigued.  The gentlewoman herself chose to
attend so genteel and lovely a guest.  She asked her if she would have
bread and butter with her tea?

'No.  She could not eat.

'They had very good biscuits.

'As she pleased.

'The gentlewoman stept out for some, and returning on a sudden, she
observed the sweet little fugitive endeavouring to restrain a violent
burst of grief to which she had given way in the little interval.

'However, when the tea came, she made the landlady sit down with her,
and asked her abundance of questions, about the villages and roads in
the neighbourhood.

'The gentlewoman took notice to her, that she seemed to be troubled in
mind.

'Tender spirits, she replied, could not part with dear friends without
concern.'

She meant me, no doubt.

'She made no inquiry about a lodging, though by the sequel, thou'lt
observe, that she seemed to intend to go no farther that night than
Hampstead.  But after she had drank two dishes, and put a biscuit in
her pocket, [sweet soul! to serve for her supper, perhaps,] she laid
down half-a-crown; and refusing change, sighing, took leave, saying she
would proceed towards Hendon; the distance to which had been one of her
questions.

'They offered to send to know if a Hampstead coach were not to go to
Hendon that evening.

'No matter, she said--perhaps she might meet the chariot.'

Another of her feints, I suppose: for how, or with whom, could any thing
of this sort have been concerted since yesterday morning?

'She had, as the people took notice to one another, something so
uncommonly noble in her air, and in her person and behaviour, that they
were sure she was of quality.  And having no servant with her of either
sex, her eyes, [her fine eyes, the gentlewoman called them, stranger as
she was, and a woman!] being swelled and red, they were sure there was an
elopement in the case, either from parents or guardians; for they
supposed her too young and too maidenly to be a married lady; and were
she married, no husband would let such a fine young creature to be
unattended and alone; nor give her cause for so much grief, as seemed to
be settled in her countenance.  Then at times she seemed to be so
bewildered, they said, that they were afraid she had it in her head to
make away with herself.

'All these things put together, excited their curiosity; and they engaged
a peery servant, as they called a footman who was drinking with Kit. the
hostler, at the tap-house, to watch all her motions.  This fellow
reported the following particulars, as they re-reported to me:

'She indeed went towards Hendon, passing by the sign of the Castle on the
Heath; then, stopping, looked about her, and down into the valley before
her.  Then, turning her face towards London, she seemed, by the motion of
her handkerchief to her eyes, to weep; repenting [who knows?] the rash
step she had taken, and wishing herself back again.'

Better for her, if she do, Jack, once more I say!--Woe be to the girl who
could think of marrying me, yet to be able to run away from me, and
renounce me for ever!

'Then, continuing on a few paces, she stopt again--and, as if disliking
her road, again seeming to weep, directed her course back towards
Hampstead.'

I am glad she wept so much, because no heart bursts, (be the occasion for
the sorrow what it will,) which has that kindly relief.  Hence I hardly
ever am moved at the sight of these pellucid fugitives in a fine woman.
How often, in the past twelve hours, have I wished that I could cry most
confoundedly?

'She then saw a coach-and-four driving towards her empty.  She crossed
the path she was in, as if to meet it, and seemed to intend to speak to
the coachman, had he stopt or spoken first.  He as earnestly looked at
her.--Every one did so who passed her, (so the man who dogged her was the
less suspected.')--Happy rogue of a coachman, hadst thou known whose
notice thou didst engage, and whom thou mightest have obliged!--It was
the divine Clarissa Harlowe at whom thou gazest!--Mine own Clarissa
Harlowe!--But it was well for me that thou wert as undistinguishing as
the beasts thou drovest; otherwise, what a wild-goose chace had I been
led?

'The lady, as well as the coachman, in short, seemed to want resolution;
--the horses kept on--[the fellow's head and eyes, no doubt, turned
behind him,] and the distance soon lengthened beyond recall.  With a
wistful eye she looked after him; sighed and wept again; as the servant
who then slyly passed her, observed.

'By this time she had reached the houses.  She looked up at every one as
she passed; now and then breathing upon her bared hand, and applying it
to her swelled eyes, to abate the redness, and dry the tears.  At last,
seeing a bill up for letting lodgings, she walked backwards and forwards
half a dozen times, as if unable to determine what to do.  And then went
farther into the town, and there the fellow, being spoken to by one of
his familiars, lost her for a few minutes: but he soon saw her come out
of a linen-drapery shop, attended with a servant-maid, having, as it
proved, got that maid-servant to go with her to the house she is now at.*


* See Letter XXI. of this volume.


'The fellow, after waiting about an hour, and not seeing her come out,
returned, concluding that she had taken lodgings there.'

And here, supposing my narrative of the dramatic kind, ends Act the
first.  And now begins


ACT II
SCENE.--Hampstead Heath continued.
ENTER MY RASCAL.

Will. having got at all these particulars, by exchanging others as
frankly against them, with which I had formerly prepared him both
verbally and in writing.--I found the people already of my party, and
full of good wishes for my success, repeating to me all they told him.

But he had first acquainted me with the accounts he had given them of his
lady and me.  It is necessary that I give thee the particulars of his
tale, and I have a little time upon my hands: for the maid of the house,
who had been out of an errand, tells us, that she saw Mrs. Moore, [with
whom must be my first business,] go into the house of a young gentleman,
within a few doors of her, who has a maiden sister, Miss Rawlins by name,
so notified for prudence, that none of her acquaintance undertake any
thing of consequence without consulting her.

Meanwhile my honest coachman is walking about Miss Rawlin's door, in
order to bring me notice of Mrs. Moore's return to her own house.  I hope
her gossip's-tale will be as soon told as mine--which take as follows:--

Will. told them, before I came, 'That his lady was but lately married to
one of the finest gentlemen in the world.  But that he, being very gay
and lively, she was mortal jealous of him; and, in a fit of that sort,
had eloped from him.  For although she loved him dearly, and he doated
upon her, (as well he might, since, as they had seen, she was the finest
creature that ever the sun shone upon,) yet she was apt to be very wilful
and sullen, if he might take liberty to say so--but truth was truth;--and
if she could not have her own way in every thing, would be for leaving
him.  That she had three or four times played his master such tricks; but
with all the virtue and innocence in the world; running away to an
intimate friend of her's, who, though a young lady of honour, was but too
indulgent to her in this only failing; for which reason his master has
brought her to London lodgings; their usual residence being in the
country: and that, on his refusing to satisfy her about a lady he had
been seen with in St. James's Park, she had, for the first time since she
came to town, served his master thus, whom he had left half-distracted on
this account.'

And truly well he might, poor gentleman! cried the honest folks, pitying
me before they saw me.

'He told them how he came by his intelligence of her; and made himself
such an interest with them, that they helped him to a change of clothes
for himself; and the landlord, at his request, privately inquired, if the
lady actually remained at Mrs. Moore's, and for how long she had taken
the lodgings?--which he found only to be for a week certain; but she had
said, that she believed she should hardly stay so long.  And then it was
that he wrote his letter, and sent it by honest Peter Patrick, as thou
hast heard.'

When I came, my person and dress having answered Will.'s description, the
people were ready to worship me.  I now-and-then sighed, now-and-then put
on a lighter air; which, however, I designed should show more of vexation
ill-disguised, than of real cheerfulness; and they told Will. it was such
a thousand pities so fine a lady should have such skittish tricks;
adding, that she might expose herself to great dangers by them; for that
there were rakes every where--[Lovelaces in every corner, Jack!] and many
about that town, who would leave nothing unattempted to get into her
company; and although they might not prevail upon her, yet might they
nevertheless hurt her reputation; and, in time, estrange the affections
of so fine a gentleman from her.

Good sensible people these!--Hey, Jack!

Here, Landlord, one word with you.--My servant, I find, has acquainted
you with the reason of my coming this way.--An unhappy affair, Landlord!
--A very unhappy affair!--But never was there a more virtuous woman.

So, Sir, she seems to be.  A thousand pities her ladyship has such ways--
and to so good-humoured a gentleman as you seem to be, Sir.

Mother-spoilt, Landlord!--Mother-spoilt!--that's the thing!--But
[sighing] I must make the best of it.  What I want you to do for me is to
lend me a great-coat.--I care not what it is.  If my spouse should see me
at a distance, she would make it very difficult for me to get at her
speech.  A great-coat with a cape, if you have one.  I must come upon her
before she is aware.

I am afraid, Sir, I have none fit for such a gentleman as you.

O, any thing will do!--The worse the better.


Exit Landlord.--Re-enter with two great-coats.

Ay, Landlord, this will be best; for I can button the cape over the lower
part of my face.  Don't I look devilishly down and concerned, Landlord?

I never saw a gentleman with a better-natured look.--'Tis pity you should
have such trials, Sir.

I must be very unhappy, no doubt of it, Landlord.--And yet I am a little
pleased, you must needs think, that I have found her out before any great
inconvenience has arisen to her.  However, if I cannot break her of these
freaks, she'll break my heart; for I do love her with all her failings.

The good woman, who was within hearing of all this, pitied me much.

Pray, your Honour, said she, if I may be so bold, was madam ever a mamma?

No--[and I sighed.]--We have been but a little while married; and as I
may say to you, it is her own fault that she is not in that way.  [Not a
word of a lie in this, Jack.]  But to tell you truth, Madam, she may be
compared to the dog in the manger--

I understand you, Sir, [simpering,] she is but young, Sir.  I have heard
of one or two such skittish young ladies, in my time, Sir.--But when
madam is in that way, I dare say, as she loves you, (and it would be
strange if she did not!) all this will be over, and she may make the best
of wives.

That's all my hope.

She is a fine lady as I ever beheld.--I hope, Sir, you won't be too
severe.  She'll get over all these freaks, if once she be a mamma, I
warrant.

I can't be severe to her--she knows that.  The moment I see her, all
resentment is over with me, if she gives me but one kind look.

All this time I was adjusting the horseman's coat, and Will. was putting
in the ties of my wig,* and buttoning the cape over my chin.


* The fashionable wigs at that time.


I asked the gentlewoman for a little powder.  She brought me a powder-
box, and I slightly shook the puff over my hat, and flapt one side of it,
though the lace looked a little too gay for my covering; and, slouching
it over my eyes, Shall I be known, think you, Madam?

Your Honour is so expert, Sir!--I wish, if I may be so bold, your lady
has not some cause to be jealous.  But it will be impossible, if you keep
your laced clothes covered, that any body should know you in that dress
to be the same gentleman--except they find you out by your clocked
stockings.

Well observed--Can't you, Landlord, lend or sell me a pair of stockings,
that will draw over these? I can cut off the feet, if they won't go into
my shoes.

He could let me have a pair of coarse, but clean, stirrup stockings, if I
pleased.

The best in the world for the purpose.

He fetch'd them.  Will. drew them on; and my legs then made a good gouty
appearance.

The good woman smiling, wished me success; and so did the landlord.  And
as thou knowest that I am not a bad mimic, I took a cane, which I
borrowed of the landlord, and stooped in the shoulders to a quarter of a
foot less height, and stumped away cross to the bowling-green, to
practise a little the hobbling gait of a gouty man.--The landlady
whispered her husband, as Will. tells me, He's a good one, I warrant him
--I dare say the fault lies not at all of one side.  While mine host
replied, That I was so lively and so good-natured a gentleman, that he
did not know who could be angry with me, do what I would.  A sensible
fellow!--I wish my charmer were of the same opinion.

And now I am going to try if I can't agree with goody Moore for lodgings
and other conveniencies for my sick wife.

'Wife, Lovelace?' methinks thou interrogatest.

Yes, wife, for who knows what cautions the dear fugitive may have given
in apprehension of me?

'But has goody Moore any other lodgings to let?'

Yes, yes; I have taken care of that; and find that she has just such
conveniencies as I want.  And I know that my wife will like them.  For,
although married, I can do every thing I please; and that's a bold word,
you know.  But had she only a garret to let, I would have liked it; and
been a poor author afraid of arrests, and made that my place of refuge;
yet would have made shift to pay beforehand for what I had.  I can suit
myself to any condition, that's my comfort.


***


The widow Moore returned! say you?--Down, down, flutterer!--This
impertinent heart is more troublesome to me than my conscience, I think.
--I shall be obliged to hoarsen my voice, and roughen my character, to
keep up with its puppily dancings.

But let me see, shall I be angry or pleased when I am admitted to my
beloved's presence?

Angry to be sure.--Has she not broken her word with me?--At a time too
when I was meditating to do her grateful justice?--And is not breach of
word a dreadful crime in good folks?--I have ever been for forming my
judgment of the nature of things and actions, not so much from what they
are in themselves, as from the character of the actors.  Thus it would be
as odd a thing in such as we to keep our words with a woman, as it would
be wicked in her to break her's to us.

Seest thou not that this unseasonable gravity is admitted to quell the
palpitations of this unmanageable heart?  But still it will go on with
its boundings.  I'll try as I ride in my chariot to tranquilize.

'Ride, Bob! so little a way?'

Yes, ride, Jack; for am I not lame?  And will it not look well to have a
lodger who keeps his chariot?  What widow, what servant, asks questions
of a man with an equipage?

My coachman, as well as my other servant, is under Will.'s tuition.

Never was there such a hideous rascal as he has made himself.  The devil
only and his other master can know him.  They both have set their marks
upon him.  As to my honour's mark, it will never be out of his dam'd wide
mothe, as he calls it.  For the dog will be hanged before he can lose the
rest of his teeth by age.

I am gone.



LETTER XXIV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
HAMPSTEAD, FRIDAY NIGHT, JUNE 9.


Now, Belford, for the narrative of narratives.  I will continue it as I
have opportunity; and that so dexterously, that, if I break off twenty
times, thou shalt not discern where I piece my thread.

Although grievously afflicted with the gout, I alighted out of my chariot
(leaning very hard on my cane with one hand, and on my new servant's
shoulder with the other) the same instant almost that he had knocked at
the door, that I might be sure of admission into the house.

I took care to button my great coat about me, and to cover with it even
the pummel of my sword, it being a little too gay for my years.  I knew
not what occasion I might have for my sword.  I stooped forward; blinked
with my eyes to conceal their lustre (no vanity in saying that, Jack); my
chin wrapt up for the tooth-ache; my slouched, laced hat, and so much of
my wig as was visible, giving me, all together, the appearance of an
antiquated beau.

My wife, I resolved beforehand, should have a complication of disorders.

The maid came to the door.  I asked for her mistress.  She showed me into
one of the parlours; and I sat down with a gouty Oh!--


ENTER GOODY MOORE.

Your servant, Madam--but you must excuse me; I cannot well stand--I find
by the bill at the door, that you have lodgings to let [mumbling my words
as if, like my man Will., I had lost some of my fore-teeth]: be pleased
to inform me what they are; for I like your situation--and I will tell
you my family--I have a wife, a good old woman--older than myself, by the
way, a pretty deal.  She is in a bad state of health, and is advised into
the Hampstead air.  She will have two maid servants and a footman.  The
coach or chariot (I shall not have them put up both together) we can put
up any where, and the coachman will be with his horses.

When, Sir, shall you want to come in?

I will take them from this very day; and, if convenient, will bring my
wife in the afternoon.

Perhaps, Sir, you would board, as well as lodge?

That as you please.  It will save me the trouble of bringing my cook, if
we do.  And I suppose you have servants who know how to dress a couple of
dishes.  My wife must eat plain food, and I don't love kickshaws.

We have a single lady, who will be gone in two or three days.  She has
one of the best apartments: that will then be at liberty.

You have one or two good ones mean time, I presume, Madam, just to
receive my wife; for we have lost time--these damn'd physicians--excuse
me, Madam, I am not used to curse; but it is owing to the love I have for
my wife--they have kept her in hand, till they are ashamed to take more
fees, and now advise her to the air.  I wish we had sent her hither at
first.  But we must now make the best of it.

Excuse me, Madam, [for she looked hard at me,] that I am muffled up in
this warm weather.  I am but too sensible that I have left my chamber
sooner that I ought, and perhaps shall have a return of my gout for it.
I came out thus muffled up with a dreadful pain in my jaws; an ague in
them, I believe.  But my poor dear will not be satisfied with any body's
care but mine.  And, as I told thee, we have lost time.

You shall see what accommodations I have, if you please, Sir.  But I
doubt you are too lame to walk up stairs.

I can make shift to hobble up now I have rested a little.  I'll just look
upon the apartment my wife is to have.  Any thing may do for the
servants: and as you seem to be a good sort of gentlewoman, I shan't
stand for a price, and will pay well besides for the trouble I shall
give.

She led the way; and I, helping myself by the banisters, made shift to
get up with less fatigue than I expected from ancles so weak.  But oh!
Jack, what was Sixtus the Vth.'s artful depression of his natural powers
to mine, when, as this half-dead Montalto, he gaped for the pretendedly
unsought pontificate, and the moment he was chosen leapt upon the
prancing beast, which it was thought by the amazed conclave he was not
able to mount, without help of chairs and men?  Never was there a more
joyful heart and lighter heels than mine joined together; yet both denied
their functions; the one fluttering in secret, ready to burst its bars
for relief-ful expression, the others obliged to an hobbling motion;
when, unrestrained, they would, in their master's imagination, have
mounted him to the lunar world without the help of a ladder.

There were three rooms on a floor: two of them handsome; and the third,
she said, still handsomer; but the lady was in it.

I saw, I saw she was! for as I hobbled up, crying out upon my weak
ancles, in the hoarse mumbling voice I had assumed, I beheld a little
piece of her as she just cast an eye (with the door a-jar, as they call
it) to observe who was coming up; and, seeing such an old clumsy fellow,
great coated in weather so warm, slouched and muffled up, she withdrew,
shutting the door without any emotion.  But it was not so with me; for
thou canst not imagine how my heart danced to my mouth, at the very
glimpse of her; so that I was afraid the thump, thump, thumping villain,
which had so lately thumped as much to no purpose, would have choked me.

I liked the lodging well; and the more as she said the third room was
still handsomer.  I must sit down, Madam, [and chose the darkest part of
the room]: Won't you take a seat yourself?--No price shall part us--but I
will leave the terms to you and my wife, if you please.  And also whether
for board or not.  Only please to take this for earnest, putting a guinea
into her hand--and one thing I will say; my poor wife loves money; but is
not an ill-natured woman.  She was a great fortune to me: but, as the real
estate goes away at her death, I would fain preserve her for that reason,
as well as for the love I bear her as an honest man.  But if she makes
too close a bargain with you, tell me; and, unknown to her, I will make
it up.  This is my constant way: she loves to have her pen'orths; and I
would not have her vexed or made uneasy on any account.

She said, I was a very considerate gentleman; and, upon the condition I
had mentioned, she was content to leave the terms to my lady.

But, Madam, cannot a body just peep into the other apartment; that I may
be more particular to my wife in the furniture of it?

The lady desires to be private, Sir--but--and was going to ask her leave.

I caught hold of her arm--However, stay, stay, Madam: it mayn't be
proper, if the lady loves to be private.  Don't let me intrude upon the
lady--

No intrusion, Sir, I dare say: the lady is good-humoured.  She will be so
kind as to step down into the parlour, I dare say.  As she stays so
little a while, I am sure she will not wish to stand in my way.

No, Madam, that's true, if she be good-humoured, as you say--Has she been
with you long, Madam?

She came but yesterday, Sir--

I believe I just now saw the glimpse of her.  She seems to be an elderly
lady.

No, Sir! you're mistaken.  She's a young lady; and one of the handsomest
I ever saw.

Cot so, I beg her pardon!  Not but that I should have liked her the
better, were she to stay longer, if she had been elderly.  I have a
strange taste, Madam, you'll say; but I really, for my wife's sake, love
every elderly woman.  Indeed I ever thought age was to be reverenced,
which made me (taking the fortune into the scale too, that I own) make my
addresses to my present dear.

Very good of you, Sir, to respect age: we all hope to live to be old.

Right, Madam.--But you say the lady is beautiful.  Now you must know,
that though I choose to converse with the elderly, yet I love to see a
beautiful young woman, just as I love to see fine flowers in a garden.
There's no casting an eye upon her, is there, without her notice?  For in
this dress, and thus muffled up about my jaws, I should not care to be
seen any more than she, let her love privacy as much as she will.

I will go and ask if I may show a gentleman the apartment, Sir; and, as
you are a married gentleman, and not over young, she'll perhaps make the
less scruple.

Then, like me, she loves elderly folks best perhaps.  But it may be she
has suffered by young ones.

I fancy she has, Sir, or is afraid she shall.  She desired to be very
private; and if by description inquired after, to be denied.

Thou art a true woman, goody Moore, thought I.

Good lack--good lack!--What may be her story then, I pray?

She is pretty reserved in her story: but, to tell you my thoughts, I
believe love is in the case: she is always in tears, and does not much
care for company.

Nay, Madam, it becomes not me to dive into ladies' secrets; I want not to
pry into other people's affairs.  But, pray, how does she employ
herself?--Yet she came but yesterday; so you can't tell.

Writing continually, Sir.

These women, Jack, when you ask them questions by way of information,
don't care to be ignorant of any thing.

Nay, excuse me, Madam, I am very far from being an inquisitive man.  But
if her case be difficult, and not merely love, as she is a friend of
your's, I would give her my advice.

Then you are a lawyer, Sir--

Why, indeed, Madam, I was some time at the bar; but I have long left
practice; yet am much consulted by my friends in difficult points.  In a
pauper case I frequently give money; but never take any from the richest.

You are a very good gentleman, then, Sir.

Ay, Madam, we cannot live always here; and we ought to do what good we
can--but I hate to appear officious.  If the lady stay any time, and
think fit, upon better acquaintance, to let me into her case, it may be a
happy day for her, if I find it a just one; for, you must know, that when
I was at the bar, I never was such a sad fellow as to undertake, for the
sake of a paltry fee, to make white black, and black white:  For what
would that have been, but to endeavour to establish iniquity by quirks,
while I robbed the innocent?

You are an excellent gentleman, Sir: I wish [and then she sighed] I had
had the happiness to know there was such a lawyer in the world; and to
have been acquainted with him.

Come, come, Mrs. Moore, I think your name is, it may not be too late--
when you and I are better acquainted, I may help you perhaps.--But
mention nothing of this to the lady: for, as I said, I hate to appear
officious.

This prohibition, I knew, if goody Moore answered the specimen she had
given of her womanhood, would make her take the first opportunity to
tell, were it to be necessary to my purpose that she should.

I appeared, upon the whole, so indifferent about seeing the room, or the
lady, that the good woman was the more eager I should see both.  And the
rather, as I, to stimulate her, declared, that there was more required in
my eye to merit the character of a handsome woman, than most people
thought necessary; and that I had never seen six truly lovely women in my
life.

To be brief, she went in; and after a little while came out again.  The
lady, Sir, is retired to her closet.  So you may go in and look at the
room.

Then how my heart began again to play its pug's tricks!

I hobbled in, and stumped about, and liked it very much; and was sure my
wife would.  I begged excuse for sitting down, and asked, who was the
minister of the place?  If he were a good preacher?  Who preached at the
Chapel?  And if he were a good preacher, and a good liver too, Madam--I
must inquire after that: for I love, but I must needs say, that the
clergy should practise what they preach.

Very right, Sir; but that is not so often the case as were to be wished.

More's the pity, Madam.  But I have a great veneration for the clergy in
general.  It is more a satire upon human nature than upon the cloth, if
we suppose those who have the best opportunities to do good, less perfect
than other people.  For my part, I don't love professional any more than
national reflections.--But I keep the lady in her closet.  My gout makes
me rude.

Then up from my seat stumped I--what do you call these window-curtains,
Madam?

Stuff-damask, Sir.

It looks mighty well, truly.  I like it better than silk.  It is warmer
to be sure, and much fitter for lodgings in the country; especially for
people in years.  The bed is in a pretty state.

It is neat and clean, Sir: that's all we pretend to.

Ay, mighty well--very well--a silk camblet, I think--very well, truly!--I
am sure my wife will like it.  But we would not turn the lady out of her
lodgings for the world.  The other two apartments will do for us at
present.

Then stumping towards the closet, over the door of which hung a
picture--What picture is that--Oh! I see; a St. Cecilia!

A common print, Sir!

Pretty well, pretty well!  It is after an Italian master.--I would not
for the world turn the lady out of her apartment.  We can make shift with
the other two, repeated I, louder still: but yet mumblingly hoarse: for I
had as great regard to uniformity in accent, as to my words.

O Belford! to be so near my angel, think what a painful constraint I was
under.

I was resolved to fetch her out, if possible: and pretending to be
going--you can't agree as to any time, Mrs. Moore, when we can have this
third room, can you?--Not that [whispered I, loud enough to be heard in
the next room; not that] I would incommode the lady: but I would tell my
wife when abouts--and women, you know, Mrs. Moore, love to have every
thing before them of this nature.

Mrs. Moore (said my charmer) [and never did her voice sound so harmonious
to me: Oh! how my heart bounded again!  It even talked to me, in a
manner; for I thought I heard, as well as felt, its unruly flutters; and
every vein about me seemed a pulse; Mrs. Moore] you may acquaint the
gentleman, that I shall stay here only for two or three days at most,
till I receive an answer to a letter I have written into the country; and
rather than be your hindrance, I will take up with any apartment a pair
of stairs higher.

Not for the world!--Not for the world, young lady! cried I.--My wife, as
I love her, should lie in a garret, rather than put such a considerate
young lady, as you seem to be, to the least inconveniency.

She opened not the door yet; and I said, but since you have so much
goodness, Madam, if I could but just look into the closet as I stand, I
could tell my wife whether it is large enough to hold a cabinet she much
values, and ill have with her wherever she goes.

Then my charmer opened the door, and blazed upon me, as it were, in a
flood of light, like what one might imagine would strike a man, who, born
blind, had by some propitious power been blessed with his sight, all at
once, in a meridian sun.

Upon my soul, I never was so strangely affected before.  I had much ado
to forbear discovering myself that instant: but, hesitatingly, and in
great disorder, I said, looking into the closet and around it, there is
room, I see, for my wife's cabinet; and it has many jewels in it of high
price; but, upon my soul, [for I could not forbear swearing, like a
puppy: habit is a cursed thing, Jack--] nothing so valuable as a lady I
see, can be brought into it.

She started, and looked at me with terror.  The truth of the compliment,
as far as I know, had taken dissimulation from my accent.

I saw it was impossible to conceal myself longer from her, any more than
(from the violent impulses of my passion) to forbear manifesting myself.
I unbuttoned therefore my cape, I pulled off my flapt slouched hat; I
threw open my great coat, and, like the devil in Milton [an odd
comparison though!]--

      I started up in my own form divine,
      Touch'd by the beam of her celestial eye,
      More potent than Ithuriel's spear!--

Now, Belford, for a similitude--now for a likeness to illustrate the
surprising scene, and the effect it had upon my charmer, and the
gentlewoman!--But nothing was like it, or equal to it.  The plain fact
can only describe it, and set it off--thus then take it.

She no sooner saw who it was, than she gave three violent screams; and,
before I could catch her in my arms, (as I was about to do the moment I
discovered myself,) down she sunk at my feet in a fit; which made me
curse my indiscretion for so suddenly, and with so much emotion,
revealing myself.

The gentlewoman, seeing so strange an alteration in my person, and
features, and voice, and dress, cried out, Murder, help! murder, help! by
turns, for half a dozen times running.  This alarmed the house, and up
ran two servant maids, and my servant after them.  I cried out for water
and hartshorn, and every one flew a different way, one of the maids as
fast down as she came up; while the gentlewoman ran out of one room into
another, and by turns up and down the apartment we were in, without
meaning or end, wringing her foolish hands, and not knowing what she did.

Up then came running a gentleman and his sister, fetched, and brought in
by the maid, who had run down, and having let in a cursed crabbed old
wretch, hobbling with his gout, and mumbling with his hoarse
broken-toothed voice, who was metamorphosed all at once into a lively,
gay young fellow, with a clear accent, and all his teeth, she would have
it, that I was neither more nor less than the devil, and could not keep
her eye from my foot, expecting, no doubt, every minute to see it
discover itself to be cloven.

For my part, I was so intent upon restoring my angel, that I regarded
nobody else.  And, at last, she slowly recovering motion, with bitter
sighs and sobs, (only the whites of her eyes however appearing for some
moments,) I called upon her in the tenderest accent, as I kneeled by her,
my arm supporting her head, My angel! my charmer! my Clarissa! look upon
me, my dearest life!--I am not angry with you; I will forgive you, my
best beloved.

The gentleman and his sister knew not what to make of all this: and the
less, when my fair-one, recovering her sight, snatched another look at
me; and then again groaned, and fainted away.

I threw up the closet-sash for air, and then left her to the care of the
young gentlewoman, the same notable Miss Rawlins, who I had heard of at
the Flask: and to that of Mrs. Moore; who by this time had recovered
herself; and then retiring to one corner of the room, I made my servant
pull off my gouty stockings, brush my hat, and loop it up into the usual
smart cock.

I then stept to the closet to Mr. Rawlins, whom, in the general
confusion, I had not much minded before.--Sir, said I, you have an
uncommon scene before you.  The lady is my wife, and no gentleman's
presence is necessary here but my own.

I beg pardon, Sir; if the lady be your wife, I have no business here.
But, Sir, by her concern at seeing you--

Pray, Sir, none of your if's and but's, I beseech you: nor your concern
about the lady's concern.  You are a very unqualified judge in this
cause; and I beg of you, Sir, to oblige me with your absence.  The women
only are proper to be present on this occasion, added I; and I think
myself obliged to them for their care and kind assistance.

'Tis well he made not another word: for I found my choler begin to rise.
I could not bear, that the finest neck, and arms, and foot, in the world,
should be exposed to the eyes of any man living but mine.

I withdrew once more from the closet, finding her beginning to recover,
lest the sight of me too soon should throw her back again.

The first words she said, looking round her with great emotion, were, Oh!
hide me, hide me!  Is he gone?--Oh! hide me!--Is he gone?

Sir, said Miss Rawlins, coming to me with an air both peremptory and
assured, This is some surprising case.  The lady cannot bear the sight of
you.  What you have done is best known to yourself.  But another such fit
will probably be her last.  It would be but kind therefore for you to
retire.

It behoved me to have so notable a person of my party; and the rather as
I had disobliged her impertinent brother.

The dear creature, said I, may well, be concerned to see me.  If you,
Madam, had a husband who loved you as I love her, you would not, I am
confident, fly from him, and expose yourself to hazards, as she does
whenever she has not all her way--and yet with a mind not capable of
intentional evil--but mother-spoilt!--This is her fault, and all her
fault: and the more inexcusable it is, as I am the man of her choice, and
have reason to think she loves me above all the men in the world.

Here, Jack, was a story to support to the lady; face to face too!*


* And here, Belford, lest thou, through inattention, should be surprised
at my assurance, let me remind thee (and that, thus, by way of marginal
observation, that I may not break in upon my narrative) that this my
intrepidity concerted (as I have from time to time acquainted thee) in
apprehension of such an event as has fallen out.  For had not the dear
creature already passed for my wife before no less than four worthy
gentlemen of family and fortune?** and before Mrs. Sinclair, and her
household, and Miss Partington?  And had she not agreed to her uncle's
expedient, that she should pass for such, from the time of Mr. Hickman's
application to that uncle;*** and that the worthy Capt. Tomlinson should
be allowed to propagate that belief: as he had actually reported to two
families (they possibly to more); purposely that it might come to the
ears of James Harlowe; and serve for a foundation for uncle John to build
his reconciliation-scheme upon?  And canst thou think that nothing was
meant by all this contrivance? and that I am not still further prepared
to support my story?

** See Vol. IV. Letter IV. towards the conclusion.
*** Ibid. Letter XVI.
 Ibid.

Indeed, I little thought, at the time that I formed these precautionary
schemes, that she would ever have been able, if willing, to get out of my
hands.  All that I hoped I should have occasion to have recourse to them
for, was only, in case I should have the courage to make the grand
attempt, and should succeed in it, to bring the dear creature [and this
out of tenderness to her, for what attention did I ever yet pay to the
grief, the execrations, the tears of a woman I had triumphed over?] to
bear me in her sight: to expostulate with me, to be pacified by my pleas,
and by my own future hopes, founded upon the reconciliatory-project, upon
my reiterated vows, and upon the Captain's assurances.  Since in that
case, to forgive me, to have gone on with me, for a week, would have been
to forgive me, to have gone on with me, for ever.  And that, had my
eligible life of honour taken place, her trials would all have been then
over: and she would have known nothing but gratitude, love, and joy, to
the end of one of our lives.  For never would I, never could I, have
abandoned such an admirable creature as this.  Thou knowest I never was a
sordid villain to any of her inferiors--Her inferiors, I may say--For who
is not her inferior?


You speak like a gentleman; you look like a gentleman, said Miss
Rawlins--but, Sir, this is a strange case; the lady sees to dread the
sight of you.

No wonder, Madam; taking her a little on one side, nearer to Mrs. Moore.
I have three times already forgiven the dear creature--but this is
jealousy!--There is a spice of that in it--and of phrensy too [whispered
I, that it might have the face of a secret, and of consequence the more
engage their attention]--but our story is too long.

I then made a motion to go to my beloved.  But they desired that I would
walk into the next room; and they would endeavour to prevail upon her to
lie down.

I begged that they would not suffer her to talk; for that she was
accustomed to fits, and, when in this way, would talk of any thing that
came uppermost: and the more she was suffered to run on, the worse she
was; and if not kept quiet, would fall into ravings: which might possibly
hold her a week.

They promised to keep her quiet; and I withdrew into the next room;
ordering every one down but Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins.

She was full of exclamations!  Unhappy creature! miserable! ruined! and
undone! she called herself; wrung her hands, and begged they would assist
her to escape from the terrible evils she should otherwise be made to
suffer.

They preached patience and quietness to her; and would have had her to
lie down: but she refused; sinking, however, into an easy chair; for she
trembled so she could not stand.

By this time, I hoped, that she was enough recovered to bear a presence
that it behoved me to make her bear; and fearing she would throw out
something in her exclamations, that would still more disconcert me, I
went into the room again.

O there he is! said she, and threw her apron over her face--I cannot see
him!--I cannot look upon him!--Begone, begone! touch me not!--

For I took her struggling hand, beseeching her to be pacified; and
assuring her, that I would make all up with her upon her own terms and
wishes.

Base man! said the violent lady, I have no wishes, but never to behold
you more!  Why must I be thus pursued and haunted?  Have you not made me
miserable enough already?--Despoiled of all succour and help, and of
every friend, I am contented to be poor, low, and miserable, so I may
live free from your persecutions.

Miss Rawlins stared at me [a confident slut this Miss Rawlins, thought
I]: so did Mrs. Moore.  I told you so! whispering said I, turning to the
women; shaking my head with a face of great concern and pity; and then to
my charmer, My dear creature, how you rave!  You will not easily recover
from the effects of this violence.  Have patience, my love.  Be pacified;
and we will coolly talk this matter over: for you expose yourself, as
well as me: these ladies will certainly think you have fallen among
robbers, and that I am the chief of them.

So you are! so you are! stamping, her face still covered [she thought of
Wednesday night, no doubt]; and, sighing as if her heart were breaking,
she put her hand to her forehead--I shall be quite distracted!

I will not, my dearest love, uncover your face.  You shall not look upon
me, since I am so odious to you.  But this is a violence I never thought
you capable of.

And I would have pressed her hand, as I held it, with my lips; but she
drew it from me with indignation.

Unhand me, Sir, said she.  I will not be touched by you.  Leave me to my
fate.  What right, what title, have you to persecute me thus?

What right, what title, my dear!--But this is not a time--I have a letter
from Captain Tomlinson--here it is--offering it to her--

I will receive nothing from your hands--tell me not of Captain
Tomlinson--tell me not of any body--you have no right to invade me thus--
once more leave me to my fate--have you not made me miserable enough?

I touched a delicate string, on purpose to set her in such a passion
before the women, as might confirm the intimation I had given of a
phrensical disorder.

What a turn is here!--Lately so happy--nothing wanting but a
reconciliation between you and your friends!--That reconciliation in such
a happy train--shall so slight, so accidental an occasion be suffered to
overturn all our happiness?

She started up with a trembling impatience, her apron falling from her
indignant face--now, said she, that thou darest to call the occasion
slight and accidental, and that I am happily out of thy vile hands, and
out of a house I have reason to believe as vile, traitor and wretch as
thou art, I will venture to cast an eye upon thee--and Oh! that it were
in my power, in mercy to my sex, to look thee first into shame and
remorse, and then into death!

This violent tragedy-speech, and the high manner in which she uttered it,
had its desired effect.  I looked upon the women, and upon her by turns,
with a pitying eye; and they shook their wise heads, and besought me to
retire, and her to lie down to compose herself.

This hurricane, like other hurricanes, was presently allayed by a shower.
She threw herself once more into her armed chair, and begged pardon of
the women for her passionate excess; but not of me: yet I was in hopes,
that when compliments were stirring, I should have come in for a share.

Indeed, Ladies, said I, [with assurance enough, thou'lt say,] this
violence is not natural to my beloved's temper--misapprehension--

Misapprehension, wretch!--And want I excuses from thee!

By what a scorn was every lovely feature agitated!

Then turning her face from me, I have not patience, O thou guileful
betrayer, to look upon thee!  Begone!  Begone!  With a face so
unblushing, how darest thou appear in my presence?

I thought then, that the character of a husband obliged me to be angry.

You may one day, Madam, repent this treatment:--by my soul, you may.  You
know I have not deserved it of you--you know--I have not.

Do I know you have not?--Wretch!  Do I know--

You do, Madam--and never did man of my figure and consideration, [I
thought it was proper to throw that in] meet with such treatment--

She lifted up her hands: indignation kept her silent.

But all is of a piece with the charge you bring against me of despoiling
you of all succour and help, of making you poor and low, and with other
unprecedented language.  I will only say, before these two gentlewomen,
that since it must be so, and since your former esteem for me is turned
into so riveted an aversion, I will soon, very soon, make you entirely
easy.  I will be gone:--I will leave you to your own fate, as you call
it; and may that be happy!--Only, that I may not appear to be a spoiler,
a robber indeed, let me know whither I shall send your apparel, and every
thing that belongs to you, and I will send it.

Send it to this place; and assure me, that you will never molest me more;
never more come near me; and that is all I ask of you.

I will do so, Madam, said I, with a dejected air.  But did I ever think I
should be so indifferent to you?--However, you must permit me to insist
on your reading this letter; and on your seeing Captain Tomlinson, and
hearing what he has to say from your uncle.  He will be here by-and-by.

Don't trifle with me, said she in an imperious tone--do as you offer.  I
will not receive any letter from your hands.  If I see Captain Tomlinson,
it shall be on his own account, not on your's.  You tell me you will send
me my apparel--if you would have me believe any thing you say, let this
be the test of your sincerity.--Leave me now, and send my things.

The women started.--They did nothing but stare; and appeared to be more
and more at a loss what to make of the matter between us.

I pretended to be going from her in a pet; but, when I had got to the
door, I turned back; and, as if I had recollected myself--One word more,
my dearest creature!--Charming, even in your anger!--O my fond soul! said
I, turning half round, and pulling out my handkerchief.--

I believe, Jack, my eyes did glisten a little.  I have no doubt but they
did.  The women pitied me--honest souls!  They showed they had each of
them a handkerchief as well as I.  So, has thou not observed (to give a
familiar illustration,) every man in a company of a dozen, or more,
obligingly pull out his watch, when some one has asked what's o'clock?--
As each man of a like number, if one talks of his beard, will fall to
stroking his chin with his four fingers and thumb.

One word only, Madam, repeated I, (as soon as my voice had recovered its
tone,) I have represented to Captain Tomlinson in the most favourable
light the cause of our present misunderstanding.  You know what your
uncle insists upon, and with which you have acquiesced.--The letter in my
hand, [and again I offered it to her,] will acquaint you with what you
have to apprehend from your brother's active malice.

She was going to speak in a high accent, putting the letter from her,
with an open palm--Nay, hear me out, Madam--The Captain, you know, has
reported our marriage to two different persons.  It is come to your
brother's ears.  My own relations have also heard of it.--Letters were
brought me from town this morning, from Lady Betty Lawrance, and Miss
Montague.  Here they are.  [I pulled them out of my pocket, and offered
them to her, with that of the Captain; but she held back her still open
palm, that she might not receive them.]  Reflect, Madam, I beseech you,
reflect upon the fatal consequences with which this, your high
resentment, may be attended.

Ever since I knew you, said she, I have been in a wilderness of doubt
and error.  I bless God that I am out of your hands.  I will transact for
myself what relates to myself.  I dismiss all your solicitude for me.--
Am I not my own mistress?--Have you any title?--

The women stared--[the devil stare ye, thought I!--Can ye do nothing but
stare?]--It was high time to stop her here.

I raised my voice to drown her's.--You used, my dearest creature, to have
a tender and apprehensive heart.--You never had so much reason for such a
one as now.

Let me judge for myself, upon what I shall see, not upon what I shall
hear.--Do you think I shall ever?--

I dreaded her going on--I must be heard, Madam, (raising my voice still
higher,)--you must let me read one paragraph or two out of this letter to
you, if you will not read it yourself--

Begone from me, Man!--Begone from me with thy letters!  What pretence
hast thou for tormenting me thus?  What right?--What title?--

Dearest creature! what questions you ask!--Questions that you can as well
answer yourself--

I can, I will, and thus I answer them--

Still louder I raised my voice.--She was overborne.--Sweet soul!  It
would be hard, thought I, [and yet I was very angry with her,] if such a
spirit as thine cannot be brought to yield to such a one as mine!

I lowered my voice on her silence.  All gentle, all intreative, my
accent.  My head bowed--one hand held out--the other on my honest heart.
--For heaven's sake, my dearest creature, resolve to see Captain
Tomlinson with temper.  He would have come along with me, but I was
willing to try to soften your mind first on this fatal misapprehension,
and this for the same of your own wishes.  For what is it otherwise to
me, whether your friends are, or are not, reconciled to us?--Do I want
any favour from them?--For your own mind's sake, therefore, frustrate not
Captain Tomlinson's negociation.  That worthy gentleman will be here in
the afternoon; Lady Betty will be in town, with my cousin Montague, in a
day or two.--They will be your visiters.  I beseech you do not carry this
misunderstanding so far, as that Lord M. and Lady Betty, and Lady Sarah,
may know it.  [How considerable this made me look to the women!]  Lady
Betty will not let you rest till you consent to accompany her to her own
seat--and to that lady may you safely intrust your cause.

Again, upon my pausing a moment, she was going to break out.  I liked not
the turn of her countenance, nor the tone of her voice--'And thinkest
thou, base wretch,' were the words she did utter: I again raised my
voice, and drowned her's.--Base wretch, Madam?--You know that I have not
deserved the violent names you have called me.  Words so opprobrious from
a mind so gentle!--But this treatment is from you, Madam?--From you, whom
I love more than my own soul!--By that soul, I swear that I do.--[The
women looked upon each other--they seemed pleased with my ardour.--Women,
whether wives, maids, or widows, love ardours: even Miss Howe, thou
knowest, speaks up for ardours,*]--Nevertheless, I must say, that you
have carried matters too far for the occasion.  I see you hate me--


* See Vol. IV. Letters XXIX. and XXXIV.


She was just going to speak--If we are to separate for ever, in a strong
and solemn voice, proceeded I, this island shall not long be troubled
with me.  Mean time, only be pleased to give these letters a perusal, and
consider what is to be said to your uncle's friend, and what he is to say
to your uncle.--Any thing will I come into, (renounce me, if you will,)
that shall make for your peace, and for the reconciliation your heart was
so lately set upon.  But I humbly conceive, that it is necessary that you
should come into better temper with me, were it but to give a favourable
appearance to what has passed, and weight to any future application to
your friends, in whatever way you shall think proper to make it.

I then put the letters into her lap, and retired into the next apartment
with a low bow, and a very solemn air.

I was soon followed by the two women.  Mrs. Moore withdrew to give the
fair perverse time to read them: Miss Rawlins for the same reason, and
because she was sent for home.

The widow besought her speedy return.  I joined in the same request; and
she was ready enough to promise to oblige us.

I excused myself to Mrs. Moore for the disguise I had appeared in at
first, and for the story I had invented.  I told her that I held myself
obliged to satisfy her for the whole floor we were upon; and for an upper
room for my servant, and that for a month certain.

She made many scruples, and begged she might not be urged, on this head,
till she had consulted Miss Rawlins.

I consented; but told her, that she had taken my earnest, and I hoped
there was no room for dispute.

Just then Miss Rawlins returned, with an air of eager curiosity; and
having been told what had passed between Mrs. Moore and me, she gave
herself airs of office immediately: which I humoured, plainly perceiving
that if I had her with me I had the other.

She wished, if there were time for it, and if it were not quite
impertinent in her to desire it, that I would give Mrs. Moore and her a
brief history of an affair, which, as she said, bore the face of novelty,
mystery, and surprise.  For sometimes it looked to her as if we were
married; at other times that point appeared doubtful; and yet the lady
did not absolutely deny it, but, upon the whole, thought herself highly
injured.

I said that our's was a very particular case.--That, were I to acquaint
them with it, some part of it would hardly appear credible.  But,
however, as they seemed hardly to be persons of discretion, I would give
them a brief account of the whole; and this in so plain and sincere a
manner, that it should clear up, to their satisfaction, every thing that
had passed, or might hereafter pass between us.

They sat down by me and threw every feature of their faces into
attention.  I was resolved to go as near the truth as possible, lest any
thing should drop from my spouse to impeach my veracity; and yet keep in
view what passed at the Flask.

It is necessary, although thou knowest my whole story, and a good deal of
my views, that thou shouldst be apprized of the substance of what I told
them.

'I gave them, in as concise a manner as I was able, this history of our
families, fortunes, alliances, antipathies, her brother's and mine
particularly.  I averred the truth of our private marriage.'  The
Captain's letter, which I will enclose, will give thee my reasons for
that.  And, besides, the women might have proposed a parson to me by way
of compromise.  'I told them the condition my spouse had made me swear
to; and to which she held me, in order, I said, to induce me the sooner
to be reconciled to her relations.

'I owned, that this restraint made me sometimes ready to fly out.'  And
Mrs. Moore was so good as to declare, that she did not much wonder at it.

Thou art a very good sort of woman, Mrs. Moore, thought I.

As Miss Howe has actually detected our mother, and might possibly find
some way still to acquaint her friend with her discoveries, I thought it
proper to prepossess them in favour of Mrs. Sinclair and her two nieces.

I said, 'they were gentlewomen born; that they had not bad hearts; that
indeed my spouse did not love them; they having once taken the liberty to
blame her for her over-niceness with regard to me. People, I said, even
good people, who knew themselves to be guilty of a fault they had no
inclination to mend, were too often least patient when told of it; as
they could less bear than others to be thought indifferently of.'

Too often the case, they owned.

'Mrs. Sinclair's house was a very handsome house, and fit to receive the
first quality, [true enough, Jack!]  Mrs. Sinclair was a woman very easy
in her circumstances:--A widow gentlewoman, as you, Mrs. Moore, are.--
Lets lodgings, as you, Mrs. Moore, do.--Once had better prospects as you,
Mrs. Moore, may have had: the relict of Colonel Sinclair;--you, Mrs.
Moore, might know Colonel Sinclair--he had lodgings at Hampstead.'

She had heard of the name.

'Oh! he was related to the best families in Scotland!--And his widow is
not to be reflected upon because she lets lodgings you know, Mrs. Moore--
you know, Miss Rawlins.'

Very true, and very true.--And they must needs say, it did not look quite
so pretty, in such a lady as my spouse, to be so censorious.

A foundation here, thought I, to procure these women's help to get back
the fugitive, or their connivance, at least, at my doing so; as well as
for anticipating any future information from Miss Howe.

I gave them a character of that virago; and intimated, 'that for a head
to contrive mischief, and a heart to execute it, she had hardly her equal
in her sex.'

To this Miss Howe it was, Mrs. Moore said, she supposed, that my spouse
was so desirous to dispatch a man and horse, by day-dawn, with a letter
she wrote before she went to bed last night, proposing to stay no longer
than till she had received an answer to it.

The very same, said I; I knew she would have immediate recourse to her.
I should have been but too happy, could I have prevented such a letter
from passing, or so to have it managed, as to have it given into Mrs.
Howe's hands, instead of her daughter's.  Women who had lived some time
in the world knew better, than to encourage such skittish pranks in young
wives.

Let me just stop to tell thee, while it is in my head, that I have since
given Will. his cue to find out where the man lives who is gone with the
fair fugitive's letter; and, if possible, to see him on his return,
before he sees her.

I told the women, 'I despaired that it would ever be better with us while
Miss Howe had so strange an ascendancy over my spouse, and remained
herself unmarried.  And until the reconciliation with her friends could
be effected; or a still happier event--as I should think it, who am the
last male of my family; and which my foolish vow, and her rigour, had
hitherto'--

Here I stopt, and looked modest, turning my diamond ring round my finger;
while goody Moore looked mighty significant, calling it a very particular
case; and the maiden fanned away, and primm'd, and purs'd, to show that
what I had said needed no farther explanantion.

'I told them the occasion of our present difference.  I avowed the
reality of the fire; but owned, that I would have made no scruple of
breaking the unnatural oath she had bound me in, (having a husband's
right on my side,) when she was so accidentally frighted into my arms;
and I blamed myself excessively, that I did not; since she thought fit to
carry her resentment so high, and had the injustice to suppose the fire
to be a contrivance of mine.'

Nay, for that matter, Mrs. Moore said, as we were married, and madam was
so odd--every gentleman would not--and stopt there Mrs. Moore.

'To suppose I should have recourse to such a poor contrivance, said I,
when I saw the dear creature every hour.'--Was not this a bold put, Jack?

A most extraordinary case, truly, cried the maiden; fanning, yet coming
in with her Well-but's!--and her sifting Pray, Sir's!--and her
restraining Enough, Sir's.--flying from the question to the question--her
seat now-and-then uneasy, for fear my want of delicacy should hurt her
abundant modesty; and yet it was difficult to satisfy her super-abundant
curiosity.

'My beloved's jealousy, [and jealousy of itself, to female minds,
accounts for a thousand unaccountablenesses,] and the imputation of her
half-phrensy, brought upon her by her father's wicked curse, and by the
previous persecutions she had undergone from all her family, were what I
dwelt upon, in order to provide against what might happen.'

In short, 'I owned against myself most of the offences which I did not
doubt but she would charge me with in their hearing; and as every cause
has a black and white side, I gave the worst parts of our story the
gentlest turn.  And when I had done, acquainted them with some of the
contents of that letter of Captain Tomlinson which I left with the lady.
I concluded with James Harlowe, and of Captain Singleton, or of any
sailor-looking men.'

This thou wilt see, from the letter itself, was necessary to be done.
Here, therefore, thou mayest read it.  And a charming letter to my
purpose wilt thou find it to be, if thou givest the least attention to
its contents.


TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDN. JUNE 7.

DEAR SIR,

Although I am obliged to be in town to-morrow, or next day at farthest,
yet I would not dispense with writing to you, by one of my servants,
(whom I send up before upon a particular occasion,) in order to advertise
you, that it is probable you will hear from some of your own relations on
your [supposed*] nuptials.  One of the persons, (Mr. Lilburne by name,)
to whom I hinted my belief of your marriage, happens to be acquainted
with Mr. Spurrier, Lady Betty Lawrance's steward, and (not being under
any restriction) mentioned it to Mr. Spurrier, and he to Lady Betty, as a
thing certain; and this, (though I have not the honour to be personally
known to her Ladyship,) brought on an inquiry from her Ladyship to me by
her gentleman; who coming to me in company with Mr. Lilburne, I had no
way but to confirm the report.--And I understand, that Lady Betty takes
it amiss that she was not acquainted with so desirable a piece of news
from yourself.


* What is between hooks [ ] thou mayest suppose, Jack, I sunk upon the
women, in the account I gave them of the contents of this letter.


Her Ladyship, it seems, has business that calls her to town [and you will
possibly choose to put her right.  If you do, it will, I presume, be in
confidence; that nothing may transpire from your own family to contradict
what I have given out.]

[I have ever been of opinion, That truth ought to be strictly adhered to
on all occasions: and am concerned that I have, (though with so good a
view,) departed from my old maxim.  But my dear friend Mr. John Harlowe
would have it so.  Yet I never knew a departure of this kind a single
departure.  But, to make the best of it now, allow me, Sir, once more to
beg the lady, as soon as possible, to authenticate the report given out.]
When both you and the lady join in the acknowledgement of your marriage,
it will be impertinent in any one to be inquisitive as to the day or
week.  [And if as privately celebrated as you intend, (while the
gentlewomen with whom you lodge are properly instructed, as you say they
are, and who shall actually believe you were married long ago,) who shall
be able to give a contradiction to my report?]

And yet it is very probable, that minute inquiries will be made; and this
is what renders precaution necessary; for Mr. James Harlowe will not
believe that you are married; and is sure, he says, that you both lived
together when Mr. Hickman's application was made to Mr. John Harlowe: and
if you lived together any time unmarried, he infers from your character,
Mr. Lovelace, that it is not probable that you would ever marry.  And he
leaves it to his two uncles to decide, if you even should be married,
whether there be not room to believe, that his sister was first
dishonoured; and if so, to judge of the title she will have to their
favour, or to the forgiveness of any of her family.--I believe, Sir, this
part of my letter had best be kept from the lady.

Young Mr. Harlowe is resolved to find this out, and to come at his
sister's speech likewise: and for that purpose sets out to-morrow, as I
am well informed, with a large attendance armed; and Mr. Solmes is to be
of the party.  And what makes him the more earnest to find it out is
this:--Mr. John Harlowe has told the whole family that he will alter, and
new-settle his will.  Mr. Antony Harlowe is resolved to do the same by
his; for, it seems, he has now given over all thoughts of changing his
condition, having lately been disappointed in a view he had of that sort
with Mrs. Howe.  These two brothers generally act in concert; and Mr.
James Harlowe dreads (and let me tell you, that he has reason for it, on
my Mr. Harlowe's account) that his younger sister will be, at last, more
benefited than he wishes for, by the alteration intended.  He has already
been endeavouring to sound his uncle Harlowe on this subject; and wanted
to know whether any new application had been made to him on his sister's
part.  Mr. Harlowe avoided a direct answer, and expressed his wishes for
a general reconciliation, and his hopes that his niece were married.
This offended the furious young man, and he reminded his uncle of
engagements they had all entered into at his sister's going away, not to
be reconciled but by general consent.

Mr. John Harlowe complains to me often of the uncontroulableness of his
nephew; and says, that now that the young man has not any body of whose
superior sense he stands in awe, he observes not decency in his behaviour
to any of them, and this makes my Mr. Harlowe still more desirous than
ever of bringing his younger niece into favour again.  I will not say all
I might of this young man's extraordinary rapaciousness:--but one would
think, that these grasping men expect to live for ever!

'I took the liberty but within these two hours to propose to set on foot
(and offered my cover to) a correspondence between my friend and his
daughter-niece, as she still sometimes fondly calls her.  She was
mistress of so much prudence, I said, that I was sure she could better
direct every thing to its desirable end, than any body else could.  But
he said, he did not think himself entirely at liberty to take such a step
at present; and that it was best that he should have it in his power to
say, occasionally, that he had not any correspondence with her, or letter
from her.

'You will see, Sir, from all this, the necessity of keeping our treaty an
absolute secret; and if the lady has mentioned it to her worthy friend
Miss Howe, I hope it is in confidence.'

[And now, Sir, a few lines in answer to your's of Monday last.]

[Mr. Harlowe was very well pleased with your readiness to come into his
proposal.  But as to what you both desire, that he will be present at the
ceremony, he said, that his nephew watched all his steps so narrowly,
that he thought it was not practicable (if he were inclinable) to oblige
you: but that he consented, with all his heart, that I should be the
person whom he had stipulated should be privately present at the ceremony
on his part.]

[However, I think, I have an expedient for this, if your lady continues
to be very desirous of her uncle's presence (except he should be more
determined than his answer to me seemed to import); of which I shall
acquaint you, and perhaps of what he says to it, when I have the pleasure
to see you in town.  But, indeed, I think you have no time to lose.  Mr.
Harlowe is impatient to hear, that you are actually one; and I hope I may
carry him down word, when I leave you next, that I saw the ceremony
performed.]

[If any obstacle arises from the lady, (from you it cannot,) I shall be
tempted to think a little hardly of her punctilio.]

Mr. Harlowe hopes, Sir, that you will rather take pains to avoid, than to
meet, this violent young man.  He has the better opinion of you, let me
tell you, Sir, from the account I gave him of your moderation and
politeness; neither of which are qualities with his nephew.  But we have
all of us something to amend.

You cannot imagine how dearly my friend still loves this excellent niece
of his.--I will give you an instance of it, which affected me a good
deal---'If once more, said he, (the last time but one we were together,)
I can but see this sweet child gracing the upper end of my table, as
mistress of my house, in my allotted month; all the rest of my family
present but as her guests; for so I formerly would have it; and had her
mother's consent for it--'  There he stopt; for he was forced to turn his
reverend face from me.  Tears ran down his cheeks.  Fain would he have
hid them: but he could not--'Yet--yet, said he--how--how--' [poor
gentleman, he perfectly sobbed,] 'how shall I be able to bear the first
meeting!'

I bless God I am no hard-hearted man, Mr. Lovelace: my eyes showed to my
worthy friend, that he had no reason to be ashamed of his humanity before
me.

I will put an end to this long epistle.  Be pleased to make my
compliments acceptable to the most excellent of women; as well as believe
me to be,

Dear Sir,
Your faithful friend, and humble servant,
ANTONY TOMLINSON.


***


During the conversation between me and the women, I had planted myself at
the farthest end of the apartment we were in, over against the door,
which was open; and opposite to the lady's chamber-door, which was shut.
I spoke so low that it was impossible for her, at that distance, to hear
what we said; and in this situation I could see if her door was opened.

I told the women, that what I had mentioned to my spouse of Lady Betty's
coming to town with her niece Montague, and of their intention to visit
my beloved, whom they had never seen, nor she them, was real; and that I
expected news of their arrival every hour.  I then showed them copies of
the other two letters, which I had left with her; the one from Lady
Betty, the other from my cousin Montague.--And here thou mayest read them
if thou wilt.

Eternally reproaching, eternally upbraiding me, are my impertinent
relations.  But they are fond of occasions to find fault with me.  Their
love, their love, Jack, and their dependence on my known good humour, are
their inducements.


TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WED. MORN. JUNE 7.

DEAR NEPHEW,

I understand that at length all our wishes are answered in your happy
marriage.  But I think we might as well have heard of it directly from
you, as from the round-about way by which we have been made acquainted
with it.  Methinks, Sir, the power and the will we have to oblige you,
should not expose us the more to your slights and negligence.  My brother
had set his heart upon giving to you the wife we have all so long wished
you to have.  But if you were actually married at the time you made him
that request (supposing, perhaps, that his gout would not let him attend
you) it is but like you.*--If your lady had her reasons to wish it to be
private while the differences between her family and self continue, you
might nevertheless have communicated it to us with that restriction; and
we should have forborne the public manifestations of our joy upon an
event we have so long desired.


* I gave Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins room to think this reproach just,
Jack.


The distant way we have come to know it is by my steward; who is
acquainted with a friend of Captain Tomlinson, to whom that gentleman
revealed it: and he, it seems, had it from yourself and lady, with such
circumstances as leave it not to be doubted.

I am, indeed, very much disobliged with you: so is Lady Sarah.  But I
have a very speedy opportunity to tell you so in person; being obliged to
go to town to my old chancery affair.  My cousin Leeson, who is, it
seems, removed to Albemarle-street, has notice of it.  I shall be at her
house, where I bespeak your attendance of Sunday night.  I have written
to my cousin Charlotte for either her, or her sister, to meet me at
Reading, and accompany me to town.  I shall stay but a few days; my
business being matter of form only.  On my return I shall pop upon Lord
M. at M. Hall, to see in what way his last fit has left him.

Mean time, having told you my mind on your negligence, I cannot help
congratulating you both on the occasion.--Your fair lady particularly,
upon her entrance into a family which is prepared to admire and love her.

My principal intention of writing to you (dispensing with the necessary
punctilio) is, that you may acquaint my dear new niece, that I will not
be denied the honour of her company down with me into Oxfordshire.  I
understand that your proposed house and equipages cannot be soon ready.
She shall be with me till they are.  I insist upon it.  This shall make
all up.  My house shall be her own.  My servants and equipages her's.

Lady Sarah, who has not been out of her own house for months, will oblige
me with her company for a week, in honour of a niece so dearly beloved,
as I am sure she will be of us all.

Being but in lodgings in town, neither you nor your lady can require much
preparation.

Some time on Monday I hope to attend the dear young lady, to make her my
compliments; and to receive her apology for your negligence: which, and
her going down with me, as I said before, shall be full satisfaction.
Mean time, God bless her for her courage, (tell her I say so;) and bless
you both in each other; and that will be happiness to us all--
particularly to

Your truly affectionate Aunt,
ELIZ. LAWRANCE.


TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.

DEAR COUSIN,

At last, as we understand, there is some hope of you.  Now does my good
Lord run over his bead-roll of proverbs; of black oxen, wild oats, long
lanes, and so forth.

Now, Cousin, say I, is your time come; and you will be no longer, I hope,
an infidel either to the power or excellence of the sex you have
pretended hitherto so much as undervalue; nor a ridiculer or scoffer at
an institution which all sober people reverence, and all rakes, sooner or
later, are brought to reverence, or to wish they had.

I want to see how you  become your silken fetters: whether the charming
yoke sits light upon your shoulders.  If with such a sweet yoke-fellow it
does not, my Lord, and my sister, as well as I, think that you will
deserve a closer tie about your neck.

His Lordship is very much displeased, that you have not written him word
of the day, the hour, the manner, and every thing.  But I ask him, how he
can already expect any mark of deference or politeness from you?  He must
stay, I tell him, till that sign of reformation, among others, appear
from the influence and example of your lady: but that, if ever you will
be good for any thing, it will be quickly seen.  And, O Cousin, what a
vast, vast journey have you to take from the dreary land of libertinism,
through the bright province of reformation, into the serene kingdom of
happiness!--You had need to lose no time.  You have many a weary step to
tread, before you can overtake those travellers who set out for it from a
less remote quarter.  But you have a charming pole-star to guide you;
that's your advantage.  I wish you joy of it: and as I have never yet
expected any highly complaisant thing from you, I make no scruple to
begin first; but it is purely, I must tell you, in respect to my new
cousin; whose accession into our family we most heartily congratulate and
rejoice in.

I have a letter from Lady Betty.  She commands either my attendance or my
sister's to my cousin Leeson's.  She puts Lord M. in hopes, that she
shall certainly bring down with her our lovely new relation; for she
says, she will not be denied.  His Lordship is the willinger to let me be
the person, as I am in a manner wild to see her; my sister having two
years ago had that honour at Sir Robert Biddulph's.  So get ready to
accompany us in our return; except your lady had objections strong enough
to satisfy us all.  Lady Sarah longs to see her; and says, This accession
to the family will supply to it the loss of her beloved daughter.

I shall soon, I hope, pay my compliments to the dear lady in person: so
have nothing to add, but that I am

Your old mad Playfellow and Cousin,
CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE.


***


The women having read the copies of these two letters, I thought that I
might then threaten and swagger--'But very little heart have I, said I,
to encourage such a visit from Lady Betty and Miss Montague to my spouse.
For after all, I am tired out with her strange ways.  She is not what she
was, and (as I told her in your hearing, Ladies) I will leave this plaguy
island, though the place of my birth, and though the stake I have in it
is very considerable, and go and reside in France or Italy, and never
think of myself as a married man, nor live like one.'

O dear! said one.

That would be a sad thing! said the other.

Nay, Madam, [turning to Mrs. Moore,]--Indeed, Madam, [to Miss Rawlins,]--
I am quite desperate.  I can no longer bear such usage.  I have had the
good fortune to be favoured by the smiles of very fine ladies, though I
say it [and I looked very modest] both abroad and at home--[Thou knowest
this to be true, Jack].  With regard to my spouse here, I have but one
hope left, (for as to the reconciliation with her friends, I left, I
scorn them all too much to value that, but for her sake,) and that was,
that if it pleased God to bless us with children, she might entirely
recover her usual serenity; and we might then be happy.  But the
reconciliation her heart was so much set upon, is now, as I hinted
before, entirely hopeless--made so, by this rash step of her's, and by
the rash temper she is in; since (as you will believe) her brother and
sister, when they come to know it, will make a fine handle of it against
us both;--affecting, as they do at present, to disbelieve our marriage--
and the dear creature herself too ready to countenance such a disbelief
--as nothing more than the ceremony--as nothing more--hem!--as nothing
more than the ceremony--

Here, as thou wilt perceive, I was bashful; for Miss Rawlins, by her
preparatory primness, put me in mind that it was proper to be so--

I turned half round; then facing the fan-player, and the matron--you
yourselves, Ladies, knew not what to believe till now, that I have told
you our story; and I do assure you, that I shall not give myself the same
trouble to convince people I hate; people from whom I neither expect nor
desire any favour; and who are determined not to be convinced.  And what,
pray, must be the issue, when her uncle's friend comes, although he seems
to be a truly worthy man?  It is not natural for him to say, 'To what
purpose, Mr. Lovelace, should I endeavour to bring about a reconciliation
between Mrs. Lovelace and her friends, by means of her elder uncle, when
a good understanding is wanting between yourselves?'--A fair inference,
Mrs. Moore!--A fair inference, Miss Rawlins.--And here is the
unhappiness--till she is reconciled to them, this cursed oath, in her
notion, is binding.

The women seemed moved; for I spoke with great earnestness, though
low--and besides, they love to have their sex, and its favours, appear of
importance to us.  They shook their deep heads at each other, and looked
sorrowful: and this moved my tender heart too.

'Tis an unheard-of case, Ladies--had she not preferred me to all
mankind--There I stopped--and that, resumed I, feeling for my
handkerchief, is what staggered Captain Tomlinson when he heard of her
flight; who, the last time he saw us together, saw the most affectionate
couple on earth!--the most affectionate couple on earth!--in the
accent-grievous, repeated I.

Out then I pulled my handkerchief, and putting it to my eyes, arose, and
walked to the window--It makes me weaker than a woman, did I not love
her, as never man loved his wife!  [I have no doubt but I do, Jack.]

There again I stopt; and resuming--Charming creature, as you see she is,
I wish I had never beheld her face!--Excuse me, Ladies; traversing the
room, and having rubbed my eyes till I supposed them red, I turned to the
women; and, pulling out my letter-case, I will show you one letter--here
it is--read it, Miss Rawlins, if you please--it will confirm to you how
much all my family are prepared to admire her.  I am freely treated in
it;--so I am in the two others: but after what I have told you, nothing
need be a secret to you two.

She took it, with an air of eager curiosity, and looked at the seal,
ostentatiously coroneted; and at the superscription, reading out, To
Robert Lovelace, Esq.--Ay, Madam--Ay, Miss, that's my name, [giving
myself an air, though I had told it to them before,] I am not ashamed of
it.  My wife's maiden name--unmarried name, I should rather say--fool
that I am!--and I rubbed my cheek for vexation [Fool enough in
conscience, Jack!] was Harlowe--Clarissa Harlowe--you heard me call her
my Clarissa--

I did--but thought it to be a feigned or love-name, said Miss Rawlins.

I wonder what is Miss Rawlins's love-name, Jack.  Most of the fair
romancers have in their early womanhood chosen love-names.  No parson
ever gave more real names, than I have given fictitious ones.  And to
very good purpose: many a sweet dear has answered me a letter for the
sake of owning a name which her godmother never gave her.

No--it was her real name, I said.

I bid her read out the whole letter.  If the spelling be not exact, Miss
Rawlins, said I, you will excuse it; the writer is a lord.  But, perhaps,
I may not show it to my spouse; for if those I have left with her have no
effect upon her, neither will this: and I shall not care to expose my
Lord M. to her scorn.  Indeed I begin to be quite careless of
consequences.

Miss Rawlins, who could not but be pleased with this mark of my
confidence, looked as if she pitied me.

And here thou mayest read the letter, No. III.


***


TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
M. HALL, WEDN. JUNE 7.

COUSIN LOVELACE,

I think you might have found time to let us know of your nuptials being
actually solemnized.  I might have expected this piece of civility from
you.  But perhaps the ceremony was performed at the very time that you
asked me to be your lady's father--but I should be angry if I proceed in
my guesses--and little said is soon amended.

But I can tell you, that Lady Betty Lawrance, whatever Lady Sarah does,
will not so soon forgive you, as I have done.  Women resent slights
longer than men.  You that know so much of the sex (I speak it not,
however, to your praise) might have known that.  But never was you before
acquainted with a lady of such an amiable character.  I hope there will
be but one soul between you.  I have before now said, that I will
disinherit you, and settle all I can upon her, if you prove not a good
husband to her.

May this marriage be crowned with a great many fine boys (I desire no
girls) to build up again a family so antient!  The first boy shall take
my surname by act of parliament.  That is my will.

Lady Betty and niece Charlotte will be in town about business before you
know where you are.  They long to pay their compliments to your fair
bride.  I suppose you will hardly be at The Lawn when they get to town;
because Greme informs me, you have sent no orders there for your lady's
accommodation.

Pritchard has all things in readiness for signing.  I will take no
advantage of your slights.  Indeed I am too much used to them--more
praise to my patience than to your complaisance, however.

One reason for Lady Betty's going up, as I may tell you under the rose,
is, to buy some suitable presents for Lady Sarah and all of us to make
on this agreeable occasion.

We would have blazed it away, could we have had timely notice, and
thought it would have been agreeable to all round.  The like occasions
don't happen every day.

My most affectionate compliments and congratulations to my new niece,
conclude me, for the present, in violent pain, that with all your
heroicalness would make you mad,

Your truly affectionate uncle,
M.


***


This letter clench'd the nail.  Not but that, Miss Rawlins said, she saw
I had been a wild gentleman; and, truly she thought so the moment she
beheld me.

They began to intercede for my spouse, (so nicely had I turned the
tables;) and that I would not go abroad and disappoint a reconciliation
so much wished for on one side, and such desirable prospects on the other
in my own family.

Who knows, thought I to myself, but more may come of this plot, than I
had even promised myself?  What a happy man shall I be, if these women
can be brought to join to carry my marriage into consummation!

Ladies, you are exceedingly good to us both.  I should have some hopes,
if my unhappily nice spouse could be brought to dispense with the
unnatural oath she has laid me under.  You see what my case is.  Do you
think I may not insist upon her absolving me from this abominable oath?
Will you be so good as to give your advice, that one apartment may serve
for a man and his wife at the hour of retirement?--[Modestly put,
Belford!--And let me here observe, that few rakes would find a language
so decent as to engage modest women to talk with him in, upon such
subjects.]

They both simpered, and looked upon one another.

These subjects always make women simper, at least.  No need but of the
most delicate hints to them.  A man who is gross in a woman's company,
ought to be knocked down with a club: for, like so many musical
instruments, touch but a single wire, and the dear souls are sensible
all over.

To be sure, Miss Rawlins learnedly said, playing with her fan, a casuist
would give it, that the matrimonial vow ought to supercede any other
obligation.

Mrs. Moore, for her part, was of opinion, that, if the lady owned herself
to be a wife, she ought to behave like one.

Whatever be my luck, thought I, with this all-eyed fair-one, any other
woman in the world, from fifteen to five-and-twenty, would be mine upon
my own terms before the morning.

And now, that I may be at hand to take all advantages, I will endeavour,
said I to myself, to make sure of good quarters.

I am your lodger, Mrs. Moore, in virtue of the earnest I have given you
for these apartments, and for any one you can spare above for my
servants.  Indeed for all you have to spare--For who knows what my
spouse's brother may attempt?  I will pay you to your own demand; and
that for a month or two certain, (board included,) as I shall or shall
not be your hindrance.  Take that as a pledge; or in part of payment--
offering her a thirty pound bank note.

She declined taking it; desiring she might consult the lady first;
adding, that she doubted not my honour; and that she would not let her
apartments to any other person, whom she knew not something of, while I
and the lady were here.

The Lady!  The Lady! from both women's mouth's continually (which still
implied a doubt in their hearts): and not Your Spouse, and Your Lady,
Sir.

I never met with such women, thought I:--so thoroughly convinced but this
moment, yet already doubting--I am afraid I have a couple of skeptics to
deal with.

I knew no reason, I said, for my wife to object to my lodging in the same
house with her here, any more than in town, at Mrs. Sinclair's.  But were
she to make such objection, I would not quit possession since it was not
unlikely that the same freakish disorder which brought her to Hampstead,
might carry her absolutely out of my knowledge.

They both seemed embarrassed; and looked upon one another; yet with such
an air, as if they thought there was reason in what I said.  And I
declared myself her boarder, as well as lodger; and dinner-time
approaching, was not denied to be the former.



LETTER XXV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


I thought it was now high time to turn my whole mind to my beloved; who
had had full leisure to weigh the contents of the letters I had left with
her.

I therefore requested Mrs. Moore to step in, and desire to know whether
she would be pleased to admit me to attend her in her apartment, on
occasion of the letters I had left with her; or whether she would favour
me with her company in the dining-room?

Mrs. Moore desired Miss Rawlins to accompany her in to the lady.  They
tapped at the door, and were both admitted.

I cannot but stop here for one minute to remark, though against myself,
upon that security which innocence gives, that nevertheless had better
have in it a greater mixture of the serpent with the dove.  For here,
heedless of all I could say behind her back, because she was satisfied
with her own worthiness, she permitted me to go on with my own story,
without interruption, to persons as great strangers to her as me; and
who, as strangers to both, might be supposed to lean to the side most
injured; and that, as I managed it, was to mine.  A dear, silly soul,
thought I, at the time, to depend upon the goodness of her own heart,
when the heart cannot be seen into but by its actions; and she, to
appearance, a runaway, an eloper, from a tender, a most indulgent
husband!--To neglect to cultivate the opinion of individuals, when the
whole world is governed by appearance!

Yet what can be expected of an angel under twenty?--She has a world of
knowledge:--knowledge speculative, as I may say, but no experience.--How
should she?--Knowledge by theory only is a vague, uncertain light: a Will
o' the Wisp, which as often misleads the doubting mind, as puts it right.

There are many things in the world, could a moralizer say, that would
afford inexpressible pleasure to a reflecting mind, were it not for the
mixture they come to us with.  To be graver still, I have seen parents,
[perhaps my own did so,] who delighted in those very qualities in their
children while young, the natural consequences of which, (too much
indulged and encouraged,) made them, as they grew up, the plague of their
hearts.--To bring this home to my present purpose, I must tell thee, that
I adore this charming creature for her vigilant prudence; but yet I would
not, methinks, wish her, by virtue of that prudence, which is, however,
necessary to carry her above the devices of all the rest of the world, to
be too wise for mine.

My revenge, my sworn revenge, is, nevertheless, (adore her as I will,)
uppermost in my heart.--Miss Howe says that my love is a Herodian love.*
By my soul, that girl's a witch!  I am half sorry to say, that I find a
pleasure in playing the tyrant over what I love.  Call it an ungenerous
pleasure, if thou wilt: softer hearts than mine know it.  The women, to a
woman, know it, and show it too, whenever they are trusted with power.
And why should it be thought strange, that I, who love them so dearly,
and study them so much, should catch the infection of them?


* See Letter XX. of this volume.



LETTER XXVI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


I will now give thee the substance of the dialogue that passed between
the two women and the lady.  Wonder not, that a perverse wife makes a
listening husband.  The event, however, as thou wilt find, justified the
old observation, That listners seldom hear good of themselves.  Conscious
of their own demerits, if I may guess by myself, [There's ingenuousness,
Jack!] and fearful of censure, they seldom find themselves disappointed.
There is something of sense, after all in these proverbs, in these
phrases, in this wisdom of nations.

Mrs. Moore was to be the messenger, but Miss Rawlins began the dialogue.

Your SPOUSE, Madam,--[Devil!--only to fish for a negative or affirmative
declaration.]

Cl.   My spouse, Madam--

Miss R.   Mr. Lovelace, Madam, avers that you are married to him; and
begs admittance, or your company in the dining-room, to talk upon the
subject of the letters he left with you.

Cl.   He is a poor wicked wretch.  Let me beg of you, Madam, to favour me
with your company as often as possible while he is hereabouts, and I
remain here.

Miss R.   I shall with pleasure attend you, Madam: but, methinks, I could
wish you would see the gentleman, and hear what he has to say on the
subject of the letters.

Cl.   My case is a hard, a very hard one--I am quite bewildered!-I know
not what to do!--I have not a friend in the world that can or will help
me!  Yet had none but friends till I knew that man!

Miss R.   The gentleman neither looks nor talks like a bad man.--Not a
very bad man, as men go.

As men go!  Poor Miss Rawlins, thought I; and dost thou know how men go?

Cl.   O Madam, you know him not!  He can put on the appearance of an
angel of light; but has a black, a very black heart!

Poor I!--

Miss R.   I could not have thought it, truly!  But men are very
deceitful, now-a-days.

Now-a-days!--A fool!--Have not her history-books told her that they were
always so?

Mrs. Moore, sighing.   I have found it so, I am sure, to my cost!--

Who knows but in her time poor goody Moore may have met with a Lovelace,
or a Belford, or some such vile fellow?  My little harum-scarum beauty
knows not what strange histories every woman living, who has had the
least independence of will, could tell her, were such to be as
communicative as she is.  But here's the thing--I have given her cause
enough of offence; but not enough to make her hold her tongue.

Cl.   As to the letters he has left with me, I know not what to say to
them: but am resolved never to have any thing to say to him.

Miss R.   If, Madam, I may be allowed to say so, I think you carry
matters very far.

Cl.   Has he been making a bad cause a good one with you, Madam?--That he
can do with those who know him not.  Indeed I heard him talking, thought
not what he said, and am indifferent about it.--But what account does he
give of himself?

I was pleased to hear this.  To arrest, to stop her passion, thought I,
in the height of its career, is a charming presage.

Then the busy Miss Rawlins fished on, to find out from her either a
confirmation or disavowal of my story--Was Lord M. my uncle?  Did I court
her at first with the allowance of her friends, her brother excepted?
Had I a rencounter with that brother?  Was she so persecuted in favour of
a very disagreeable man, one Solmes, as to induce her to throw herself
into my protection?

None of these were denied.  All the objections she could have made, were
stifled, or kept in, by the considerations, (as she mentioned,) that she
should stay there but a little while, and that her story was too long;
but Miss Rawlins would not be thus easily answered.

Miss R.   He says, Madam, that he could not prevail for marriage, till he
had consented, under a solemn oath, to separate beds, while your family
remained unreconciled.

Cl.   O the wretch!  What can be still in his head, to endeavour to pass
these stories upon strangers?

So no direct denial, thought I.--Admirable!--All will do by-and-by.

Miss R.   He has owned that an accidental fire had frightened you very
much on Wednesday night--and that--and that--an accidental fire had
frightened you--very much frightened you--last Wednesday night!

Then, after a short pause--In short, he owned, that he had taken some
innocent liberties, which might have led to a breach of the oath you had
imposed upon him; and that this was the cause of your displeasure.

I would have been glad to see how my charmer then looked.--To be sure she
was at a loss in her own mind, to justify herself for resenting so highly
an offence so trifling.--She hesitated--did not presently speak.--When
she did, she wished that she, (Miss Rawlins,) might never meet with any
man who would take such innocent liberties with her.

Miss Rawlins pushed further.

Your case, to be sure, Madam, is very particular: but if the hope of a
reconciliation with your own friends is made more distant by your leaving
him, give me leave to say, that 'tis pity--'tis pity--[I suppose the
maiden then primm'd, fann'd, and blush'd--'tis pity] the oath cannot be
dispensed with; especially as he owns he has not been so strict a liver.

I could have gone in and kissed the girl.

Cl.   You have heard his story.  Mine, as I told you before, is too long,
and too melancholy: my disorder on seeing the wretch is too great; and my
time here is too short, for me to enter upon it.  And if he has any end
to serve by his own vindication, in which I shall not be a personal
sufferer, let him make himself appear as white as an angel, with all my
heart.

My love for her, and the excellent character I gave her, were then
pleaded.

Cl.   Specious seducer!--Only tell me if I cannot get away from him by
some back way?

How my heart then went pit-a-pat, to speak in the female dialect.

Cl.   Let me look out--[I heard the sash lifted up.]--Whither does that
path lead?  Is there no possibility of getting to a coach?  Surely he
must deal with some fiend, or how could he have found me out?  Cannot I
steal to some neighbouring house, where I may be concealed till I can get
quite away?  You are good people!--I have not been always among such!--
O help me, help me, Ladies! [with a voice of impatience,] or I am ruined!

Then pausing, Is that the way to Hendon? [pointing, I suppose.]  Is
Hendon a private place?--The Hampstead coach, I am told, will carry
passengers thither.

Mrs. Moore.   I have an honest friend at Mill-Hill, [Devil fetch her!
thought I,] where, if such be your determination, Madam, and if you think
yourself in danger, you may be safe, I believe.

Cl.   Any where, if I can but escape from this man!  Whither does that
path lead, out yonder?--What is that town on the right hand called?

Mrs. Moore.   Highgate, Madam.

Miss R.   On the side of the heath is a little village, called North-end.
A kinswoman of mine lives there.  But her house is small.  I am not sure
she could accommodate such a lady.

Devil take her too! thought I,--I imagined that I had made myself a
better interest in these women.  But the whole sex love plotting--and
plotters too, Jack.

Cl.   A barn, an outhouse, a garret, will be a palace to me, if it will
but afford me a refuge from this man!

Her senses, thought I, are much livelier than mine.--What a devil have
I done, that she should be so very implacable?  I told thee, Belford, all
I did: Was there any thing in it so very much amiss?  Such prospects of a
family reconciliation before her too!  To be sure she is a very sensible
lady!

She then espied my new servant walking under the window, and asked if he
were not one of mine?

Will. was on the look-out for old Grimes, [so is the fellow called whom
my beloved has dispatched to Miss Howe.]  And being told that the man she
saw was my servant; I see, said she, that there is no escaping, unless
you, Madam, [to Miss Rawlins, I suppose,] can befriend me till I can get
farther.  I have no doubt that the fellow is planted about the house to
watch my steps.  But the wicked wretch his master has no right to
controul me.  He shall not hinder me from going where I please.  I will
raise the town upon him, if he molests me.  Dear Ladies, is there no
back-door for me to get out at while you hold him in talk?

Miss R.   Give me leave to ask you, Madam, Is there no room to hope for
accommodation?  Had you not better see him?  He certainly loves you
dearly: he is a fine gentleman; you may exasperate him, and make matters
more unhappy for yourself.

Cl.   O Mrs. Moore!  O Miss Rawlins! you know not the man!  I wish not to
see his face, nor to exchange another word with him as long as I live.

Mrs. Moore.   I don't find, Miss Rawlins, that the gentleman has
misrepresented any thing.  You see, Madam, [to my Clarissa,] how
respectful he is; not to come in till permitted.  He certainly loves you
dearly.  Pray, Madam, let him talk to you, as he wishes to do, on the
subject of his letters.

Very kind of Mrs. Moore!--Mrs. Moore, thought I, is a very good woman.  I
did not curse her then.

Miss Rawlins said something; but so low that I could not hear what it
was.  Thus it was answered.

Cl.   I am greatly distressed!  I know not what to do!--But, Mrs. Moore,
be so good as to give his letters to him--here they are.--Be pleased to
tell him, that I wish him and Lady Betty and Miss Montague a happy
meeting.  He never can want excuses to them for what has happened, any
more than pretences to those he would delude.  Tell him, that he has
ruined me in the opinion of my own friends.  I am for that reason the
less solicitous how I appear to his.

Mrs. Moore then came to me; and I, being afraid that something would pass
mean time between the other two, which I should not like, took the
letters, and entered the room, and found them retired into the closet; my
beloved whispering with an air of earnestness to Miss Rawlins, who was
all attention.

Her back was towards me; and Miss Rawlins, by pulling her sleeve, giving
intimation of my being there--Can I have no retirement uninvaded, Sir,
said she, with indignation, as if she were interrupted in some talk her
heart was in?--What business have you here, or with me?--You have your
letters; have you not?

Lovel.   I have, my dear; and let me beg of you to consider what you are
about.  I every moment expect Captain Tomlinson here.  Upon my soul, I
do.  He has promised to keep from your uncle what has happened: but what
will he think if he find you hold in this strange humour?

Cl.   I will endeavour, Sir, to have patience with you for a moment or
two, while I ask you a few questions before this lady, and before Mrs.
Moore, [who just then came in,] both of whom you have prejudiced in your
favour by your specious stories:--Will you say, Sir, that we are married
together?  Lay your hand upon your heart, and answer me, am I your wedded
wife?

I am gone too far, thought I, to give up for such a push as this, home
one as it is.

My dearest soul! how can you put such a question?  It is either for your
honour or my own, that it should be doubted?--Surely, surely, Madam, you
cannot have attended to the contents of Captain Tomlinson's letter.

She complained often of want of spirits throughout our whole contention,
and of weakness of person and mind, from the fits she had been thrown
into: but little reason had she for this complaint, as I thought, who was
able to hold me to it, as she did.  I own that I was excessively
concerned for her several times.

You and I!  Vilest of Men!--

My name is Lovelace, Madam--

Therefore it is that I call you the vilest of men.  [Was this pardonable,
Jack!]--You and I know the truth, the whole truth.--I want not to clear
up my reputation with these gentlewomen:--that is already lost with every
one I had most reason to value: but let me have this new specimen of what
you are capable of--say, wretch, (say, Lovelace, if thou hadst rather,)
art thou really and truly my wedded husband?--Say; answer without
hesitation.

She trembled with impatient indignation; but had a wildness in her
manner, which I took some advantage of, in order to parry this cursed
thrust.  And a cursed thrust it was; since, had I positively averred it,
she would never have believed any thing I said: and had I owned that I
was not married, I had destroyed my own plot, as well with the women as
with her; and could have no pretence for pursuing her, or hindering her
from going wheresoever she pleased.  Not that I was ashamed to aver it,
had it been consistent with policy.  I would not have thee think me such
a milk-sop neither.

Lovel.   My dearest love, how wildly you talk!  What would you have me
answer?  It is necessary that I should answer?  May I not re-appeal this
to your own breast, as well as to Captain Tomlinson's treaty and letter?
You know yourself how matters stand between us.--And Captain Tomlinson--

Cl.   O wretch!  Is this an answer to my question?  Say, are we married,
or are we not?

Lovel.   What makes a marriage, we all know.  If it be the union of two
hearts, [there was a turn, Jack!] to my utmost grief, I must say that we
are not; since now I see you hate me.  If it be the completion of
marriage, to my confusion and regret, I must own we are not.  But, my
dear, will you be pleased to consider what answer half a dozen people
whence you came, could give to your question?  And do not now, in the
disorder of your mind, and the height of passion, bring into question
before these gentlewomen a point you have acknowledged before those who
know us better.

I would have whispered her about the treaty with her uncle, and about the
contents of the Captain's letter; but, retreating, and with a rejecting
hand, Keep thy distance, man, cried the dear insolent--to thine own heart
I appeal, since thou evadest me thus pitifully!--I own no marriage with
thee!--Bear witness, Ladies, I do not.  And cease to torment me, cease to
follow me.--Surely, surely, faulty as I have been, I have not deserved to
be thus persecuted!--I resume, therefore, my former language: you have no
right to pursue me: you know you have not: begone then, and leave me to
make the best of my hard lot.  O my dear, cruel father! said she, in a
violent fit of grief [falling upon her knees, and clasping her uplifted
hands together] thy heavy curse is completed upon thy devoted daughter!
I am punished, dreadfully punished, by the very wretch in whom I had
placed my wicked confidence!

By my soul, Belford, the little witch with her words, but more by her
manner, moved me!  Wonder not then that her action, her grief, her tears,
set the women into the like compassionate manifestations.

Had I not a cursed task of it?

The two women withdrew to the further end of the room, and whispered, a
strange case!  There is no phrensy here--I just heard said.

The charming creature threw her handkerchief over her head and neck,
continuing kneeling, her back towards me, and her face hid upon a chair,
and repeatedly sobbed with grief and passion.

I took this opportunity to step to the women to keep them steady.

You see, Ladies, [whispering,] what an unhappy man I am!  You see what a
spirit this dear creature has!--All, all owing to her implacable
relations, and to her father's curse.--A curse upon them all! they have
turned the head of the most charming woman in the world!

Ah! Sir, Sir, replied Miss Rawlins, whatever be the fault of her
relations, all is not as it should be between you and her.  'Tis plain
she does not think herself married: 'tis plain she does not: and if you
have any value for the poor lady, and would not totally deprive her of
her senses, you had better withdraw, and leave to time and cooler
consideration the event in your favour.

She will compel me to this at last, I fear, Miss Rawlins; I fear she
will; and then we are both undone: for I cannot live without her; she
knows it too well: and she has not a friend who will look upon her: this
also she knows.  Our marriage, when her uncle's friend comes, will be
proved incontestably.  But I am ashamed to think I have given her room
to believe it no marriage: that's what she harps upon!

Well, 'tis a strange case, a very strange one, said Miss Rawlins; and was
going to say further, when the angry beauty, coming towards the door,
said, Mrs. Moore, I beg a word with you.  And they both stepped into the
dining-room.

I saw her just before put a parcel into her pocket; and followed them
out, for fear she should slip away; and stepping to the stairs, that she
might not go by me, Will., cried I, aloud [though I knew he was not near]
--Pray, child, to a maid, who answered, call either of my servants to me.

She then came up to me with a wrathful countenance: do you call your
servant, Sir, to hinder me, between you, from going where I please?

Don't, my dearest life, misinterpret every thing I do.  Can you think me
so mean and unworthy as to employ a servant to constrain you?--I call him
to send to the public-houses, or inns in this town, to inquire after
Captain Tomlinson, who may have alighted at some one of them, and be now,
perhaps, needlessly adjusting his dress; and I would have him come, were
he to be without clothes, God forgive me! for I am stabbed to the heart
by your cruelty.

Answer was returned, that neither of my servants was in the way.

Not in the way, said I!--Whither can the dogs be gone?

O Sir! with a scornful air; not far, I'll warrant.  One of them was under
the window just now; according to order, I suppose, to watch my steps--
but I will do what I please, and go where I please; and that to your
face.

God forbid, that I should hinder you in any thing that you may do with
safety to yourself!

Now I verily believe that her design was to slip out, in pursuance of the
closet-whispering between her and Miss Rawlins; perhaps to Miss Rawlins's
house.

She then stept back to Mrs. Moore, and gave her something, which proved
to be a diamond ring, and desired her [not whisperingly, but with an air
of defiance to me] that that might be a pledge for her, till she defrayed
her demands; which she should soon find means to do; having no more money
about her than she might have occasion for before she came to an
acquaintance's.

Mrs. Moore would have declined taking it; but she would not be denied;
and then, wiping her eyes, she put on her gloves--nobody has a right to
stop me, said she!--I will go!--Whom should I be afraid of?--Her very
question, charming creature! testifying her fear.

I beg pardon, Madam, [turning to Mrs. Moore, and courtesying,] for the
trouble I have given you.--I beg pardon, Madam, to Miss Rawlins,
[courtesying likewise to her,]--you may both hear of me in a happier
hour, if such a one fall to my lot--and God bless you both!--struggling
with her tears till she sobbed--and away was tripping.

I stepped to the door: I put it to; and setting my back against it, took
her struggling hand--My dearest life! my angel! said I, why will you thus
distress me?--Is this the forgiveness which you so solemnly promised?--

Unhand me, Sir!--You have no business with me!  You have no right over
me!  You know you have not.

But whither, whither, my dearest love, would you go!--Think you not that
I will follow you, were it to the world's end!--Whither would you go?

Well do you ask me, whither I would go, who have been the occasion that I
have not a friend left!--But God, who knows my innocence, and my upright
intentions, will not wholly abandon me when I am out of your power; but
while I am in it, I cannot expect a gleam of the divine grace or favour
to reach me.

How severe is this!--How shockingly severe!--Out of your presence, my
angry fair-one, I can neither hope for the one nor the other.  As my
cousin Montague, in the letter you have read, observes, You are my polar
star and my guide, and if ever I am to be happy, either here or
hereafter, it must be in and by you.

She would then have opened the door.  But I, respectfully opposing her,
Begone, man!  Begone, Mr. Lovelace! said she, stop not in my way.  If you
would not that I should attempt the window, give me passage by the door;
for, once more, you have no right to detain me.

Your resentments, my dearest life, I will own to be well grounded.  I
will acknowledge that I have been all in fault.  On my knee, [and down I
dropt,] I ask your pardon.  And can you refuse to ratify your own
promise?  Look forward to the happy prospect before us.  See you not my
Lord M. and Lady Sarah longing to bless you, for blessing me, and their
whole family?  Can you take no pleasure in the promised visit of Lady
Betty and my cousin Montague?  And in the protection they offer you, if
you are dissatisfied with mine?  Have you no wish to see your uncle's
friend?  Stay only till Captain Tomlinson comes.  Receive from him the
news of your uncle's compliance with the wishes of both.

She seemed altogether distressed; was ready to sink; and forced to lean
against the wainscot, as I kneeled at her feet.  A stream of tears at
last burst from her less indignant eyes.  Good heaven! said she, lifting
up her lovely face, and clasped hands, what is at last to be my destiny?
Deliver me from this dangerous man; and direct me--I know not what to do,
what I can do, nor what I ought to do!

The women, as I had owned our marriage to be but half completed, heard
nothing in this whole scene to contradict (not flagrantly to contradict)
what I had asserted.  They believed they saw in her returning temper, and
staggered resolution, a love for me, which her indignation had before
suppressed; and they joined to persuade her to tarry till the Captain
came, and to hear his proposals; representing the dangers to which she
would be exposed; the fatigues she might endure; a lady of her
appearance, unguarded, unprotected.  On the other hand they dwelt upon my
declared contrition, and on my promises; for the performance of which
they offered to be bound.  So much had my kneeling humility affected
them.

Women, Jack, tacitly acknowledge the inferiority of their sex, in the
pride they take to behold a kneeling lover at their feet.

She turned from me, and threw herself into a chair.

I arose and approached her with reverence.  My dearest creature, said I,
and was proceeding, but, with a face glowing with conscious dignity, she
interrupted me--Ungenerous, ungrateful Lovelace!  You know not the value
of the heart you have insulted!  Nor can you conceive how much my soul
despises your meanness.  But meanness must ever be the portion of the
man, who can act vilely!

The women believing we were likely to be on better terms, retired.  The
dear perverse opposed their going; but they saw I was desirous of their
absence; and when they had withdrawn, I once more threw myself at her
feet, and acknowledged my offences; implored her forgiveness for this one
time, and promised the most exact circumspection for the future.

It was impossible for her she said to keep her memory and forgive me.
What hadst thou seen in the conduct of Clarissa Harlowe, that should
encourage such an insult upon her as thou didst dare to make?  How meanly
must thou think of her, that thou couldst presume to be so guilty, and
expect her to be so weak as to forgive thee?

I besought her to let me read over to her Captain Tomlinson's letter.  I
was sure it was impossible she could have given it the requisite
attention.

I have given it the requisite attention, said she; and the other letters
too.  So that what I say is upon deliberation.  And what have I to fear
from my brother and sister?  They can but complete the ruin of my
fortunes with my father and uncles.  Let them and welcome.  You, Sir, I
thank you, have lowered my fortunes; but, I bless God, that my mind is
not sunk with my fortunes.  It is, on the contrary, raised above fortune,
and above you; and for half a word they shall have the estate they envied
me for, and an acquittal from me of all the expectations from my family
that may make them uneasy.

I lifted up my hands and eyes in silent admiration of her.

My brother, Sir, may think me ruined; to the praise of your character, he
may think it impossible to be with you and be innocent.  You have but too
well justified their harshest censures by every part of your conduct.
But now that I have escaped from you, and that I am out of the reach of
your mysterious devices, I will wrap myself up in mine own innocence,
[and then the passionate beauty folded her arms about herself,] and leave
to time, and to my future circumspection, the re-establishment of my
character.  Leave me then, Sir, pursue me not!--

Good Heaven! [interrupting her]--and all this, for what?--Had I not
yielded to your entreaties, (forgive me, Madam,) you could not have
carried farther your resentments--

Wretch!  Was it not crime enough to give occasion for those entreaties?
Wouldst thou make a merit to me, that thou didst not utterly ruin her
whom thou oughtest to have protected?  Begone, man! (turning from me, her
face crimsoned over with passion.)--See me no more!--I cannot bear thee
in my sight!--

Dearest, dearest creature!

If I forgive thee, Lovelace--And there she stopped.--To endeavour,
proceeded she, to endeavour by premeditation, by low contrivances, by
cries of Fire! to terrify a poor creature who had consented to take a
wretched chance with thee for life!

For Heaven's sake,--offering to take her repulsing hand, as she was
flying from me towards the closet.

What hast thou to do to plead for the sake of Heaven in thy favour!--O
darkest of human minds!

Then turning from me, wiping her eyes, and again turning towards me, but
her sweet face half aside, What difficulties hast thou involved me in!
That thou hadst a plain path before thee, after thou hadst betrayed me
into thy power.--At once my mind takes in the whole of thy crooked
behaviour; and if thou thinkest of Clarissa Harlowe as her proud heart
tells her thou oughtest to think of her, thou wilt seek thy fortunes
elsewhere.  How often hast thou provoked me to tell thee, that my soul
is above thee!

For Heaven's sake, Madam, for a soul's sake, which it is in your power
to save from perdition, forgive me the past offence.  I am the greatest
villain on earth if it was a premeditated one; yet I presume not to
excuse myself.  On your mercy I throw myself.  I will not offer at any
plea but that of penitence.  See but Captain Tomlinson.--See but Lady
Betty and my cousin; let them plead for me; let them be guarantees for
my honour.

If Captain Tomlinson come while I stay here, I may see him; but as for
you, Sir--

Dearest creature! let me beg of you not to aggravate my offence to the
Captain when he comes.  Let me beg of you--

What askest thou?  It is not that I shall be of party against myself?
That I shall palliate--

Do not charge me, Madam, interrupted I, with villainous premeditation!
--Do not give such a construction to my offence as may weaken your
uncle's opinion--as may strengthen your brother's--

She flung from me to the further end of the room, [she could go no
further,] and just then Mrs. Moore came up, and told her that dinner was
ready, and that she had prevailed upon Miss Rawlins to give her her
company.

You must excuse me, Mrs. Moore, said she.  Miss Rawlins I hope also will
--but I cannot eat--I cannot go down.  As for you, Sir, I suppose you
will think it right to depart hence; at least till the gentleman comes
whom you expect.

I respectfully withdrew into the next room, that Mrs. Moore might
acquaint her, (I durst not myself,) that I was her lodger and boarder,
as, whisperingly, I desired that she would; and meeting Miss Rawlins in
the passage, Dearest Miss Rawlins, said I, stand my friend; join with Mrs.
Moore to pacify my spouse, if she has any new flights upon my having
taken lodgings, and intending to board here.  I hope she will have more
generosity than to think of hindering a gentlewoman from letting her
lodgings.

I suppose Mrs. Moore, (whom I left with my fair-one,) had apprized her of
this before Miss Rawlins went in; for I heard her say, while I withheld
Miss Rawlins,--'No, indeed: he is much mistaken--surely he does not think
I will.'

They both expostulated with her, as I could gather from bits and scraps
of what they said; for they spoke so low, that I could not hear any
distinct sentence, but from the fair perverse, whose anger made her
louder.  And to this purpose I heard her deliver herself in answer to
different parts of their talk to her:--'Good Mrs. Moore, dear Miss
Rawlins, press me no further:--I cannot sit down at table with him!'

They said something, as I suppose in my behalf--'O the insinuating
wretch!  What defence have I against a man, who, go where I will, can
turn every one, even of the virtuous of my sex, in his favour?'

After something else said, which I heard not distinctly--'This is
execrable cunning!--Were you to know his wicked heart, he is not without
hope of engaging you two good persons to second him in the vilest of his
machinations.'

How came she, (thought I, at the instant,) by all this penetration?  My
devil surely does not play me booty.  If I thought he did, I would marry,
and live honest, to be even with him.

I suppose then they urged the plea which I hinted to Miss Rawlins at
going in, that she would not be Mrs. Moore's hindrance; for thus she
expressed herself--'He will no doubt pay you your own price.  You need
not question his liberality; but one house cannot hold us.--Why, if it
would, did I fly from him, to seek refuge among strangers?'

Then, in answer to somewhat else they pleaded--''Tis a mistake, Madam;
I am not reconciled to him, I will believe nothing he says.  Has he not
given you a flagrant specimen of what a man he is, and of what his is
capable, by the disguises you saw him in?  My story is too long, and my
stay here will be but short; or I could convince you that my resentments
against him are but too well founded.'

I suppose that they pleaded for her leave for my dining with them; for
she said--'I have nothing to say to that: it is your own house, Mrs.
Moore--it is your own table--you may admit whom you please to it, only
leave me at my liberty to choose my company.'

Then, in answer, as I suppose, to their offer of sending her up a plate--
'A bit of bread, if you please, and a glass of water; that's all I can
swallow at present.  I am really very much discomposed.  Saw you not how
bad I was?  Indignation only could have supported my spirits!--

'I have no objections to his dining with you, Madam;' added she, in
reply, I suppose, to a farther question of the same nature--'But I will
not stay a night in the same house where he lodges.'

I presume Miss Rawlins had told her that she would not stay dinner: for
she said,--'Let me not deprive Mrs. Moore of your company, Miss Rawlins.
You will not be displeased with his talk.  He can have no design upon
you.'

Then I suppose they pleaded what I might say behind her back, to make my
own story good:--'I care not what he says or what he thinks of me.
Repentance and amendment are all the harm I wish him, whatever becomes of
me!'

By her accent she wept when she spoke these last words.

They came out both of them wiping their eyes; and would have persuaded me
to relinquish the lodgings, and to depart till her uncle's friend came.
But I knew better.  I did not care to trust the Devil, well as she and
Miss Howe suppose me to be acquainted with him, for finding her out
again, if once more she escaped me.

What I am most afraid of is, that she will throw herself among her own
relations; and, if she does, I am confident they will not be able to
withstand her affecting eloquence.  But yet, as thou'lt see, the
Captain's letter to me is admirably calculated to obviate my
apprehensions on this score; particularly in that passage where it is
said, that her uncle thinks not himself at liberty to correspond directly
with her, or to receive applications from her--but through Captain
Tomlinson, as is strongly implied.*


* See Letter XXIV. of this volume.


I must own, (notwithstanding the revenge I have so solemnly vowed,) that
I would very fain have made for her a merit with myself in her returning
favour, and have owed as little as possible to the mediation of Captain
Tomlinson.  My pride was concerned in this: and this was one of my
reasons for not bringing him with me.--Another was, that, if I were
obliged to have recourse to his assistance, I should be better able, (by
visiting without him,) to direct him what to say or do, as I should find
out the turn of her humour.

I was, however, glad at my heart that Mrs. Moore came up so seasonably
with notice that dinner was ready.  The fair fugitive was all in all.
She had the excuse for withdrawing, I had time to strengthen myself; the
Captain had time to come; and the lady to cool.--Shakspeare advises
well:

      Oppose not rage, whilst rage is in its force;
      But give it way awhile, and let it waste.
      The rising deluge is not stopt with dams;
      Those it o'erbears, and drowns the hope of harvest.
      But, wisely manag'd, its divided strength
      Is sluic'd in channels, and securely drain'd:
      And when its force is spent, and unsupply'd,
      The residue with mounds may be restrain'd,
      And dry-shod we may pass the naked ford.

I went down with the women to dinner.  Mrs. Moore sent her fair boarder
up a plate, but she only ate a little bit of bread, and drank a glass of
water.  I doubted not but she would keep her word, when it was once gone
out.  Is she not an Harlowe?  She seems to be enuring herself to
hardships, which at the worst she can never know; since, though she
should ultimately refuse to be obliged to me, or (to express myself more
suitable to my own heart,) to oblige me, every one who sees her must
befriend her.

But let me ask thee, Belford, Art thou not solicitous for me in relation
to the contents of the letter which the angry beauty had written and
dispatched away by man and horse; and for what may be Miss Howe's answer
to it?  Art thou not ready to inquire, Whether it be not likely that Miss
Howe, when she knows of her saucy friend's flight, will be concerned
about her letter, which she must know could not be at Wilson's till after
that flight, and so, probably, would fall into my hands?--

All these things, as thou'lt see in the sequel, are provided for with as
much contrivance as human foresight can admit.

I have already told thee that Will. is upon the lookout for old Grimes--
old Grimes is, it seems, a gossiping, sottish rascal; and if Will. can
but light of him, I'll answer for the consequence; For has not Will. been
my servant upwards of seven years?



LETTER XXVII

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


We had at dinner, besides Miss Rawlins, a young widow-niece of Mrs.
Moore, who is come to stay a month with her aunt--Bevis her name; very
forward, very lively, and a great admirer of me, I assure you;--hanging
smirkingly upon all I said; and prepared to approve of every word before
I spoke: and who, by the time we had half-dined, (by the help of what she
had collected before,) was as much acquainted with our story as either of
the other two.

As it behoved me to prepare them in my favour against whatever might come
from Miss Howe, I improved upon the hint I had thrown out above-stairs
against that mischief-making lady.  I represented her to be an arrogant
creature, revengeful, artful, enterprising, and one who, had she been a
man, would have sworn and cursed, and committed rapes, and played the
devil, as far as I knew: [I have no doubt of it, Jack!] but who, by
advantage of a female education, and pride and insolence, I believed was
personally virtuous.

Mrs. Bevis allowed, that there was a vast deal in education--and in
pride too, she said.  While Miss Rawlins came with a prudish God forbid
that virtue should be owing to education only!  However, I declared that
Miss Howe was a subtle contriver of mischief; one who had always been my
enemy: her motives I knew not: but despised the man whom her mother was
desirous she should have, one Hickman; although I did not directly aver
that she would rather have had me; yet they all immediately imagined that
that was the ground of her animosity to me, and of her envy to my
beloved: and it was pity, they said, that so fine a young lady did not
see through such a pretended friend.

And yet nobody [added I] has more reason than she to know by experience
the force of a hatred founded in envy; as I hinted to you above, Mrs.
Moore, and to you, Miss Rawlins, in the case of her sister Arabella.

I had compliments made to my person and talents on this occasion: which
gave me a singular opportunity of displaying my modesty, by disclaiming
the merit of them, with a No, indeed!--I should be very vain, Ladies, if
I thought so.  While thus abusing myself, and exalting Miss Howe, I got
their opinion both for modesty and generosity; and had all the graces
which I disclaimed thrown in upon me besides.

In short, they even oppressed that modesty, which (to speak modestly of
myself) their praises created, by disbelieving all I said against myself.

And, truly, I must needs say, they have almost persuaded even me myself,
that Miss Howe is actually in love with me.  I have often been willing to
hope this.  And who knows but she may?  The Captain and I have agreed,
that it shall be so insinuated occasionally--And what's thy opinion,
Jack?  She certainly hates Hickman; and girls who are disengaged seldom
hate, though they may not love: and if she had rather have another, why
not that other ME?  For am I not a smart fellow, and a rake?  And do not
your sprightly ladies love your smart fellow, and your rakes?  And where
is the wonder, that the man who could engage the affections of Miss
Harlowe, should engage those of a lady (with her* alas's) who would be
honoured in being deemed her second?


* See Letter XX. of this volume, where Miss Howe says, Alas! my dear, I
know you loved him!


Nor accuse thou me of SINGULAR vanity in this presumption, Belford.  Wert
thou to know the secret vanity that lurks in the hearts of those who
disguise or cloke it best, thou wouldst find great reason to acquit, at
least, to allow for me: since it is generally the conscious over-fulness
of conceit, that makes the hypocrite most upon his guard to conceal it.
Yet with these fellows, proudly humble as they are, it will break out
sometimes in spite of their clokes, though but in self-denying,
compliment-begging self-degradation.

But now I have undervalued myself, in apologizing to thee on this
occasion, let me use another argument in favour of my observation, that
the ladies generally prefer a rake to a sober man; and of my presumption
upon it, that Miss Howe is in love with me: it is this: common fame says,
That Hickman is a very virtuous, a very innocent fellow--a male-virgin, I
warrant!--An odd dog I always thought him.  Now women, Jack, like not
novices.  Two maidenheads meeting together in wedlock, the first child
must be a fool, is their common aphorism.  They are pleased with a love
of the sex that is founded in the knowledge of it.  Reason good; novices
expect more than they can possibly find in the commerce with them.  The
man who knows them, yet has ardours for them, to borrow a word from Miss
Howe,* though those ardours are generally owing more to the devil within
him, than to the witch without him, is the man who makes them the highest
and most grateful compliment.  He knows what to expect, and with what to
be satisfied.


* See Vol. IV. Letters XXIX. and XXXIV.


Then the merit of a woman, in some cases, must be ignorance, whether real
or pretended.  The man, in these cases, must be an adept.  Will it then
be wondered at, that a woman prefers a libertine to a novice?--While she
expects in the one the confidence she wants, she considers the other and
herself as two parallel lines, which, though they run side by side, can
never meet.

Yet in this the sex is generally mistaken too; for these sheepish fellows
are sly.  I myself was modest once; and this, as I have elsewhere hinted
to thee,* has better enabled me to judge of both sexes.


* See Vol. III. Letter XXIII.


But to proceed with my narrative:

Having thus prepared every one against any letter should come from Miss
Howe, and against my beloved's messenger returns, I thought it proper to
conclude that subject with a hint, that my spouse could not bear to have
any thing said that reflected upon Miss Howe; and, with a deep sigh,
added, that I had been made very unhappy more than once by the ill-will
of ladies whom I had never offended.

The widow Bevis believed that might very easily be.  Will. both without
and within, [for I intend he shall fall in love with widow Moore's maid,
and have saved one hundred pounds in my service, at least,] will be great
helps, as things may happen.



LETTER XXVIII

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


We had hardly dined, when my coachman, who kept a look-out for Captain
Tomlinson, as Will. did for old Grimes, conducted hither that worthy
gentleman, attended by one servant, both on horseback.  He alighted.  I
went out to meet him at the door.

Thou knowest his solemn appearance, and unblushing freedom; and yet canst
not imagine what a dignity the rascal assumed, nor how respectful to him
I was.

I led him into the parlour, and presented him to the women, and them to
him.  I thought it highly imported me (as they might still have some
diffidences about our marriage, from my fair-one's home-pushed questions
on that head) to convince them entirely of the truth of all I had
asserted.  And how could I do this better, than by dialoguing a little
with him before them?

Dear Captain, I thought you long; for I have had a terrible conflict with
my spouse.

Capt.   I am sorry that I am later than my intention--my account with my
banker--[There's a dog, Jack!] took me up longer time to adjust than I
had foreseen [all the time pulling down and stroking his ruffles]: for
there was a small difference between us--only twenty pounds, indeed,
which I had taken no account of.

The rascal has not seen twenty pounds of his own these ten years.

Then had we between us the character of the Harlowe family; I railed
against them all; the Captain taking his dear friend Mr. John Harlowe's
part; with a Not so fast!--not so fast, young gentleman!--and the like
free assumptions.

He accounted for their animosity by my defiances: no good family, having
such a charming daughter, would care to be defied, instead of courted: he
must speak his mind: never was a double-tongued man.--He appealed to the
ladies, if he were not right?

He got them on his side.

The correction I had given the brother, he told me, must have aggravated
matters.

How valiant this made me look to the women!--The sex love us mettled
fellows at their hearts.

Be that as it would, I should never love any of the family but my spouse;
and wanting nothing from them, I would not, but for her sake, have gone
so far as I had gone towards a reconciliation.

This was very good of me; Mrs. Moore said.

Very good indeed; Miss Rawlins.

Good;--It is more than good; it is very generous; said the widow.

Capt.   Why so it is, I must needs say: for I am sensible that Mr.
Lovelace has been rudely treated by them all--more rudely, than it could
have been imagined a man of his quality and spirit would have put up
with.  But then, Sir, [turning to me,] I think you are amply rewarded in
such a lady; and that you ought to forgive the father for the daughter's
sake.

Mrs. Moore.   Indeed so I think.

Miss R.   So must every one think who has seen the lady.

Widow B.   A fine lady, to be sure!  But she has a violent spirit; and
some very odd humours too, by what I have heard.  The value of good
husbands is not known till they are lost!

Her conscience then drew a sigh from her.

Lovel.   Nobody must reflect upon my angel!--An angel she is--some little
blemishes, indeed, as to her over-hasty spirit, and as to her unforgiving
temper.  But this she has from the Harlowes; instigated too by that Miss
Howe.--But her innumerable excellencies are all her own.

Capt.   Ay, talk of spirit, there's a spirit, now you have named Miss
Howe!  [And so I led him to confirm all I had said of that vixen.]  Yet
she was to be pitied too; looking with meaning at me.

As I have already hinted, I had before agreed with him to impute secret
love occasionally to Miss Howe, as the best means to invalidate all that
might come from her in my disfavour.

Capt.   Mr. Lovelace, but that I know your modesty, or you could give a
reason--

Lovel.   Looking down, and very modest--I can't think so, Captain--but
let us call another cause.

Every woman present could look me in the face, so bashful was I.

Capt.   Well, but as to our present situation--only it mayn't be proper--
looking upon me, and round upon the women.

Lovel.   O Captain, you may say any thing before this company--only,
Andrew, [to my new servant, who attended us at table,] do you withdraw:
this good girl [looking at the maid-servant] will help us to all we want.

Away went Andrew: he wanted not his cue; and the maid seemed pleased at
my honour's preference of her.

Capt.   As to our present situation, I say, Mr. Lovelace--why, Sir, we
shall be all untwisted, let me tell you, if my friend Mr. John Harlowe
were to know what that is.  He would as much question the truth of your
being married, as the rest of the family do.

Here the women perked up their ears; and were all silent attention.

Capt.   I asked you before for particulars, Mr. Lovelace; but you
declined giving them.--Indeed it may not be proper for me to be
acquainted with them.--But I must own, that it is past my comprehension,
that a wife can resent any thing a husband can do (that is not a breach
of the peace) so far as to think herself justified for eloping from him.

Lovel.   Captain Tomlinson:--Sir--I do assure you, that I shall be
offended--I shall be extremely concerned--if I hear that word eloping
mentioned again--

Capt.   Your nicety and your love, Sir, may make you take offence--but it
is my way to call every thing by its proper name, let who will be
offended--

Thou canst not imagine, Belford, how brave and how independent the rascal
looked.

Capt.   When, young gentleman, you shall think proper to give us
particulars, we will find a word for this rash act in so admirable a
lady, that shall please you better.--You see, Sir, that being the
representative of my dear friend Mr. John Harlowe, I speak as freely as I
suppose he would do, if present.  But you blush, Sir--I beg your pardon,
Mr. Lovelace: it becomes not a modest man to pry into those secrets,
which a modest man cannot reveal.

I did not blush, Jack; but denied not the compliment, and looked down:
the women seemed delighted with my modesty: but the widow Bevis was more
inclined to laugh at me than praise me for it.

Capt.   Whatever be the cause of this step, (I will not again, Sir, call
it elopement, since that harsh word wounds your tenderness,) I cannot but
express my surprise upon it, when I recollect the affectionate behaviour,
to which I was witness between you, when I attended you last.  Over-love,
Sir, I think you once mention--but over-love [smiling] give me leave to
say, Sir, it is an odd cause of quarrel--few ladies--

Lovel.   Dear Captain!--And I tried to blush.

The women also tried; and being more used to it, succeeded better.--Mrs.
Bevis indeed has a red-hot countenance, and always blushes.

Miss R.   It signifies nothing to mince the matter: but the lady above as
good as denies her marriage.  You know, Sir, that she does; turning to
me.

Capt.   Denies her marriage!  Heavens! how then have I imposed upon my
dear friend Mr. John Harlowe!

Lovel.   Poor dear!--But let not her veracity be called into question.
She would not be guilty of a wilful untruth for the world.

Then I had all their praises again.

Lovel.   Dear creature!--She thinks she has reason for her denial.  You
know, Mrs. Moore; you know, Miss Rawlins; what I owned to you above as my
vow.

I looked down, and, as once before, turned round my diamond ring.

Mrs. Moore looked awry, and with a leer at Miss Rawlins, as to her
partner in the hinted-at reference.

Miss Rawlins looked down as well as I; her eyelids half closed, as if
mumbling a pater-noster, meditating her snuff-box, the distance between
her nose and chin lengthened by a close-shut mouth.

She put me in mind of the pious Mrs. Fetherstone at Oxford, whom I
pointed out to thee once, among other grotesque figures, at St. Mary's
church, whither we went to take a view of her two sisters: her eyes shut,
not daring to trust her heart with them open; and but just half-rearing
her lids, to see who the next comer was; and falling them again, when her
curiosity was satisfied.

The widow Bevis gazed, as if on the hunt for a secret.

The Captain looked archly, as if half in the possession of one.

Mrs. Moore at last broke the bashful silence.  Mrs. Lovelace's behaviour,
she said, could be no otherwise so well accounted for, as by the ill
offices of that Miss Howe; and by the severity of her relations; which
might but too probably have affected her head a little at times: adding,
that it was very generous in me to give way to the storm when it was up,
rather than to exasperate at such a time.

But let me tell you, Sirs, said the widow Bevis, that is not what one
husband in a thousand would have done.

I desired, that no part of this conversation might be hinted to my
spouse; and looked still more bashfully.  Her great fault, I must own,
was over-delicacy.

The Captain leered round him; and said, he believed he could guess from
the hints I had given him in town (of my over-love) and from what had now
passed, that we had not consummated our marriage.

O Jack! how sheepishly then looked, or endeavoured to look, thy friend!
how primly goody Moore! how affectedly Miss Rawlins!--while the honest
widow Bevis gazed around her fearless; and though only simpering with her
mouth, her eyes laughed outright, and seemed to challenge a laugh from
every eye in the company.

He observed, that I was a phoenix of a man, if so; and he could not but
hope that all matters would be happily accommodated in a day or two; and
that then he should have the pleasure to aver to her uncle, that he was
present, as he might say, on our wedding-day.

The women seemed all to join in the same hope.

Ah, Captain!  Ah, Ladies! how happy should I be, if I could bring my dear
spouse to be of the same mind!

It would be a very happy conclusion of a very knotty affair, said the
widow Bevis; and I see not why we may not make this very night a merry
one.

The Captain superciliously smiled at me.  He saw plainly enough, he said,
that we had been at children's play hitherto.  A man of my character, who
could give way to such a caprice as this, must have a prodigious value
for his lady.  But one thing he would venture to tell me; and that was
this--that, however desirous young skittish ladies might be to have their
way in this particular, it was a very bad setting-out for the man; as it
gave his bride a very high proof of the power she had over him: and he
would engage, that no woman, thus humoured, ever valued the man the more
for it; but very much the contrary--and there were reasons to be given
why she should not.

Well, well, Captain, no more of this subject before the ladies.--One
feels [shrugging my shoulders in a bashful try-to-blush manner] that one
is so ridiculous--I have been punished enough for my tender folly.

Miss Rawlins had taken her fan, and would needs hide her face behind it--
I suppose because her blush was not quite ready.

Mrs. Moore hemmed, and looked down; and by that gave her's over.

While the jolly widow, laughing out, praised the Captain as one of
Hudibras's metaphysicians, repeating,

      He knew what's what, and that's as high
      As metaphysic wit can fly.

This made Miss Rawlins blush indeed:--Fie, fie, Mrs. Bevis! cried she,
unwilling, I suppose, to be thought absolutely ignorant.

Upon the whole, I began to think that I had not made a bad exchange of
our professing mother, for the unprofessing Mrs. Moore.  And indeed the
women and I, and my beloved too, all mean the same thing: we only differ
about the manner of coming at the proposed end.



LETTER XXIX

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


It was now high time to acquaint my spouse, that Captain Tomlinson was
come.  And the rather, as the maid told us, that the lady had asked her
if such a gentleman [describing him] was not in the parlour?

Mrs. Moore went up, and requested, in my name, that she would give us
audience.

But she returned, reporting my beloved's desire, that Captain Tomlinson
would excuse her for the present.  She was very ill.  Her spirits were
too weak to enter into conversation with him; and she must lie down.

I was vexed, and at first extremely disconcerted.  The Captain was vexed
too.  And my concern, thou mayest believe, was the greater on his
account.

She had been very much fatigued, I own.  Her fits in the morning must
have disordered her: and she had carried her resentment so high, that it
was the less wonder she should find herself low, when her raised spirits
had subsided.  Very low, I may say; if sinkings are proportioned to
risings; for she had been lifted up above the standard of a common
mortal.

The Captain, however, sent up his own name, that if he could be admitted
to drink one dish of tea with her, he should take it for a favour: and
would go to town, and dispatch some necessary business, in order, if
possible, to leave his morning free to attend her.

But she pleaded a violent head-ache; and Mrs. Moore confirmed the plea to
be just.

I would have had the Captain lodge there that night, as well in
compliment to him, as introductory to my intention of entering myself
upon my new-taken apartment: but his hours were of too much importance to
him to stay the evening.

It was indeed very inconvenient for him, he said, to return in the
morning; but he is willing to do all in his power to heal this breach,
and that as well for the sakes of me and my lady, as for that of his dear
friend Mr. John Harlowe; who must not know how far this misunderstanding
had gone.  He would therefore only drink one dish of tea with the ladies
and me.

And accordingly, after he had done so, and I had had a little private
conversation with him, he hurried away.

His fellow had given him, in the interim, a high character to Mrs.
Moore's servants: and this reported by the widow Bevis (who being no
proud woman, is hail fellow well met, as the saying is, with all her
aunt's servants) he was a fine gentleman, a discreet gentleman, a man of
sense and breeding, with them all: and it was pity, that, with such great
business upon his hands, he should be obliged to come again.

My life for your's, audibly whispered the widow Bevis, there is humour as
well as head-ache in somebody's declining to see this worthy gentleman.--
Ah, Lord! how happy might some people be if they would!

No perfect happiness in this world, said I, very gravely, and with a
sigh; for the widow must know that I heard her.  If we have not real
unhappiness, we can make it, even from the overflowings of our good
fortune.

Very true, and very true, the two widows.  A charming observation!  Mrs.
Bevis.  Miss Rawlins smiled her assent to it; and I thought she called me
in her heart charming man! for she professes to be a great admirer of
moral observations.

I had hardly taken leave of the Captain, and sat down again with the
women, when Will. came; and calling me out, 'Sir, Sir,' said he, grinning
with a familiarity in his looks as if what he had to say entitled him to
take liberties; 'I have got the fellow down!--I have got old Grimes--hah,
hah, hah, hah!--He is at the Lower Flask--almost in the condition of
David's sow, and please your honour--[the dog himself not much better]
here is his letter--from--from Miss Howe--ha, ha, ha, ha,' laughed the
varlet; holding it fast, as if to make conditions with me, and to excite
my praises, as well as my impatience.

I could have knocked him down; but he would have his say out--'old Grimes
knows not that I have the letter--I must get back to him before he misses
it--I only make a pretence to go out for a few minutes--but--but'--and
then the dog laughed again--'he must stay--old Grimes must stay--till I
go back to pay the reckoning.'

D--n the prater; grinning rascal!  The letter!  The letter!

He gathered in his wide mothe, as he calls it, and gave me the letter;
but with a strut, rather than a bow; and then sidled off like one of
widow Sorlings's dunghill cocks, exulting after a great feat performed.
And all the time that I was holding up the billet to the light, to try to
get at its contents without breaking the seal, [for, dispatched in a
hurry, it had no cover,] there stood he, laughing, shrugging, playing off
his legs; now stroking his shining chin, now turning his hat upon his
thumb! then leering in my face, flourishing with his head--O Christ!
now-and-then cried the rascal--

What joy has this dog in mischief!--More than I can have in the
completion of my most favourite purposes!--These fellows are ever happier
than their masters.

I was once thinking to rumple up this billet till I had broken the seal.
Young families [Miss Howe's is not an ancient one] love ostentatious
sealings: and it might have been supposed to have been squeezed in pieces
in old Grimes's breeches-pocket.  But I was glad to be saved the guilt as
well as suspicion of having a hand in so dirty a trick; for thus much of
the contents (enough for my purpose) I was enabled to scratch out in
character without it; the folds depriving me only of a few connecting
words, which I have supplied between hooks.

My Miss Harlowe, thou knowest, had before changed her name to Miss
Laetitia Beaumont.  Another alias now, Jack, to it; for this billet was
directed to her by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas.  I have learned her to
be half a rogue, thou seest.


'I congratulate you, my dear, with all my heart and soul, upon [your
escape] from the villain.  [I long] for the particulars of all.  [My
mother] is out; but, expecting her return every minute, I dispatched
[your] messenger instantly.  [I will endeavour to come at] Mrs. Townsend
without loss of time; and will write at large in a day or two, if in that
time I can see her.  [Mean time I] am excessively uneasy for a letter I
sent you yesterday by Collins, [who must have left it at] Wilson's after
you got away.  [It is of very] great importance.  [I hope the] villain
has it not.  I would not for the world [that he should.]  Immediately
send for it, if, by doing so, the place you are at [will not be]
discovered.  If he has it, let me know it by some way [out of] hand.  If
not, you need not send.

'Ever, ever your's,
'A.H.
'June 9.'


***


O Jack! what heart's-ease does this interception give me!--I sent the
rascal back with the letter to old Grimes, and charged him to drink no
deeper.  He owned, that he was half-seas over, as he phrased it.

Dog! said I, are you not to court one of Mrs. Moore's maids to-night?--

Cry your mercy, Sir!--I will be sober.--I had forgot that--but old Grimes
is plaguy tough, I thought I should never have got him down.

Away, villain!  Let old Grimes come, and on horseback too, to the door--

He shall, and please your honour, if I can get him on the saddle, and if
he can sit--

And charge him not to have alighted, nor to have seen any body--

Enough, Sir, familiarly nodding his head, to show he took me.  And away
went the villain--into the parlour, to the women, I.

In a quarter of an hour came old Grimes on horseback, waving to his
saddle-bow, now on this side, now on that; his head, at others, joining
to that of his more sober beast.

It looked very well to the women that I made no effort to speak to old
Grimes, (though I wished, before them, that I knew the contents of what
he brought;) but, on the contrary, desired that they would instantly let
my spouse know that her messenger was returned.

Down she flew, violently as she had the head-ache!

O how I prayed for an opportunity to be revenged of her for the
ungrateful trouble she had given to her uncle's friend!

She took the letter from old Grimes with her own hands, and retired to an
inner parlour to read it.

She presently came out again to the fellow, who had much ado to sit his
horse--Here is your money, friend.--I thought you long: but what shall I
do to get somebody to go to town immediately for me?  I see you cannot.

Old Grimes took his money, let fall his hat in doffing it; had it given
him, and rode away; his eyes isinglass, and set in his head, as I saw
through the window, and in a manner speechless--all his language hiccup.
My dog needed not to have gone so deep with this tough old Grimes.  But
the rascal was in his kingdom with him.

The lady applied to Mrs. Moore; she mattered not the price.  Could a man
and horse be engaged for her?--Only to go for a letter left for her, at
one Mr. Wilson's, in Pall-mall.

A poor neighbour was hired--a horse procured for him--he had his
directions.

In vain did I endeavour to engaged my beloved, when she was below.  Her
head-ache, I suppose, returned.--She, like the rest of her sex, can be
ill or well when she pleases.

I see her drift, thought I; it is to have all her lights from Miss Howe
before she resolves, and to take her measures accordingly.

Up she went expressing great impatience about the letter she had sent
for; and desired Mrs. Moore to let her know if I offered to send any one
of my servants to town--to get at the letter, I suppose, was her fear;
but she might have been quite easy on that head; and yet, perhaps, would
not, had she known that the worthy Captain Tomlinson, (who will be in
town before her messenger,) will leave there the important letter, which
I hope will help to pacify her, and reconcile her to me.

O Jack, Jack! thinkest thou that I will take all this roguish pains, and
be so often called villain for nothing?

But yet, is it not taking pains to come at the finest creature in the
world, not for a transitory moment only, but for one of our lives!  The
struggle only, Whether I am to have her in my own way, or in her's?

But now I know thou wilt be frightened out of thy wits for me--What,
Lovelace! wouldest thou let her have a letter that will inevitably blow
thee up; and blow up the mother, and all her nymphs!--yet not intend to
reform, nor intend to marry?

Patience, puppy!--Canst thou not trust thy master?



LETTER XXX

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


I went up to my new-taken apartment, and fell to writing in character, as
usual.  I thought I had made good my quarters, but the cruel creature,
understanding that I intended to take up my lodgings there, declared with
so much violence against it, that I was obliged to submit, and to accept
of another lodging, about twelve doors off, which Mrs. Moore recommended.
And all the advantage I could obtain was, that Will., unknown to my
spouse, and for fear of a freak, should lie in the house.

Mrs. Moore, indeed, was unwilling to disoblige either of us.  But Miss
Rawlins was of opinion, that nothing more ought to be allowed me: and yet
Mrs. Moore owned, that the refusal was a strange piece of tyranny to a
husband, if I were a husband.

I had a good mind to make Miss Rawlins smart for it.  Come and see Miss
Rawlins, Jack.--If thou likest her, I'll get her for thee with a
wet-finger, as the saying is!

The widow Bevis indeed stickled hard for me.  [An innocent, or injured
man, will have friends every where.]  She said, that to bear much with
some wives, was to be obliged to bear more; and I reflected, with a sigh,
that tame spirits must always be imposed upon.  And then, in my heart, I
renewed my vows of revenge upon this haughty and perverse beauty.

The second fellow came back from town about nine o'clock, with Miss
Howe's letter of Wednesday last.  'Collins, it seems, when he left it,
had desired, that it might be safely and speedily delivered into Miss
Laetitia Beaumont's own hands.  But Wilson, understanding that neither
she nor I were in town, [he could not know of our difference thou must
think,] resolved to take care of it till our return, in order to give it
into one of our own hands; and now delivered it to her messenger.'

This was told her.  Wilson, I doubt not, is in her favour upon it.

She took the letter with great eagerness; opened it in a hurry, [am glad
she did; yet, I believe, all was right,] before Mrs. Moore and Mrs.
Bevis, [Miss Rawlins was gone home;] and said, she would not for the
world that I should have had that letter, for the sake of her dear friend
the writer, who had written to her very uneasily about it.

Her dear friend! repeated Mrs. Bevis, when she told me this:--such
mischief-makers are always deemed dear friends till they are found out!

The widow says that I am the finest gentleman she ever beheld.

I have found a warm kiss now-and-then very kindly taken.

I might be a very wicked fellow, Jack, if I were to do all the mischief
in my power.  But I am evermore for quitting a too-easy prey to reptile
rakes!  What but difficulty, (though the lady is an angel,) engages me to
so much perseverance here?--And here, conquer or die! is now the
determination!


***

I have just now parted with this honest widow.  She called upon me at my
new lodgings.  I told her, that I saw I must be further obliged to her in
the course of this difficult affair.  She must allow me to make her a
handsome present when all was happily over.  But I desired that she would
take no notice of what should pass between us, not even to her aunt; for
that she, as I saw, was in the power of Miss Rawlins: and Miss Rawlins,
being a maiden gentlewoman, knew not the right and the fit in matrimonial
matters, as she, my dear widow, did.

Very true: How should she? said Mrs. Bevis, proud of knowing--nothing!
But, for her part, she desired no present.  It was enough if she could
contribute to reconcile man and wife, and disappoint mischief-makers.
She doubted not, that such an envious creature as Miss Howe was glad that
Mrs. Lovelace had eloped--jealousy and love was Old Nick!

See, Belford, how charmingly things work between me and my new
acquaintance, the widow!--Who knows, but that she may, after a little
farther intimacy, (though I am banished the house on nights,) contrive a
midnight visit for me to my spouse, when all is still and fast asleep?

Where can a woman be safe, who has once entered the lists with a
contriving and intrepid lover?

But as to this letter, methinkest thou sayest, of Miss Howe?

I knew thou wouldest be uneasy for me.  But did not I tell thee that I
had provided for every thing?  That I always took care to keep seals
entire, and to preserve covers?*  Was it not easy then, thinkest thou, to
contrive a shorter letter out of a longer; and to copy the very words?


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


I can tell thee, it was so well ordered, that, not being suspected to
have been in my hands, it was not easy to find me out.  Had it been my
beloved's hand, there would have been no imitating it for such a length.
Her delicate and even mind is seen in the very cut of her letters.  Miss
Howe's hand is no bad one, but it is not so equal and regular.  That
little devil's natural impatience hurrying on her fingers, gave, I
suppose, from the beginning, her handwriting, as well as the rest of her,
its fits and starts, and those peculiarities, which, like strong muscular
lines in a face, neither the pen, nor the pencil, can miss.

Hast thou a mind tot see what it was I permitted Miss Howe to write to
her lovely friend?  Why then, read it here, so extracted from her's of
Wednesday last, with a few additions of my own.  The additions
underscored.*


* Editor's note: In place of italics, as in the original, I have
substituted hooks [ ].


MY DEAREST FRIEND,

You will perhaps think that I have been too long silent.  But I had begun
two letters at different times since my last, and written a great deal
each time; and with spirit enough I assure you; incensed as I was against
the abominable wretch you are with; particularly on reading your's of the
21st of the past month.

The FIRST I intended to keep open till I could give you some account of
my proceedings with Mrs. Townsend.  It was some days before I saw her:
and this intervenient space giving me time to reperuse what I had
written, I thought it proper to lay that aside, and to write in a style a
little less fervent; for you would have blamed me, I knew, for the
freedom of some of my expressions, (execrations, if you please.)  And
when I had gone a good way in the SECOND, and change your prospects, on
his communicating to you Miss Montague's letter, and his better
behaviour, occasioning a change in your mind, I laid that aside also.
And in this uncertainty thought I would wait to see the issue of affairs
between you before I wrote again; believing that all would soon be
decided one way or other.


***


[Here I was forced to break off.  I am too little my own mistress:--My
mother* is always up and down--and watching as if I were writing to a
fellow.  What need I (she asks me,) lock myself in,** if I am only
reading past correspondencies?  For that is my pretence, when she comes
poking in with her face sharpened to an edge, as I may say, by a
curiosity that gives her more pain than pleasure.--The Lord forgive me;
but I believe I shall huff her next time she comes in.]


* See Letter XX. of this volume.
** Ibid.


***


Do you forgive me too, my dear--my mother ought; because she says I am my
father's girl; and because I am sure I am her's.


[Upon my life, my dear, I am sometimes of opinion, that this vile man was
capable of meaning you dishonour.  When I look back upon his past conduct,
I cannot help, and verily believe, that he has laid aside such thoughts.
My reasons for both opinions I will give you.]

[For the first: to-wit, that he had it once in his head to take you at
advantage if he could, I consider* that] pride, revenge, and a delight to
tread in unbeaten paths, are principal ingredients in the character of
this finished libertine.  He hates all your family, yourself excepted--
yet is a savage in love.  His pride, and the credit which a few plausible
qualities, sprinkled among his odious ones, have given him, have secured
him too good a reception from our eye-judging, our undistinguishing, our
self--flattering, our too-confiding sex, to make assiduity and
obsequiousness, and a conquest of his unruly passions, any part of his
study.

He has some reason for his animosity to all the men, and to one woman of
your family.  He has always shown you, and his own family too, that he
prefers his pride to his interest.  He is a declared marriage-hater; a
notorious intriguer; full of his inventions, and glorying in them.--As
his vanity had made him imagine that no woman could be proof against his
love, no wonder that he struggled like a lion held in toils,* against a
passion that he thought not returned.**  Hence, perhaps, it is not
difficult to believe, that it became possible for such a wretch as this
to give way to his old prejudices against marriage; and to that revenge
which had always been a first passion with him.***


* See Letter XX. of this volume.
** Ibid.
*** Ibid.


[And hence we may account for] his delays--his teasing ways--his bringing
you to bear with his lodging in the same house--his making you pass to
the other people of it as his wife--his bringing you into the company of
his libertine companions--the attempt of imposing upon you that Miss
Partington for a bedfellow, &c.

[My reasons for a contrary opinion, to wit, that he is now resolved to do
you all the justice in his power to do you,] are these:--That he sees
that all his own family* have warmly engaged themselves in your cause:
that the horrid wretch loves you; with such a love, however, as Herod
loved his Mariamne: that, on inquiry, I find it to be true, that
Counsellor Williams, (whom Mr. Hickman knows to be a man of eminence in
his profession,) has actually as good as finished the settlements: that
two draughts of them have been made; one avowedly to be sent to this very
Captain Tomlinson:--and I find, that a license has actually been more
than once endeavoured to be obtained, and that difficulties have hitherto
been made, equally to Lovelace's vexation and disappointment.  My
mother's proctor, who is very intimate with the proctor applied to by the
wretch, has come at this information in confidence; and hints, that, as
Mr. Lovelace is a man of high fortunes, these difficulties will probably
be got over.


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


[I had once resolved to make strict inquiry about Tomlinson; and still,
if you will, your uncle's favourite housekeeper may be sounded at a
distance.]

[I know that the matter is so laid,*] that Mrs. Hodges is supposed to
know nothing of the treaty set on foot by means of Captain Tomlinson.
But your uncle is an--


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


But your uncle is an old man;* and old men imagine themselves to be under
obligation to their paramours, if younger than themselves, and seldom
keep any thing from their knowledge.--Yet, methinks, there can be no
need; since Tomlinson, as you describe him, is so good a man, and so much
of a gentleman; the end to be answered by his being an impostor so much
more than necessary, if Lovelace has villany in his head.--And thus what
he communicated to you of Mr. Hickman's application to your uncle, and of
Mrs. Norton's to your mother (some of which particulars I am satisfied
his vile agent Joseph Leman could not reveal to his viler employer); his
pushing on the marriage-day in the name of your uncle; which it could not
answer any wicked purpose for him to do; and what he writes of your
uncle's proposal, to have it thought that you were married from the time
that you had lived in one house together; and that to be made to agree
with the time of Mr. Hickman's visit to your uncle; the insisting on a
trusty person's being present at the ceremony, at that uncle's nomination
--these things make me [assured that he now at last means honourably.]


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


[But if any unexpected delays should happen on his side, acquaint me, my
dear, with the very street where Mrs. Sinclair lives; and where Mrs.
Fretchville's house is situated (which I cannot find that you have ever
mentioned in your former letters--which is a little odd); and I will make
strict inquiries of them, and of Tomlinson too; and I will (if your heart
will let you take my advice) soon procure you a refuge from him with Mrs.
Townsend.]

[But why do I now, when you seem to be in so good a train, puzzle and
perplex you with my retrospections?  And yet they may be of use to you,
if any delay happen on his part.]

[But that I think cannot well be.  What you have therefore now to do, is
so to behave to this proud-spirited wretch, as may banish from his mind
all remembrance of] past disobligations,* and to receive his addresses,
as those of a betrothed lover.  You will incur the censure of prudery and
affectation, if you keep him at that distance which you have hitherto
[kept him at.]  His sudden (and as suddenly recovered) illness has given
him an opportunity to find out that you love him (Alas! my dear, I knew
you loved him!)  He has seemed to change his nature, and is all love and
gentleness.  [And no more quarrels now, I beseech you.]


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


[I am very angry with him, nevertheless, for the freedoms which he took
with your person;* and I think some guard is necessary, as he is
certainly an encroacher.  But indeed all men are so; and you are such a
charming creature, and have kept him at such a distance!--But no more of
this subject.  Only, my dear, be not over-nice, now you are so near the
state.  You see what difficulties you laid yourself under,] when
Tomlinson's letter called you again into [the wretch's] company.


* See Letter XI. of this volume.


If you meet with no impediments, no new causes of doubt,* your reputation
in the eye of the world is concerned, that you should be his, [and, as
your uncle rightly judges, be thought to have been his before now.]  And
yet, [let me tell you,] I [can hardly] bear [to think,] that these
libertines should be rewarded for their villany with the best of the sex,
when the worst of it are too good for them.


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


I shall send this long letter by Collins,* who changes his day to oblige
me.  As none of our letters by Wilson's conveyance have miscarried, when
you have been in more apparently-disagreeable situations than you are in
at present, [I have no doubt] that this will go safe.


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


Miss Lardner* (whom you have seen hat her cousin Biddulph's) saw you at
St. James's church on Sunday was fortnight.  She kept you in her eye
during the whole time; but could not once obtain the notice of your's,
though she courtesied to you twice.  She thought to pay her compliments
to you when the service was over; for she doubted not but you were
married--and for an odd reason--because you came to church by yourself.
Every eye, (as usual, wherever you are,) she said was upon you; and this
seeming to give you hurry, and you being nearer the door than she, you
slid out before she could get to you.  But she ordered her servant to
follow you till you were housed.  This servant saw you step into a chair
which waited for you; and you ordered the men to carry you to the place
where they took you up. She [describes the house] as a very genteel
house, and fit to receive people of fashion: [and what makes me mention
this, is, that perhaps you will have a visit from her; or message, at
least.]


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


[So that you have Mr. Doleman's testimony to the credit of the house
and people you are with; and he is] a man of fortune, and some
reputation; formerly a rake indeed; but married to a woman of family;
and having had a palsy blow, one would think a penitent.*  You have [also
Mr. Mennell's at least passive testimony; Mr.] Tomlinson's; [and now,
lastly, Miss Lardner's; so that there will be the less need for inquiry:
but you know my busy and inquisitive temper, as well as my affection for
you, and my concern for your honour.  But all doubt will soon be lost in
certainty.]

[Nevertheless I must add, that I would have you] command me up, if I can
be of the least service or pleasure to you.*  I value not fame; I value
not censure; nor even life itself, I verily think, as I do your honour,
and your friendship--For is not your honour my honour?  And is not your
friendship the pride of my life?


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


May Heaven preserve you, my dearest creature, in honour and safety, is
the prayer, the hourly prayer, of

Your ever-faithful and affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.

THURSDAY MORN. 5.

I have written all night.  [Excuse indifferent writing; my crow-quills
are worn to the stumps, and I must get a new supply.]


***


These ladies always write with crow-quills, Jack.

If thou art capable of taking in all my providences, in this letter, thou
wilt admire my sagacity and contrivance almost as much as I do myself.
Thou seest, that Miss Lardner, Mrs. Sinclair, Tomlinson, Mrs.
Fretchville, Mennell, are all mentioned in it.  My first liberties with
her person also.  [Modesty, modesty, Belford, I doubt, is more confined
to time, place, and occasion, even by the most delicate minds, than these
minds would have it believed to be.]  And why all these taken notice of
by me from the genuine letter, but for fear some future letter from the
vixen should escape my hands, in which she might refer to these names?
And, if none of them were to have been found in this that is to pass for
her's, I might be routed horse and foot, as Lord M. would phrase it in a
like case.

Devilish hard (and yet I may thank myself) to be put to all this plague
and trouble:--And for what dost thou ask?--O Jack, for a triumph of more
value to me beforehand than an imperial crown!--Don't ask me the value of
it a month hence.  But what indeed is an imperial crown itself when a man
is used to it?

Miss Howe might well be anxious about the letter she wrote.  Her sweet
friend, from what I have let pass of her's, has reason to rejoice in the
thought that it fell not into my hands.

And now must all my contrivances be set at work, to intercept the
expected letter from Miss Howe: which is, as I suppose, to direct her to
a place of safety, and out of my knowledge.  Mrs. Townsend is, no doubt,
in this case, to smuggle her off: I hope the villain, as I am so
frequently called between these two girls, will be able to manage this
point.

But what, perhaps, thou askest, if the lady should take it into her head,
by the connivance of Miss Rawlins, to quit this house privately in the
night?

I have thought of this, Jack.  Does not Will. lie in the house?  And is
not the widow Bevis my fast friend?



LETTER XXXI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SIX O'CLOCK, JUNE 10.


The lady gave Will.'s sweetheart a letter last night to be carried to the
post-house, as this morning, directed for Miss Howe, under cover to
Hickman.  I dare say neither cover nor letter will be seen to have been
opened.  The contents but eight lines--To own--'The receipt of her
double-dated letter in safety; and referring to a longer letter, which
she intends to write, when she shall have a quieter heart, and less
trembling fingers.  But mentions something to have happened [My detecting
her she means] which has given her very great flutters, confusions, and
apprehensions: but which she will wait the issue of [Some hopes for me
hence, Jack!] before she gives her fresh perturbation or concern on her
account.--She tells her how impatient she shall be for her next,' &c.

Now, Belford, I thought it would be but kind in me to save Miss Howe's
concern on these alarming hints; since the curiosity of such a spirit
must have been prodigiously excited by them.  Having therefore so good a
copy to imitate, I wrote; and, taking out that of my beloved, put under
the same cover the following short billet; inscriptive and conclusive
parts of it in her own words.


HAMPSTEAD, TUES. EVEN.

MY EVER-DEAR MISS HOWE,

A few lines only, till calmer spirits and quieter fingers be granted me,
and till I can get over the shock which your intelligence has given me--
to acquaint you--that your kind long letter of Wednesday, and, as I may
say, of Thursday morning, is come safe to my hands.  On receipt of your's
by my messenger to you, I sent for it from Wilson's.  There, thank
Heaven! it lay.  May that Heaven reward you for all your past, and for
all your intended goodness to

Your for-ever obliged,
CL. HARLOWE.


***


I took great pains in writing this.  It cannot, I hope, be suspected.
Her hand is so very delicate.  Yet her's is written less beautifully than
she usually writes: and I hope Miss Howe will allow somewhat for hurry of
spirits, and unsteady fingers.

My consideration for Miss Howe's ease of mind extended still farther than
to the instance I have mentioned.

That this billet might be with her as soon as possible, (and before it
could have reached Hickman by the post,) I dispatched it away by a
servant of Mowbray's.  Miss Howe, had there been any failure or delay,
might, as thou wilt think, have communicated her anxieties to her
fugitive friend; and she to me perhaps in a way I should not have been
pleased with.

Once more wilt thou wonderingly question--All this pains for a single
girl?

Yes, Jack--But is not this girl a CLARISSA?--And who knows, but kind
fortune, as a reward for my perseverance, may toss me in her charming
friend?  Less likely things have come to pass, Belford.  And to be sure I
shall have her, if I resolve upon it.



LETTER XXXII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
EIGHT O'CLOCK, SAT. MORN. JUNE 10.


I am come back from Mrs. Moore's, whither I went in order to attend my
charmer's commands.  But no admittance--a very bad night.

Doubtless she must be as much concerned that she has carried her
resentments so very far, as I have reason to be that I made such poor use
of the opportunity I had on Wednesday night.

But now, Jack, for a brief review of my present situation; and a slight
hint or two of my precautions.

I have seen the women this morning, and find them half-right, half-
doubting.

Miss Rawlins's brother tells her, that she lives at Mrs. Moore's.

Mrs. Moore can do nothing without Miss Rawlins.

People who keep lodgings at public places expect to get by every one who
comes into their purlieus.  Though not permitted to lodge there myself, I
have engaged all the rooms she has to spare, to the very garrets; and
that, as I have told thee before, for a month certain, and at her own
price, board included; my spouse's and all: but she must not at present
know it.  So I hope I have Mrs. Moore fast by the interest.

This, devil-like, is suiting temptations to inclinations.

I have always observed, and, I believe, I have hinted as much formerly,*
that all dealers, though but for pins, may be taken in by customers for
pins, sooner than by a direct bribe of ten times the value; especially if
pretenders to conscience: for the offer of a bribe would not only give
room for suspicion, but would startle and alarm their scrupulousness;
while a high price paid for what you buy, is but submitting to be cheated
in the method of the person makes a profession to get by.  Have I not
said that human nature is a rogue?**--And do not I know that it is?


* See Vol. III. Letter XXXIV.
** See Vol. III. Letter XXXV. and Vol. IV. Letter XXI.


To give a higher instance, how many proud senators, in the year 1720,
were induced, by presents or subscription of South-sea stock, to
contribute to a scheme big with national ruin; who yet would have spurned
the man who should have presumed to offer them even twice the sum certain
that they had a chance to gain by the stock?--But to return to my review
and to my precautions.

Miss Rawlins fluctuates, as she hears the lady's story, or as she hears
mine.  Somewhat of an infidel, I doubt, is this Miss Rawlins.  I have not
yet considered her foible.  The next time I see her, I will take
particular notice of all the moles and freckles in her mind; and then
infer and apply.

The widow Bevis, as I have told thee, is all my own.

My man Will. lies in the house.  My other new fellow attends upon me; and
cannot therefore be quite stupid.

Already is Will. over head and ears in love with one of Mrs. Moore's
maids.  He was struck with her the moment he set his eyes upon her.  A
raw country wench too.  But all women, from the countess to the cook-
maid, are put into high good humour with themselves when a man is taken
with them at first sight.  Be they ever so plain [no woman can be ugly,
Jack!] they'll find twenty good reasons, besides the great one (for
sake's sake) by the help of the glass without (and perhaps in spite of
it) and conceit within, to justify the honest fellow's caption.

'The rogue has saved 150L. in my service.'--More by 50 than I bid him
save.  No doubt, he thinks he might have done so; though I believe not
worth a groat.  'The best of masters I--passionate, indeed; but soon
appeased.'

The wench is extremely kind to him already.  The other maid is also very
civil to him.  He has a husband for her in his eye.  She cannot but say,
that Mr. Andrew, my other servant [the girl is for fixing the person] is
a very well spoken civil young man.

'We common folks have our joys, and please your honour, says honest
Joseph Leman, like as our betters have.'*  And true says honest Joseph--
did I prefer ease to difficulty, I should envy these low-born sinners
some of their joys.


* See Vol. III. Letter XLVII.


But if Will. had not made amorous pretensions to the wenches, we all
know, that servants, united in one common compare-note cause, are
intimate the moment they see one another--great genealogists too; they
know immediately the whole kin and kin's kin of each other, though
dispersed over the three kingdoms, as well as the genealogies and kin's
kin of those whom they serve.

But my precautions end not here.

O Jack, with such an invention, what occasion had I to carry my beloved
to Mrs. Sinclair's?

My spouse may have farther occasion for the messengers whom she
dispatched, one to Miss Howe, the other to Wilson's.  With one of these
Will. is already well-acquainted, as thou hast heard--to mingle liquor
is to mingle souls with these fellows; with the other messenger he will
soon be acquainted, if he be not already.

The Captain's servant has his uses and instructions assigned him.  I have
hinted at some of them already.*  He also serves a most humane and
considerate master.  I love to make every body respected to my power.


* See Letter XXIX. of this volume.


The post, general and penny, will be strictly watched likewise.

Miss Howe's Collins is remembered to be described.  Miss Howe's and
Hickman's liveries also.

James Harlowe and Singleton are warned against.  I am to be acquainted
with any inquiry that shall happen to be made after my spouse, whether by
her married or maiden name, before she shall be told of it--and this that
I may have it in my power to prevent mischief.

I have ordered Mowbray and Tourville (and Belton, if his health permit)
to take their quarters at Hampstead for a week, with their fellows to
attend them.  I spare thee for the present, because of thy private
concerns.  But hold thyself in cheerful readiness, however, as a mark of
thy allegiance.

As to my spouse herself, has she not reason to be pleased with me for
having permitted her to receive Miss Howe's letter from Wilson's?  A
plain case, either that I am no deep plotter, or that I have no farther
views than to make my peace with her for an offence so slight and so
accidental.

Miss Howe says, though prefaced with an alas! that her charming friend
loves me: she must therefore yearn after this reconciliation--prospects
so fair--if she showed me any compassion; seemed inclinable to spare
me, and to make the most favourable construction: I cannot but say, that
it would be impossible not to show her some.  But, to be insulted and
defied by a rebel in one's power, what prince can bear that?

But I must return to the scene of action.  I must keep the women steady.
I had no opportunity to talk to my worthy Mrs. Bevis in private.

Tomlinson, a dog, not come yet!



LETTER XXXIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FROM MY APARTMENTS AT MRS. MOORE'S.


Miss Rawlins at her brothers; Mrs. Moore engaged in household matters;
widow Bevis dressing; I have nothing to do but write.  This cursed
Tomlinson not yet arrived!--Nothing to be done without him.

I think he shall complain in pretty high language of the treatment he met
with yesterday.  'What are our affairs to him?  He can have no view but
to serve us.  Cruel to send back to town, un-audienced, unseen, a man of
his business and importance.  He never stirs a-foot, but something of
consequence depends upon his movements.  A confounded thing to trifle
thus humoursomely with such a gentleman's moments!--These women think,
that all the business of the world must stand still for their figaries
[a good female word, Jack!] the greatest triflers in the creation, to
fancy themselves the most important beings in it--marry come up! as I
have heard goody Sorlings say to her servants, when she has rated at them
with mingled anger and disdain.'

After all, methinks I want those tostications [thou seest how women, and
women's words, fill my mind] to be over, happily over, that I may sit
down quietly, and reflect upon the dangers I have passed through, and the
troubles I have undergone.  I have a reflecting mind, as thou knowest;
but the very word reflecting implies all got over.

What briars and thorns does the wretch rush into (a scratched face and
tattered garments the unavoidable consequence) who will needs be for
striking out a new path through overgrown underwood; quitting that beaten
out for him by those who have travelled the same road before him!


***


A visit from the widow Bevis, in my own apartment.  She tells me, that my
spouse had thoughts last night, after I was gone to my lodgings, of
removing from Mrs. Moore's.

I almost wish she had attempted to do so.

Miss Rawlins, it seems, who was applied to upon it, dissuaded her from
it.

Mrs. Moore also, though she did not own that Will. lay in the house, (or
rather set up in it, courting,) set before her the difficulties, which,
in her opinion, she would have to get clear off, without my knowledge;
assuring her, that she could be no where more safe than with her, till
she had fixed whither to go.  And the lady herself recollected, that if
she went, she might miss the expected letter from her dear friend Miss
Howe! which, as she owned, was to direct her future steps.

She must also surely have some curiosity to know what her uncle's friend
had to say to her from her uncle, contemptuously as she yesterday treated
a man of his importance.  Nor could she, I should think, be absolutely
determined to put herself out of the way of receiving the visits of two
of the principal ladies of my family, and to break entirely with me in
the face of them all.--Besides, whither could she have gone?--Moreover,
Miss Howe's letter coming (after her elopement) so safely to her hands,
must surely put her into a more confiding temper with me, and with every
one else, though she would not immediately own it.

But these good folks have so little charity!--Are such severe censurers!
--Yet who is absolutely perfect?--It were to be wished, however, that
they would be so modest as to doubt themselves sometimes: then would they
allow for others, as others (excellent as they imagine themselves to be)
must for them.


SATURDAY, ONE O'CLOCK.

Tomlinson at last is come.  Forced to ride five miles about (though I
shall impute his delay to great and important business) to avoid the
sight of two or three impertinent rascals, who, little thinking whose
affairs he was employed in, wanted to obtrude themselves upon him.  I
think I will make this fellow easy, if he behave to my liking in this
affair.

I sent up the moment he came.

She desired to be excused receiving his visit till four this afternoon.

Intolerable!--No consideration!--None at all in this sex, when their
cursed humours are in the way!--Pay-day, pay-hour, rather, will come!--
Oh! that it were to be the next!

The Captain is in a pet.  Who can blame him?  Even the women think a man
of his consequence, and generously coming to serve us, hardly used.
Would to heaven she had attempted to get off last night!  The women not
my enemies, who knows but the husband's exerted authority might have met
with such connivance, as might have concluded either in carrying her back
to her former lodgings, or in consummation at Mrs. Moore's, in spite of
exclamations, fits, and the rest of the female obsecrations?

My beloved has not appeared to any body this day, except to Mrs. Moore.
Is, it seems, extremely low: unfit for the interesting conversation that
is to be held in the afternoon.  Longs to hear from her dear friend Miss
Howe--yet cannot expect a letter for a day or two.  Has a bad opinion of
all mankind.--No wonder!--Excellent creature as she is! with such a
father, such uncles, such a brother, as she has!

How does she look?

Better than could be expected from yesterday's fatigue, and last night's
ill rest.

These tender doves know not, till put to it, what they can bear;
especially when engaged in love affairs; and their attention wholly
engrossed.  But the sex love busy scenes.  Still life is their aversion.
A woman will create a storm, rather than be without one.  So that they
can preside in the whirlwind, and direct it, they are happy.--But my
beloved's misfortune is, that she must live in tumult; yet neither raise
them herself, nor be able to controul them.



LETTER XXXIV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT NIGHT, JUNE 10.


What will be the issue of all my plots and contrivances, devil take me if
I am able to divine.  But I will not, as Lord M. would say, forestall my
own market.

At four, the appointed hour, I sent up, to desire admittance in the
Captain's name and my own.

She would wait upon the Captain presently; [not upon me!] and in the
parlour, if it were not engaged.

The dining-room being mine, perhaps that was the reason of her naming the
parlour--mighty nice again, if so!  No good sign for me, thought I, this
stiff punctilio.

In the parlour, with me and the Captain, were Mrs. Moore, Miss Rawlins,
and Mrs. Bevis.

The women said, they would withdraw when the lady came down.

Lovel.   Not, except she chooses you should, Ladies.--People who are so
much above-board as I am, need not make secrets of any of their affairs.
Besides, you three ladies are now acquainted with all our concerns.

Capt.   I have some things to say to your lady, that perhaps she would
not herself choose that any body should hear; not even you, Mr. Lovelace,
as you and her family are not upon such a good foot of understanding as
were to be wished.

Lovel.   Well, well, Captain, I must submit.  Give us a sign to withdraw,
and we will withdraw.

It was better that the exclusion of the women should come from him, than
from me.

Capt.   I will bow, and wave my hand, thus--when I wish to be alone with
the lady.  Her uncle dotes upon her.  I hope, Mr. Lovelace, you will not
make a reconciliation more difficult, for the earnestness which my dear
friend shows to bring it to bear.  But indeed I must tell you, as I told
you more than once before, that I am afraid you have made lighter of the
occasion of this misunderstanding to me, than it ought to have been made.

Lovel.   I hope, Captain Tomlinson, you do not question my veracity!

Capt.   I beg your pardon, Mr. Lovelace--but those things which we men
may think lightly of, may not be light to a woman of delicacy.--And then,
if you have bound yourself by a vow, you ought--

Miss Rawlins bridling, her lips closed, (but her mouth stretched to a
smile of approbation, the longer for not buttoning,) tacitly showed
herself pleased with the Captain for his delicacy.

Mrs. Moore could speak--Very true, however, was all she said, with a
motion of her head that expressed the bow-approbatory.

For my part, said the jolly widow, staring with eyes as big as eggs, I
know what I know.--But man and wife are man and wife; or they are not
man and wife.--I have no notion of standing upon such niceties.

But here she comes! cried one, hearing her chamber-door open--Here she
comes! another, hearing it shut after her--And down dropt the angel among
us.

We all stood up, bowing and courtesying, and could not help it; for she
entered with such an air as commanded all our reverence.  Yet the Captain
looked plaguy grave.

Cl.   Pray keep your seats, Ladies--Pray do not go, [for they made offers
to withdraw; yet Miss Rawlins would have burst had she been suffered to
retire.]  Before this time you have all heard my story, I make no doubt--
pray keep your seats--at least all Mr. Lovelace's.

A very saucy and whimsical beginning, thought I.

Captain Tomlinson, your servant, addressing herself to him with
inimitable dignity.  I hope you did not take amiss my declining your
visit yesterday.  I was really incapable of talking upon any subject that
required attention.

Capt.   I am glad to see you better now, Madam.  I hope I do.

Cl.   Indeed I am not well.  I would not have excused myself from
attending you some hours ago, but in hopes I should have been better.  I
beg your pardon, Sir, for the trouble I have given you; and shall the
rather expect it, as this day will, I hope, conclude it all.

Thus set; thus determined; thought I,--yet to have slept upon it!--But,
as what she said was capable of a good, as well as a bad, construction, I
would not put an unfavourable one upon it.

Lovel.   The Captain was sorry, my dear, he did not offer his attendance
the moment he arrived yesterday.  He was afraid that you took it amiss
that he did not.

Cl.   Perhaps I thought that my uncle's friend might have wished to see
me as soon as he came, [how we stared!]--But, Sir, [to me,] it might be
convenient to you to detain him.

The devil, thought I!--So there really was resentment as well as head-
ache, as my good friend Mrs. Bevis observed, in her refusing to see the
honest gentleman.

Capt.   You would detain me, Mr. Lovelace--I was for paying my respects
to the lady the moment I came--

Cl.   Well, Sir, [interrupting him,] to wave this; for I would not be
thought captious--if you have not suffered inconvenience, in being
obliged to come again, I shall be easy.

Capt.   [Half disconcerted.]  A little inconvenience, I can't say but I
have suffered.  I have, indeed, too many affairs upon my hands; but the
desire I have to serve you and Mr. Lovelace, as well as to oblige my dear
friend, your uncle Harlowe, make great inconveniencies but small ones.

Cl.   You are very obliging, Sir.--Here is a great alteration since you
parted with us last.

Capt.   A great one indeed, Madam!  I was very much surprised at it, on
Thursday evening, when Mr. Lovelace conducted me to your lodgings, where
we hoped to find you.

Cl.   Have you any thing to say to me, Sir, from my uncle himself, that
requires my private ear!--Don't go, Ladies, [for the women stood up, and
offered to withdraw,]--if Mr. Lovelace stays, I am sure you may.

I frowned--I bit my lip--I looked at the women--and shook my head.

Capt.   I have nothing to offer, but what Mr. Lovelace is a party to, and
may hear, except one private word or two, which may be postponed to the
last.

Cl.   Pray, Ladies, keep your seats.--Things are altered, Sir, since I
saw you.  You can mention nothing that relates to me now, to which that
gentleman can be a party.

Capt.   You surprise me, Madam!  I am sorry to hear this!--Sorry for your
uncle's sake!--Sorry for your sake!--Sorry for Mr. Lovelace's sake!--And
yet I am sure he must have given greater occasion than he has mentioned
to me, or--

Lovel.  Indeed, Captain,--indeed, Ladies, I have told you great part of
my story!--And what I told you of my offence was the truth:--what I
concealed of my story was only what I apprehended would, if known, cause
this dear creature to be thought more censorious than charitable.

Cl.   Well, well, Sir, say what you please.  Make me as black as you
please--make yourself as white as you can--I am not now in your power:
that consideration will comfort me for all.

Capt.   God forbid that I should offer to plead in behalf of a crime,
that a woman of virtue and honour cannot forgive!  But surely, surely,
Madam, this is going too far.

Cl.   Do not blame me, Captain Tomlinson.  I have a good opinion of you,
as my uncle's friend; but if you are Mr. Lovelace's friend, that is
another thing; for my interest and Mr. Lovelace's must now be for ever
separated.

Capt.   One word with you, Madam, if you please--offering to retire.

Cl.   You may say all that you please to say before these gentlewomen.--
Mr. Lovelace may have secrets--I have none:--you seem to think me faulty:
I should be glad that all the world knew my heart.  Let my enemies sit in
judgment upon my actions; fairly scanned, I fear not the result; let them
even ask me my most secret thoughts, and, whether they make for me, or
against me, I will reveal them.

Capt.   Noble Lady! who can say as you say?

The women held up their hands and eyes; each, as if she had said,--Not I.

No disorder here! said Miss Rawlins:--but, (judging by her own heart,) a
confounded deal of improbability, I believe she thought.

Finely said, to be sure, said the widow Bevis, shrugging her shoulders.

Mrs. Moore sighed.

Jack Belford, thought I, knows all mine; and in this I am more ingenuous
than any of the three, and a fit match for this paragon.

Cl.   How Mr. Lovelace has found me out here I cannot tell: but such mean
devices, such artful, such worse than Waltham disguises put on, to
obtrude himself into my company; such bold, such shocking untruths--

Capt.   The favour of but one word, Madam, in private--

Cl.   In order to support a right which he has not over me!--O Sir!--O
Captain Tomlinson!--I think I have reason to say, that the man, (there he
stands!) is capable of any vileness!--

The women looked upon one another, and upon me, by turns, to see how I
bore it.  I had such dartings in my head at the instant, that I thought I
should have gone distracted.  My brain seemed on fire.  What would I have
given to have had her alone with me!--I traversed the room; my clenched
fist to my forehead.  O that I had any body here, thought I, that,
Hercules-like, when flaming in the tortures of Dejanira's poisoned shirt,
I could tear in pieces!

Capt.   Dear Lady! see you not how the poor gentleman--Lord, how have I
imposed upon your uncle, at this rate!  How happy did I tell him I saw
you!  How happy I was sure you would be in each other!

Cl.   O Sir, you don't know how many premeditated offences I had forgiven
when I saw you last, before I could appear to you what I hoped then I
might for the future be!--But now you may tell my uncle, if you please,
that I cannot hope for his mediation.  Tell him, that my guilt, in giving
this man an opportunity to spirit me away from my tried, my experienced,
my natural friends, (harshly as they treated me,) stares me every day
more and more in the face; and still the more, as my fate seems to be
drawing to a crisis, according to the malediction of my offended father!

And then she burst into tears, which even affected that dog, who, brought
to abet me, was himself all Belforded over.

The women, so used to cry without grief, as they are to laugh without
reason, by mere force of example, [confound their promptitudes;] must
needs pull out their handkerchiefs.  The less wonder, however, as I
myself, between confusion, surprise, and concern, could hardly stand it.

What's a tender heart good for?--Who can be happy that has a feeling
heart?--And yet, thou'lt say, that he who has it not, must be a tiger,
and no man.

Capt.   Let me beg the favour of one word with you, Madam, in private;
and that on my own account.

The women hereupon offered to retire.  She insisted that, if they went,
I should not stay.

Capt.   Sir, bowing to me, shall I beg--

I hope, thought I, that I may trust this solemn dog, instructed as he is.
She does not doubt him.  I'll stay out no longer than to give her time to
spend her first fire.

I then passively withdrew with the women.--But with such a bow to my
goddess, that it won for me every heart but that I wanted most to win;
for the haughty maid bent not her knee in return.

The conversation between the Captain and the lady, when we were retired,
was to the following effect:--They both talked loud enough for me to hear
them--the lady from anger, the Captain with design; and thou mayest be
sure there was no listener but myself.  What I was imperfect in was
supplied afterwards; for I had my vellum-leaved book to note all down.
If she had known this, perhaps she would have been more sparing of her
invectives--and but perhaps neither.

He told her that as her brother was absolutely resolved to see her; and
as he himself, in compliance with her uncle's expedient, had reported her
marriage; and as that report had reached the ears of Lord M., Lady Betty,
and the rest of my relations; and as he had been obliged, in consequence
of his first report, to vouch it; and as her brother might find out where
she was, and apply to the women here for a confirmation or refutation of
the marriage; he had thought himself obliged to countenance the report
before the women.  That this had embarrassed him not a little, as he
would not for the world that she should have cause to think him capable
of prevarication, contrivance, or double dealing; and that this made him
desirous of a private conversation with her.

It was true, she said, she had given her consent to such an expedient,
believing it was her uncle's; and little thinking that it would lead to
so many errors.  Yet she might have known that one error is frequently
the parent of many.  Mr. Lovelace had made her sensible of the truth of
that observation, on more occasions than one; and it was an observation
that he, the Captain, had made, in one of the letters that was shown her
yesterday.*


* See Letter XXIV.


He hoped that she had no mistrust of him: that she had no doubt of his
honour.  If, Madam, you suspect me--if you think me capable--what a man!
the Lord be merciful to me!--What a man must you think me!

I hope, Sir, there cannot be a man in the world who could deserve to be
suspected in such a case as this.  I do not suspect you.  If it were
possible there could be one such a man, I am sure, Captain Tomlinson, a
father of children, a man in years, of sense and experience, cannot be
that man.

He told me, that just then, he thought he felt a sudden flash from her
eye, an eye-beam as he called it, dart through his shivering reins; and
he could not help trembling.

The dog's conscience, Jack!--Nothing else!--I have felt half a dozen such
flashes, such eye-beams, in as many different conversations with this
soul-piercing beauty.

Her uncle, she must own, was not accustomed to think of such expedients;
but she had reconciled this to herself, as the case was unhappily
uncommon; and by the regard he had for her honour.

This set the puppy's heart at ease, and gave him more courage.

She asked him if he thought Lady Betty and Miss Montague intended her a
visit?

He had no doubt but they did.

And does he imagine, said she, that I could be brought to countenance to
them the report you have given out?

[I had hoped to bring her to this, Jack, or she had seen their letters.
But I had told the Captain that I believed I must give up this
expectation.]

No.--He believed that I had not such a thought.  He was pretty sure, that
I intended, when I saw them, to tell them, (as in confidence,) the naked
truth.

He then told her that her uncle had already made some steps towards a
general reconciliation.  The moment, Madam, that he knows you are really
married, he will enter into confidence with your father upon it; having
actually expressed to your mother his desire to be reconciled to you.

And what, Sir, said my mother?  What said my dear mother?

With great emotion she asked this question; holding out her sweet face,
as the Captain described her, with the most earnest attention, as if she
would shorten the way which his words were to have to her heart.

Your mother, Madam, burst into tears upon it: and your uncle was so
penetrated by her tenderness, that he could not proceed with the subject.
But he intends to enter upon it with her in form, as soon as he hears
that the ceremony is over.

By the tone of her voice she wept.  The dear creature, thought I, begins
to relent!--And I grudged the dog his eloquence.  I could hardly bear the
thought that any man breathing should have the power which I had lost, of
persuading this high-souled woman, though in my own favour.  And wouldest
thou think it? this reflection gave me more uneasiness at the moment than
I felt from her reproaches, violent as they were; or than I had pleasure
in her supposed relenting: for there is beauty in every thing she says
and does!--Beauty in her passion!--Beauty in her tears!--Had the Captain
been a young fellow, and of rank and fortune, his throat would have been
in danger; and I should have thought very hardly of her.

O Captain Tomlinson, said she, you know not what I have suffered by this
man's strange ways!  He had, as I was not ashamed to tell him yesterday,
a plain path before him.  He at first betrayed me into his power--but
when I was in it--There she stopt.--Then resuming--O Sir, you know not
what a strange man he has been!--An unpolite, a rough-manner'd man!  In
disgrace of his birth, and education, and knowledge, an unpolite man!--
And so acting, as if his worldly and personal advantages set him above
those graces which distinguish a gentleman.

The first woman that ever said, or that ever thought so of me, that's my
comfort, thought I!--But this, (spoken of to her uncle's friend, behind
my back,) helps to heap up thy already-too-full measure, dearest!--It is
down in my vellum-book.

Cl.   When I look back on his whole behaviour to a poor young creature,
(for I am but a very young creature,) I cannot acquit him either of great
folly or of deep design.  And, last Wednesday--There she stopt; and I
suppose turned away her face.

I wonder she was not ashamed to hint at what she thought so shameful; and
that to a man, and alone with him.

Capt.   Far be it from me, Madam, to offer to enter too closely into so
tender a subject.  Mr. Lovelace owns, that you have reason to be
displeased with him.  But he so solemnly clears himself of premeditated
offence--

Cl.   He cannot clear himself, Captain Tomlinson.  The people of the
house must be very vile, as well as he.  I am convinced that there was a
wicked confederacy--but no more upon such a subject.

Capt.   Only one word more, Madam.--He tells me, that you promised to
pardon him.  He tells me--

He knew, interrupted she, that he deserved not pardon, or he had not
extorted the promise from me.  Nor had I given it to him, but to shield
myself from the vilest outrage--

Capt.   I could wish, Madam, inexcusable as his behaviour has been, since
he has something to plead in the reliance he made upon your promise,
that, for the sake of appearances to the world, and to avoid the
mischiefs that may follow if you absolutely break with him, you could
prevail upon your naturally-generous mind to lay an obligation upon him
by your forgiveness.

She was silent.

Capt.   Your father and mother, Madam, deplore a daughter lost to them,
whom your generosity to Mr. Lovelace may restore: do not put it to the
possible chance, that they may have cause to deplore a double loss; the
losing of a son, as well as a daughter, who, by his own violence, which
you may perhaps prevent, may be for ever lost to them, and to the whole
family.

She paused--she wept--she owned that she felt the force of this argument.

I will be the making of this fellow, thought I.

Capt.   Permit me, Madam, to tell you, that I do not think it would be
difficult to prevail upon your uncle, if you insist upon it, to come up
privately to town, and to give you with his own hand to Mr. Lovelace--
except, indeed, your present misunderstanding were to come to his ears.
Besides, Madam, your brother, it is likely, may at this very time be in
town; and he is resolved to find you out--

Cl.   Why, Sir, should I be so much afraid of my brother?  My brother has
injured me, not I him.  Will my brother offer to me what Mr. Lovelace has
offered?--Wicked, ungrateful man! to insult a friendless, unprotected
creature, made friendless by himself!--I cannot, cannot think of him in
the light I once thought of him.  What, Sir, to put myself into the power
of a wretch, who has acted by me with so much vile premeditation!--Who
shall pity, who shall excuse me, if I do, were I to suffer ever so much
from him?--No, Sir.--Let Mr. Lovelace leave me--let my brother find me.
I am not such a poor creature as to be afraid to face the brother who has
injured me.

Capt.   Were you and your brother to meet only to confer together, to
expostulate, to clear up difficulties, it were another thing.  But what,
Madam, can you think will be the issue of an interview, (Mr. Solmes with
him,) when he finds you unmarried, and resolved never to have Mr.
Lovelace; supposing Mr. Lovelace were not to interfere, which cannot be
imagined?

Cl.   Well, Sir, I can only say, I am a very unhappy creature!--I must
resign to the will of Providence, and be patient under evils, which that
will not permit me to shun.  But I have taken my measures.  Mr. Lovelace
can never make me happy, nor I him.  I wait here only for a letter from
Miss Howe--that must determine me--

Determine you as to Mr. Lovelace, Madam? interrupted the Captain.

Cl.   I am already determined as to him.

Capt.  If it be not in his favour, I have done.  I cannot use stronger
arguments than I have used, and it would be impertinent to repeat them.
If you cannot forgive his offence, I am sure it must have been much
greater than he has owned to me. If you are absolutely determined, be
pleased to let me know what I shall say to your uncle?  You were pleased
to tell me, that this day would put an end to what you called my trouble:
I should not have thought it any, could I have been an humble mean of
reconciling persons of worth and honour to each other.

Here I entered with a solemn air.

Lovel.   Captain Tomlinson, I have heard a part of what has passed
between you and this unforgiving (however otherwise excellent) lady.  I
am cut to the heart to find the dear creature so determined.  I could
not have believed it possible, with such prospects, that I had so little
share in her esteem.  Nevertheless I must do myself justice with regard
to the offence I was so unhappy as to give, since I find you are ready
to think it much greater than it really was.

Cl.   I hear not, Sir, your recapitulations.  I am, and ought to be, the
sole judge of insults offered to my person.  I enter not into discussion
with you, nor hear you on the shocking subject.  And was going.

I put myself between her and the door--You may hear all I have to say,
Madam.  My fault is not of such a nature, but that you may.  I will be a
just accuser of myself; and will not wound your ears.

I then protested that the fire was a real fire.  [So it was.]  I
disclaimed [less truly] premeditation.  I owned that I was hurried on by
the violence of a youthful passion, and by a sudden impulse, which few
other persons, in the like situation, would have been able to check: that
I withdrew, at her command and entreaty, on the promise of pardon,
without having offered the least indecency, or any freedom, that would
not have been forgiven by persons of delicacy, surprised in an attitude
so charming--her terror, on the alarm of fire, calling for a soothing
behaviour, and personal tenderness, she being ready to fall into fits: my
hoped-for happy day so near, that I might be presumed to be looked upon
as a betrothed lover--and that this excuse might be pleaded even for the
women of the house, that they, thinking us actually married, might
suppose themselves to be the less concerned to interfere on so tender an
occasion.--[There, Jack, was a bold insinuation on behalf of the women!]

High indignation filled her disdainful eye, eye-beam after eye-beam
flashing at me.  Every feature of her sweet face had soul in it.  Yet she
spoke not.  Perhaps, Jack, she had a thought, that this plea for the
women accounted for my contrivance to have her pass to them as married,
when I first carried her thither.

Capt.   Indeed, Sir, I must say that you did not well to add to the
apprehensions of a lady so much terrified before.

The dear creature offered to go by me.  I set my back against the door,
and besought her to stay a few moments.  I had not said thus much, my
dearest creature, but for your sake, as well as for my own, that Captain
Tomlinson should not think I had been viler than I was.  Nor will I say
one word more on the subject, after I have appealed to your own heart,
whether it was not necessary that I should say so much; and to the
Captain, whether otherwise he would not have gone away with a much worse
opinion of me, if he had judged of my offence by the violence of your
resentment.

Capt.   Indeed I should.  I own I should.  And I am very glad, Mr.
Lovelace, that you are able to defend yourself thus far.

Cl.   That cause must be well tried, where the offender takes his seat
upon the same bench with the judge.--I submit not mine to men--nor, give
me leave to say, to you, Captain Tomlinson, though I am willing to have a
good opinion of you.  Had not the man been assured that he had influenced
you in his favour, he would not have brought you up to Hampstead.

Capt.   That I am influenced, as you call it, Madam, is for the sake of
your uncle, and for your own sake, more (I will say to Mr. Lovelace's
face) than for his.  What can I have in view but peace and
reconciliation?  I have, from the first, blamed, and I now, again, blame
Mr. Lovelace, for adding distress to distress, and terror to terror; the
lady, as you acknowledge, Sir, [looking valiantly,] ready before to fall
into fits.

Lovel.   Let me own to you, Captain Tomlinson, that I have been a very
faulty, a very foolish man; and, if this dear creature ever honoured me
with her love, an ungrateful one.  But I have had too much reason to
doubt it.  And this is now a flagrant proof that she never had the value
for me which my proud heart wished for; that, with such prospects before
us; a day so near; settlements approved and drawn; her uncle meditating a
general reconciliation which, for her sake, not my own, I was desirous to
give into; she can, for an offence so really slight, on an occasion so
truly accidental, renounce me for ever; and, with me, all hopes of that
reconciliation in the way her uncle had put it in, and she had acquiesced
with; and risque all consequences, fatal ones as they may too possibly
be.--By my soul, Captain Tomlinson, the dear creature must have hated me
all the time she was intending to honour me with her hand.  And now she
must resolve to abandon me, as far as I know, with a preference in her
heart of the most odious of men--in favour of that Solmes, who, as you
tell me, accompanies her brother: and with what hopes, with what view,
accompanies him!--How can I bear to think of this?--

Cl.   It is fit, Sir, that you should judge of my regard for you by your
own conscienceness of demerit.  Yet you know, or you would not have dared
to behave to me as sometimes you did, that you had more of it than you
deserved.

She walked from us; and then returning, Captain Tomlinson, said she, I
will own to you, that I was not capable of resolving to give my hand, and
--nothing but my hand.  Had I not given a flagrant proof of this to the
once most indulgent of parents? which has brought me into a distress,
which this man has heightened, when he ought, in gratitude and honour, to
have endeavoured to render it supportable.  I had even a bias, Sir, in
his favour, I scruple not to own it. Long (much too long!) bore I with
his unaccountable ways, attributing his errors to unmeaning gaiety, and
to a want of knowing what true delicacy, and true generosity, required
from a heart susceptible of grateful impressions to one involved by his
means in unhappy circumstances.

It is now wickedness in him (a wickedness which discredits all his
professions) to say, that this last cruel and ungrateful insult was not
a premeditated one--But what need I say more of this insult, when it was
of such a nature, and that it has changed that bias in his favour, and
make me choose to forego all the inviting prospects he talks of, and to
run all hazards, to free myself from his power?

O my dearest creature! how happy for us both, had I been able to discover
that bias, as you condescend to call it, through such reserves as man
never encountered with!

He did discover it, Capt. Tomlinson.  He brought me, more than once, to
own it; the more needlessly brought me to own it, as I dare say his own
vanity gave him no cause to doubt it; and as I had apparently no other
motive in not being forward to own it, than my too-justly-founded
apprehensions of his want of generosity.  In a word, Captain Tomlinson,
(and now, that I am determined upon my measures, I the less scruple to
say,) I should have despised myself, had I found myself capable of
affectation or tyranny to the man I intended to marry.  I have always
blamed the dearest friend I have in the world for a fault of this nature.
In a word--

Lovel.   And had my angel really and indeed the favour for me she is
pleased to own?--Dearest creature, forgive me.  Restore me to your good
opinion.  Surely I have not sinned beyond forgiveness.  You say that I
extorted from you the promise you made me.  But I could not have presumed
to make that promise the condition of my obedience, had I not thought
there was room to expect forgiveness.  Permit, I beseech you, the
prospects to take place, that were opening so agreeably before us.  I
will go to town, and bring the license.  All difficulties to the
obtaining of it are surmounted.  Captain Tomlinson shall be witness to
the deeds.  He will be present at the ceremony on the part of your uncle.
Indeed he gave me hope that your uncle himself--

Capt.   I did, Mr. Lovelace: and I will tell you my grounds for the hope
I gave.  I promised to my dear friend, (your uncle, Madam,) that he
should give out that he would take a turn with me to my little farm-house,
as I call it, near Northampton, for a week or so.--Poor gentleman!
he has of late been very little abroad!--Too visibly declining!--Change
of air, it might be given out, was good for him.--But I see, Madam, that
this is too tender a subject--

The dear creature wept.  She knew how to apply as meant the Captain's
hint to the occasion of her uncle's declining state of health.

Capt.   We might indeed, I told him, set out in that road, but turn short
to town in my chariot; and he might see the ceremony performed with his
own eyes, and be the desired father, as well as the beloved uncle.

She turned from us, and wiped her eyes.

Capt.   And, really, there seem now to be but two objections to this, as
Mr. Harlowe discouraged not the proposal--The one, the unhappy
misunderstanding between you; which I would not by any means he should
know; since then he might be apt to give weight to Mr. James Harlowe's
unjust surmises.--The other, that it would necessarily occasion some
delay to the ceremony; which certainly may be performed in a day or two
--if--

And then he reverently bowed to my goddess.--Charming fellow!--But often
did I curse my stars, for making me so much obliged to his adroitness.

She was going to speak; but, not liking the turn of her countenance
(although, as I thought, its severity and indignation seemed a little
abated) I said, and had like to have blown myself up by it--one expedient
I have just thought of--

Cl.   None of your expedients, Mr. Lovelace!--I abhor your expedients,
your inventions--I have had too many of them.

Lovel.   See, Capt. Tomlinson!--See, Sir!--O how we expose ourselves to
you!--Little did you think, I dare say, that we have lived in such a
continued misunderstanding together!--But you will make the best of it
all.  We may yet be happy.  Oh! that I could have been assured that this
dear creature loved me with the hundredth part of the love I have for
her!--Our diffidences have been mutual.  I presume to say that she has
too much punctilio: I am afraid that I have too little.  Hence our
difficulties.  But I have a heart, Captain Tomlinson, a heart, that bids
me hope for her love, because it is resolved to deserve it as much as man
can deserve it.

Capt.   I am indeed surprised at what I have seen and heard.  I defend
not Mr. Lovelace, Madam, in the offence he has given you--as a father of
daughters myself, I cannot defend him; though his fault seems to be
lighter than I had apprehended--but in my conscience, Madam, I think you
carry your resentment too high.

Cl.   Too high, Sir!--Too high to the man that might have been happy if
he would!  Too high to the man that has held my soul in suspense an
hundred times, since (by artifice and deceit) he obtained a power over
me!--Say, Lovelace, thyself say, art thou not the very Lovelace, who by
insulting me, hast wronged thine own hopes?--The wretch that appeared in
vile disguises, personating an old, lame creature, seeking for lodgings
for thy sick wife?--Telling the gentlewomen here stories all of thine own
invention; and asserting to them an husband's right over me, which thou
hast not!--And is it [turning to the Captain] to be expected, that I
should give credit to the protestations of such a man?

Lovel.   Treat me, my dearest creature, as you please, I will bear it:
and yet your scorn and your violence have fixed daggers in my heart--But
was it possible, without those disguises, to come at your speech?--And
could I lose you, if study, if invention, would put it in my power to
arrest your anger, and give me hope to engage you to confirm to me the
promised pardon?  The address I made to you before the women, as if the
marriage-ceremony had passed, was in consequence of what your uncle had
advised, and what you had acquiesced with; and the rather made, as your
brother, and Singleton, and Solmes, were resolved to find out whether
what was reported of your marriage were true or not, that they might take
their measures accordingly; and in hopes to prevent that mischief, which
I have been but too studious to prevent, since this tameness has but
invited insolence from your brother and his confederates.

Cl.   O thou strange wretch, how thou talkest!--But, Captain Tomlinson,
give me leave to say, that, were I inclined to enter farther upon this
subject, I would appeal to Miss Rawlins's judgment (whom else have I to
appeal to?)  She seems to be a person of prudence and honour; but not to
any man's judgment, whether I carry my resentment beyond fit bounds, when
I resolve--

Capt.   Forgive, Madam, the interruption--but I think there can be no
reason for this.  You ought, as you said, to be the sole judge of
indignities offered you.  The gentlewomen here are strangers to you.  You
will perhaps stay but a little while among them.  If you lay the state of
your case before any of them, and your brother come to inquire of them,
your uncle's intended mediation will be discovered, and rendered abortive
--I shall appear in a light that I never appeared in, in my life--for these
women may not think themselves obliged to keep the secret.

Charming fellow!

Cl.   O what difficulties has one fatal step involved me in--but there is
no necessity for such an appeal to any body.  I am resolved on my
measures.

Capt.   Absolutely resolved, Madam?

Cl.   I am.

Capt.   What shall I say to your uncle Harlowe, Madam?--Poor gentleman!
how will he be surprised!--You see, Mr. Lovelace--you see, Sir,--turning
to me with a flourishing hand--but you may thank yourself--and admirably
stalked he from us.

True, by my soul, thought I.  I traversed the room, and bit my
unpersuasive lips, now upper, now under, for vexation.

He made a profound reverence to her--and went to the window, where lay
his hat and whip; and, taking them up, opened the door.  Child, said he,
to some body he saw, pray order my servant to bring my horse to the
door--

Lovel.   You won't go, Sir--I hope you won't!--I am the unhappiest man in
the world!--You won't go--yet, alas!--But you won't go, Sir!--there may
be yet hopes that Lady Betty may have some weight--

Capt.   Dear Mr. Lovelace! and may not my worthy friend, and affectionate
uncle, hope for some influence upon his daughter-niece?--But I beg pardon
--a letter will always find me disposed to serve the lady, and that as
well for her sake as for the sake of my dear friend.

She had thrown herself into her chair: her eyes cast down: she was
motionless, as in a profound study.

The Captain bowed to her again: but met with no return to his bow.  Mr.
Lovelace, said he, (with an air of equality and independence,) I am
your's.

Still the dear unaccountable sat as immovable as a statue; stirring
neither hand, foot, head, nor eye--I never before saw any one in so
profound a reverie in so waking a dream.

He passed by her to go out at the door she sat near, though the passage
by the other door was his direct way; and bowed again.  She moved not.
I will not disturb the lady in her meditations, Sir.--Adieu, Mr. Lovelace
--no farther, I beseech you.

She started, sighing--Are you going, Sir?

Capt.   I am, Madam.  I could have been glad to do you service; but I see
it is not in my power.

She stood up, holding out one hand, with inimitable dignity and sweetness
--I am sorry you are going, Sir!--can't help it--I have no friend to
advise with--Mr. Lovelace has the art (or good fortune, perhaps I should
call it) to make himself many.--Well, Sir--if you will go, I can't help
it.

Capt.   I will not go, Madam; his eyes twinkling.  [Again seized with a
fit of humanity!]  I will not go, if my longer stay can do you either
service or pleasure.  What, Sir, [turning to me,] what, Mr. Lovelace, was
your expedient;--perhaps something may be offered, Madam--

She sighed, and was silent.

REVENGE, invoked I to myself, keep thy throne in my heart.  If the
usurper LOVE once more drive thee from it, thou wilt never again regain
possession!

Lovel.   What I had thought of, what I had intended to propose, [and I
sighed,] was this, that the dear creature, if she will not forgive me, as
she promised, will suspend the displeasure she has conceived against me,
till Lady Betty arrives.--That lady may be the mediatrix between us.
This dear creature may put herself into her protection, and accompany her
down to her seat in Oxfordshire.  It is one of her Ladyship's purposes to
prevail on her supposed new niece to go down with her.  It may pass to
every one but to Lady Betty, and to you, Captain Tomlinson, and to your
friend Mr. Harlowe (as he desires) that we have been some time married:
and her being with my relations will amount to a proof to James Harlowe
that we are; and our nuptials may be privately, and at this beloved
creature's pleasure, solemnized; and your report, Captain, authenticated.

Capt.   Upon my honour, Madam, clapping his hand upon his breast, a
charming expedient!--This will answer every end.

She mused--she was greatly perplexed--at last, God direct me! said she: I
know not what to do--a young unfriended creature!  Whom can I have to
advise with?--Let me retire, if I can retire.

She withdrew with slow and trembling feet, and went up to her chamber.

For Heaven's sake, said the penetrated varlet [his hands lifted up]; for
Heaven's sake, take compassion upon this admirable woman!--I cannot
proceed--she deserves all things--

Softly!--d--n the fellow!--the women are coming in.

He sobbed up his grief--turned about--hemm'd up a more manly accent--Wipe
thy cursed eyes--He did.  The sunshine took place on one cheek, and
spread slowly to the other, and the fellow had his whole face again.

The women all three came in, led by that ever-curious Miss Rawlins.  I
told them, that the lady was gone up to consider of every thing: that we
had hopes of her.  And such a representation we made of all that had
passed, as brought either tacit or declared blame upon the fair perverse
for hardness of heart and over-delicacy.

The widow Bevis, in particular, put out one lip, tossed up her head,
wrinkled her forehead, and made such motions with her now lifted-up, now
cast-down eyes, as showed that she thought there was a great deal of
perverseness and affectation in the lady.  Now-and-then she changed her
censuring looks to looks of pity of me--but (as she said) she loved not
to aggravate!--A poor business, God help's! shrugging up her shoulders,
to make such a rout about!  And then her eyes laughed heartily--
Indulgence was a good thing!  Love was a good thing!--but too much was
too much!

Miss Rawlins, however, declared, after she had called the widow Bevis,
with a prudish simper, a comical gentlewoman! that there must be
something in our story, which she could not fathom; and went from us into
a corner, and sat down, seemingly vexed that she could not.



LETTER XXXV

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


The lady staid longer above than we wished; and I hoping that (lady-like)
she only waited for an invitation to return to us, desired the widow
Bevis, in the Captain's name, (who wanted to go to town,) to request the
favour of her company.

I cared not to send up either Miss Rawlins or Mrs. Moore on the errand,
lest my beloved should be in a communicative disposition; especially as
she had hinted at an appeal to Miss Rawlins; who, besides, has such an
unbounded curiosity.

Mrs. Bevis presently returned with an answer (winking and pinking at me)
that the lady would follow her down.

Miss Rawlins could not but offer to retire, as the others did.  Her eyes,
however, intimated that she had rather stay.  But they not being answered
as she seemed to wish, she went with the rest, but with slower feet; and
had hardly left the parlour, when the lady entered it by the other door;
a melancholy dignity in her person and air.

She sat down.  Pray, Mr. Tomlinson, be seated.

He took his chair over against her.  I stood behind her's that I might
give him agreed-upon signals, should there be occasion for them.

As thus--a wink of the left eye was to signify push that point, Captain.

A wink of the right, and a nod, was to indicate approbation of what he
had said.

My fore-finger held up, and biting my lip, get off of that, as fast as
possible.

A right-forward nod, and a frown, swear to it, Captain.

My whole spread hand, to take care not to say too much on that particular
subject.

A scowling brow, and a positive nod, was to bid him rise in temper.

And these motions I could make, even those with my hand, without holding
up my arm, or moving my wrist, had the women been there; as, when the
motions were agreed upon, I knew not but they would.

She hemmed--I was going to speak, to spare her supposed confusion: but
this lady never wants presence of mind, when presence of mind is
necessary either to her honour, or to that conscious dignity which
distinguishes her from all the women I ever knew.

I have been considering, said she, as well as I was able, of every thing
that has passed; and of all that has been said; and of my unhappy
situation.  I mean no ill, I wish no ill, to any creature living, Mr.
Tomlinson.  I have always delighted to draw favourable rather than
unfavourable conclusions; sometimes, as it has proved, for very bad
hearts.  Censoriousness, whatever faults I have, is not naturally my
fault.--But, circumstanced as I am, treated as I have been, unworthily
treated, by a man who is full of contrivances, and glories in them--

Lovel.   My dearest life!--But I will not interrupt you.

Cl.   Thus treated, it becomes me to doubt--it concerns my honour to
doubt, to fear, to apprehend--your intervention, Sir, is so seasonable,
so kind, for this man--my uncle's expedient, the first of the kind he
ever, I believe, thought of! a plain, honest, good-minded man, as he is,
not affecting such expedients--your report in conformity to it--the
consequences of that report; the alarm taken by my brother; his rash
resolution upon it--the alarm taken by Lady Betty, and the rest of Mr.
Lovelace's relations--the sudden letters written to him upon it, which,
with your's, he showed me--all ceremony, among persons born observers of
ceremony, and entitled to value themselves upon their distinction,
dispensed with--all these things have happened so quick, and some of them
so seasonable--

Lovel.   Lady Betty, you see, Madam, in her letter, dispenses with
punctilo, avowedly in compliment to you.  Charlotte, in her's, professes
to do the same for the same reason.  Good Heaven! that the respect
intended you by my relations, who, in every other case, are really
punctilious, should be thus construed!  They were glad, Madam, to have an
opportunity to compliment you at my expense.  Every one of my family
takes delight in rallying me.  But their joy on the supposed occasion--

Cl.   Do I doubt, Sir, that you have not something to say for any thing
you think fit to do?  I am speaking to Captain Tomlinson, Sir.  I will
you would be pleased to withdraw--at least to come from behind my chair.

And she looked at the Captain, observing, no doubt, that his eyes seemed
to take lessons from mine.

A fair match, by Jupiter!

The Captain was disconcerted.  The dog had not had such a blush upon his
face for ten years before.  I bit my lip for vexation: walked about the
room; but nevertheless took my post again; and blinked with my eyes to
the Captain, as a caution for him to take more care of his: and then
scouling with my brows, and giving the nod positive, I as good as said,
resent that, Captain.

Capt.   I hope, Madam, you have no suspicion that I am capable--

Cl.   Be not displeased with me, Captain Tomlinson.  I have told you that
I am not of a suspicious temper.  Excuse me for the sake of my sincerity.
There is not, I will be bold to say, a sincerer heart in the world than
her's before you.

She took out her handkerchief, and put it to her eyes.

I was going, at that instant, after her example, to vouch for the honesty
of my heart; but my conscience Mennelled upon me; and would not suffer
the meditated vow to pass my lips.--A devilish thing, thought I, for a
man to be so little himself, when he has most occasion for himself!

The villain Tomlinson looked at me with a rueful face, as if he begged
leave to cry for company.  It might have been as well, if he had cried.
A feeling heart, or the tokens of it given by a sensible eye, are very
reputable things, when kept in countenance by the occasion.

And here let me fairly own to thee, that twenty times in this trying
conversation I said to myself, that could I have thought that I should
have had all this trouble, and incurred all this guilt, I would have been
honest at first.  But why, Jack, is this dear creature so lovely, yet so
invincible?--Ever heardst thou before that the sweets of May blossomed in
December?

Capt.   Be pleased--be pleased, Madam--if you have any doubts of my
honour--

A whining varlet!  He should have been quite angry--For what gave I him
the nod positive?  He should have stalked again to the window, as for his
whip and hat.

Cl.   I am only making such observations as my youth, my inexperience,
and my present unhappy circumstances, suggest to me--a worthy heart
(such, I hope, as Captain Tomlinson's) need not fear an examination--
need not fear being looked into--whatever doubts that man, who has been
the cause of my errors, and, as my severe father imprecated, the punisher
of the errors he has caused, might have had of me, or of my honour, I
would have forgiven him for them, if he had fairly proposed them to me:
for some doubts perhaps such a man might have of the future conduct of a
creature whom he could induce to correspond with him against parental
prohibition, and against the lights which her own judgment threw in upon
her: and if he had propounded them to me like a man and a gentleman, I
would have been glad of the opportunity given me to clear my intentions,
and to have shown myself entitled to his good opinion--and I hope you,
Sir--

Capt.   I am ready to hear all your doubts, Madam, and to clear them up--

Cl.   I will only put it, Sir, to your conscience and honour--

The dog sat uneasy--he shuffled with his feet--her eye was upon him--he
was, therefore, after the rebuff he had met with, afraid to look at me
for my motions; and now turned his eyes towards me, then from me, as if
he would unlook his own looks.

Cl.   That all is true, that you have written, and that you have told me.

I gave him a right forward nod, and a frown--as much as to say, swear to
it, Captain.  But the varlet did not round it off as I would have had
him.  However, he averred that it was.

He had hoped, he said, that the circumstances with which his commission
was attended, and what he had communicated to her, which he could not
know but from his dear friend, her uncle, might have shielded him even
from the shadow of suspicion.  But I am contented, said he, stammering,
to be thought--to be thought--what--what you please to think of me--till,
till, you are satisfied--

A whore's-bird!

Cl.   The circumstances you refer to, I must own ought to shield you,
Sir, from suspicion; but the man before you is a man that would make an
angel suspected, should that angel plead for him.

I came forward,--traversed the room,--was indeed in a bl--dy passion.--I
have no patience, Madam!--and again I bit my unpersuasive lips.

Cl.   No man ought to be impatient at imputations he is not ashamed to
deserve.  An innocent man will not be outrageous upon such imputations.
A guilty man ought not.  [Most excellently would this charming creature
cap sentences with Lord M.!]  But I am not now trying you, Sir, [to me,]
on the foot of your merits.  I am only sorry that I am constrained to put
questions to this worthier gentleman, [worthier gentleman, Jack!] which,
perhaps, I ought not to put, so far as they regard himself.  And I hope,
Captain Tomlinson, that you, who know not Mr. Lovelace so well, as, to my
unhappiness, I do, and who have children of your own, will excuse a poor
young creature, who is deprived of all worldly protection, and who has
been insulted and endangered by the most designing man in the world, and,
perhaps, by a confederacy of his creatures.

There she stopt; and stood up, and looked at me; fear, nevertheless,
apparently mingled with her anger.--And so it ought.  I was glad,
however, of this poor sign of love; no one fears whom they value not.

Women's tongues were licensed, I was going to say; but my conscience
would not let me call her a woman; nor use to her so vulgar a phrase.  I
could only rave by my motions, lift up my eyes, spread my hands, rub my
face, pull my wig, and look like a fool.  Indeed, I had a great mind to
run mad.  Had I been alone with her, I would; and she should have taken
consequences.

The Captain interposed in my behalf; gently, however, and as a man not
quite sure that he was himself acquitted.  Some of the pleas we had both
insisted on he again enforced; and, speaking low, Poor gentleman! said
he, who can but pity him?  Indeed, Madam, it is easy to see, with all his
failings, the power you have over him!

Cl.   I have no pleasure, Sir, in distressing any one; not even him, who
has so much distressed me.  But, Sir, when I THINK, and when I see him
before me, I cannot command my temper!  Indeed, indeed, Captain
Tomlinson, Mr. Lovelace has not acted by me either as a grateful or a
generous man, nor even as a prudent one!--He knows not, as I told him
yesterday, the value of the heart he has insulted!

There the angel stopt; her handkerchief at her eyes.

O Belford, Belford! that she should so greatly excel, as to make me, at
times, appear as a villain in my own eyes!

I besought her pardon.  I promised that it should be the study of my
whole life to deserve it.  My faults, I said, whatever they had been,
were rather faults in her apprehension than in fact.  I besought her to
give way to the expedient I had hit upon--I repeated it.  The Captain
enforced it, for her uncle's sake.  I, once more, for the sake of the
general reconciliation; for the sake of all my family; for the sake of
preventing further mischief.

She wept.  She seemed staggered in her resolution--she turned from me.
I mentioned the letter of Lord M.  I besought her to resign to Lady
Betty's mediation all our differences, if she would not forgive me before
she saw her.

She turned towards me--she was going to speak; but her heart was full,
and again she turned away her eyes,--And do you really and indeed expect
Lady Betty and Miss Montague?--And do you--Again she stopt.

I answered in a solemn manner.

She turned from me her whole face, and paused, and seemed to consider.
But, in a passionate accent, again turning towards me, [O how difficult,
Jack, for a Harlowe spirit to forgive!]  Let her Ladyship come, if she
pleases, said she, I cannot, cannot, wish to see her; and if I did see
her, and she were to plead for you, I cannot wish to hear her!  The more
I think, the less I can forgive an attempt, that I am convinced was
intended to destroy me.  [A plaguy strong word for the occasion,
supposing she was right!]  What has my conduct been, that an insult of
such a nature should be offered to me, and it would be a weakness in me
to forgive?  I am sunk in my own eyes!  And how can I receive a visit
that must depress me more?

The Captain urged her in my favour with greater earnestness than before.
We both even clamoured, as I may say, for mercy and forgiveness.  [Didst
thou never hear the good folks talk of taking Heaven by storm?]--
Contrition repeatedly avowed; a total reformation promised; the happy
expedient again urged.

Cl.   I have taken my measures.  I have gone too far to recede, or to
wish to recede.  My mind is prepared for adversity.  That I have not
deserved the evils I have met with is my consolation; I have written to
Miss Howe what my intentions are.  My heart is not with you--it is
against you, Mr. Lovelace.  I had not written to you as I did in the
letter I left behind me, had I not resolved, whatever became of me, to
renounce you for ever.

I was full of hope now.  Severe as her expressions were, I saw she was
afraid that I should think of what she had written.  And, indeed, her
letter is violence itself.--Angry people, Jack, should never write while
their passion holds.

Lovel.   The severity you have shown me, Madam, whether by pen or by
speech, shall never have place in my remembrance, but for your honor.  In
the light you have taken things, all is deserved, and but the natural
result of virtuous resentment; and I adore you, even for the pangs you
have given me.

She was silent.  She had employment enough with her handkerchief at her
eyes.

Lovel.   You lament, sometimes, that you have no friends of your own sex
to consult with.  Miss Rawlins, I must confess, is too inquisitive to be
confided in, [I liked not, thou mayest think, her appeal to Miss
Rawlins.]  She may mean well.  But I never in my life knew a person, who
was fond of prying into the secrets of others, that was fit to be
trusted.  The curiosity of such is governed by pride, which is not
gratified but by whispering about a secret till it becomes public, in
order to show either their consequence, or their sagacity.  It is so in
every case.  What man or woman, who is covetous of power, or of making
a right use of it?  But in the ladies of my family you may confide.  It
is their ambition to think of you as one of themselves.  Renew but your
consent to pass to the world, for the sake of your uncle's expedient, and
for the prevention of mischief, as a lady some time married.  Lady Betty
may be acquainted with the naked truth; and you may, (as she hopes you
will,) accompany her to her seat; and, if it must be so, consider me as
in a state of penitence or probation, to be accepted or rejected, as I
may appear to deserve.

The Captain again clapt his hands on his breast, and declared, upon his
honour, that this was a proposal that, were the case that of his own
daughter, and she were not resolved upon immediate marriage, (which yet
he thought by far the more eligible choice,) he should be very much
concerned were she to refuse it.

Cl.   Were I with Mr. Lovelace's relations, and to pass as his wife to
the world, I could not have any choice.  And how could he be then in a
state of probation?--O Mr. Tomlinson, you are too much his friend to see
into his drift.

Capt.   His friend, Madam, as I said before, as I am your's and your
uncle's, for the sake of a general reconciliation, which must begin with
a better understanding between yourselves.

Lovel.   Only, my dearest life, resolve to attend the arrival and visit
of Lady Betty; and permit her to arbitrate between us.

Capt.   There can be no harm in that, Madam.  You can suffer no
inconvenience from that.  If Mr. Lovelace's offence be such, that a woman
of Lady Betty's character judges it to be unpardonable, why then--

Cl.   [Interrupting; and to me,] If I am not invaded by you, Sir; if I
am, (as I ought to be,) my own mistress, I think to stay here, in this
honest house, [and then had I an eye-beam, as the Captain calls it,
flashed at me,] till I receive a letter from Miss Howe.  That, I hope,
will be in a day or two.  If in that time the ladies come whom you
expect, and if they are desirous to see the creature whom you have made
unhappy, I shall know whether I can or cannot receive their visit.

She turned short to the door, and, retiring, went up stairs to her
chamber.

O Sir, said the Captain, as soon as she was gone, what an angel of a
woman is this!  I have been, and I am a very wicked man.  But if any
thing should happen amiss to this admirable lady, through my means, I
shall have more cause for self-reproach than for all the bad actions
of my life put together.

And his eyes glistened.

Nothing can happen amiss, thou sorrowful dog!--What can happen amiss?
Are we to form our opinion of things by the romantic notions of a girl,
who supposes that to be the greatest which is the slightest of evils?
Have I not told thee our whole story?  Has she not broken her promise?
Did I not generously spare her, when in my power?  I was decent, though
I had her at such advantage.--Greater liberties have I taken with girls
of character at a common romping 'bout, and all has been laughed off,
and handkerchief and head-clothes adjusted, and petticoats shaken to
rights, in my presence.  Never man, in the like circumstances, and
resolved as I was resolved, goaded on as I was goaded on, as well by her
own sex, as by the impulses of a violent passion, was ever so decent.
Yet what mercy does she show me?

Now, Jack,  this pitiful dog was such another unfortunate one as thyself
--his arguments serving to confirm me in the very purpose he brought them
to prevail upon me to give up.  Had he left me to myself, to the
tenderness of my own nature, moved as I was when the lady withdrew, and
had he set down, and made odious faces, and said nothing--it is very
possible that I should have taken the chair over against him, which she
had quitted, and have cried and blubbered with him for half an hour
together.  But the varlet to argue with me!--to pretend to convince a
man, who knows in is heart that he is doing a wrong thing!--He must needs
think that this would put me upon trying what I could say for myself; and
when the extended compunction can be carried from the heart to the lips
it must evaporate in words.

Thou, perhaps, in this place, wouldst have urged the same pleas that he
urged.  What I answered to him therefore may do for thee, and spare thee
the trouble of writing, and me of reading, a good deal of nonsense.

Capt.   You were pleased to tell me, Sir, that you only proposed to try
her virtue; and that you believed you should actually marry her.

Lovel.   So I shall, and cannot help it.  I have no doubt but I shall.
And as to trying her, is she not now in the height of her trial?  Have I
not reason to think that she is coming about?  Is she not now yielding up
her resentment for an attempt which she thinks she ought not to forgive?
And if she do, may she not forgive the last attempt?--Can she, in a word,
resent that more than she does this?  Women often, for their own sakes,
will keep the last secret; but will ostentatiously din the ears of gods
and men with their clamours upon a successless offer.  It was my folly,
my weakness, that I gave her not more cause for this her unsparing
violence!

Capt.   O Sir, you will never be able to subdue this lady without force.

Lovel.   Well, then, puppy, must I not endeavour to find a proper time
and place--

Capt.   Forgive me, Sir! but can you think of force to such a fine
creature?

Lovel.   Force, indeed, I abhor the thought of; and for what, thinkest
thou, have I taken all the pains I have taken, and engaged so many
persons in my cause, but to avoid the necessity of violent compulsion?
But yet, imaginest thou that I expect direct consent from such a lover of
forms as this lady is known to be!  Let me tell thee, M'Donald, that thy
master, Belford, has urged on thy side of the question all that thou
canst urge.  Must I have every sorry fellow's conscience to pacify, as
well as my own?--By my soul, Patrick, she has a friend here, [clapping my
hand on my breast,] that pleads for her with greater and more
irresistible eloquence than all the men in the world can plead for her.
And had she not escaped me--And yet how have I answered my first design
of trying her,* and in her the virtue of the most virtuous of the sex?--
Perseverance, man!--Perseverance!--What! wouldst thou have me decline a
trial that they make for the honour of a sex we all so dearly love?


* See Vol. III. Letter XVIII.


Then, Sir, you have no thoughts--no thoughts--[looking still more
sorrowfully,] of marrying this wonderful lady?

Yes, yes, Patrick, but I have.  But let me, first, to gratify my pride,
bring down her's.  Let me see, that she loves me well enough to forgive
me for my own sake.  Has she not heretofore lamented that she staid not
in her father's house, though the consequence must have been, if she had,
that she would have been the wife of the odious Solmes?  If now she be
brought to consent to be mine, seest thou not that the reconciliation
with her detested relations is the inducement, as it always was, and not
love of me?--Neither her virtue nor her love can be established but upon
full trial; the last trial--but if her resistance and resentment be such
as hitherto I have reason to expect they will be, and if I find in that
resentment less of hatred of me than of the fact, then shall she be mine
in her own way.  Then, hateful as is the life of shackles to me, will I
marry her.

Well, Sir, I can only say, that I am dough in your hands, to be moulded
into what shape you please.  But if, as I said before--

None of thy Said-before's, Patrick.  I remember all thou saidst--and I
know all thou canst farther say--thou art only, Pontius Pilate like,
washing thine own hands, (don't I know thee?) that thou mayest have
something to silence thy conscience with by loading me.  But we have gone
too far to recede.  Are not all our engines in readiness?  Dry up thy
sorrowful eyes.  Let unconcern and heart's ease once more take possession
of thy solemn features.  Thou hast hitherto performed extremely well.--
Shame not thy past by thy future behaviour; and a rich reward awaits
thee.  If thou art dough be dough; and I slapt him on the shoulder--
Resume but thy former shape, and I'll be answerable for the event.

He bowed assent and compliance; went to the glass; and began to untwist
and unsadden his features; pulled his wig right, as if that, as well as
his head and heart had been discomposed by his compunction, and once more
became old Lucifer's and mine.

But didst thou think, Jack, that there was so much--What-shall-I-call-it?
--in this Tomlinson?  Didst thou imagine that such a fellow as that had
bowels?  That nature, so long dead and buried in him, as to all humane
effects, should thus revive and exert itself?--Yet why do I ask this
question of thee, who, to my equal surprise, hast shown, on the same
occasion, the like compassionate sensibilities?

As to Tomlinson, it looks as if poverty had made him the wicked fellow he
is; as plenty and wantonness have made us what we are.  Necessity, after
all, is the test of principle.  But what is there in this dull word, or
thing, called HONESTY, that even I, who cannot in my present views be
served by it, cannot help thinking even the accidental emanations of it
amiable in Tomlinson, though demonstrated in a female case; and judging
better of him for being capable of such?



LETTER XXXVI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


This debate between the Captain and me was hardly over when the three
women, led by Miss Rawlins, entered, hoping no intrusion, but very
desirous, the maiden said, to know if we were likely to accommodate.

O yes, I hope so.  You know, Ladies, that your sex must, in these cases,
preserve their forms.  They must be courted to comply with their own
happiness.  A lucky expedient we have hit upon.  The uncle has his doubts
of our marriage.  He cannot believe, nor will any body, that it is
possible that a man so much in love, the lady so desirable--

They all took the hint.  It was a very extraordinary case, the two widows
allowed.  Women, Jack, [as I believe I have observed* elsewhere,] have a
high opinion of what they can do for us.  Miss Rawlins desired, if I
pleased, to let them know the expedient; and looked as if there was no
need to proceed in the rest of my speech.


* See Letter XXIV. of this volume.


I begged that they would not let the lady know I had told them what this
expedient was; and they should hear it.

They promised.

It was this: that to oblige and satisfy Mr. Harlowe, the ceremony was to
be again performed.  He was to be privately present, and to give his
niece to me with his own hands--and she was retired to consider of it.

Thou seest, Jack, that I have provided an excuse, to save my veracity to
the women here, in case I should incline to marriage, and she should
choose to have Miss Rawlins's assistance at the ceremony.  Nor doubted I
to bring my fair-one to save my credit on this occasion, if I could get
her to consent to be mine.

A charming expedient! cried the widow.  They were all three ready to clap
their hands for joy upon it.  Women love to be married twice at least,
Jack; though not indeed to the same man.  And all blessed the
reconciliatory scheme and the proposer of it; and, supposing it came from
the Captain, they looked at him with pleasure, while his face shined with
the applause implied.  He should think himself very happy, if he could
bring about a general reconciliation; and he flourished with his head
like my man Will. on his victory over old Grimes; bridling by turns, like
Miss Rawlins in the height of a prudish fit.

But now it was time for the Captain to think of returning to town, having
a great deal of business to dispatch before morning.  Nor was he certain
that he should be able again to attend us at Hampstead before he went
home.

And yet, as every thing was drawing towards a crisis, I did not intend
that he should leave Hampstead that night.

A message to the above effect was carried up, at my desire, by Mrs.
Moore; with the Captain's compliments, and to know if she had any
commands for him to her uncle?

But I hinted to the women, that it would be proper for them to withdraw,
if the lady did come down; lest she should not care to be so free before
them on a proposal so particular, as she would be to us, who had offered
it to her consideration.

Mrs. Moore brought down word that the lady was following her.  They all
three withdrew; and she entered at one door, as they went out at the
other.

The Captain accosted her, repeating the contents of the message sent up;
and desired that she would give him her commands in relation to the
report he was to make to her uncle Harlowe.

I know not what to say, Sir, nor what I would have you to say, to my
uncle--perhaps you may have business in town--perhaps you need not see my
uncle till I have heard from Miss Howe; till after Lady Betty--I don't
know what to say.

I implored the return of that value which she had so generously
acknowledged once to have had for me.  I presumed, I said, to flatter
myself that Lady Betty, in her own person, and in the name of all my
family, would be able, on my promised reformation and contrition, to
prevail in my favour, especially as our prospects in other respects with
regard to the general reconciliation wished for were so happy.  But let
me owe to your own generosity, my dearest creature, said I, rather than
to the mediation of any person on earth, the forgiveness I am an humble
suitor for.  How much more agreeable to yourself, O best beloved of my
soul, must it be, as well as obliging to me, that your first personal
knowledge of my relations, and theirs of you, (for they will not be
denied attending you) should not be begun in recriminations, in appeals?
As Lady Betty will be here soon, it will not perhaps be possible for you
to receive her visit with a brow absolutely serene.  But, dearest,
dearest creature, I beseech you, let the misunderstanding pass as a
slight one--as a misunderstanding cleared up.  Appeals give pride and
superiority to the persons appealed to, and are apt to lessen the
appellant, not only in their eye, but in her own.  Exalt not into judges
those who are prepared to take lessons and instructions from you.  The
individuals of my family are as proud as I am said to be.  But they will
cheerfully resign to your superiority--you will be the first woman of the
family in every one's eyes.

This might have done with any other woman in the world but this; and yet
she is the only woman in the world of whom it may with truth be said.
But thus, angrily, did she disclaim the compliment.

Yes, indeed!--[and there she stopt a moment, her sweet bosom heaving with
a noble disdain]--cheated out of myself from the very first!--A fugitive
from my own family!  Renounced by my relations!  Insulted by you!--Laying
humble claim to the protection of your's!--Is not this the light in which
I must appear not only to the ladies of your family, but to all the
world?--Think you, Sir, that in these circumstances, or even had I been
in the happiest, that I could be affected by this plea of undeserved
superiority?--You are a stranger to the mind of Clarissa Harlowe, if you
think her capable of so poor and so undue a pride!

She went from us to the farther end of the room.

The Captain was again affected--Excellent creature! I called her; and,
reverently approaching her, urged farther the plea I had last made.

It is but lately, said I, that the opinions of my relations have been
more than indifferent to me, whether good or bad; and it is for your
sake, more than for my own, that I now wish to stand well with my whole
family.  The principal motive of Lady Betty's coming up, is, to purchase
presents for the whole family to make on the happy occasion.

This consideration, turning to the Captain, with so noble-minded a dear
creature, I know, can have no weight; only as it will show their value
and respect.  But what a damp would their worthy hearts receive, were
they to find their admired new niece, as they now think her, not only not
their niece, but capable of renouncing me for ever!  They love me.  They
all love me.  I have been guilty of carelessness and levity to them,
indeed; but of carelessness and levity only; and that owing to a pride
that has set me above meanness, though it has not done every thing for
me.

My whole family will be guaranties for my good behaviour to this dear
creature, their niece, their daughter, their cousin, their friend, their
chosen companion and directress, all in one.--Upon my soul, Captain, we
may, we must be happy.

But, dearest, dearest creature, let me on my knees [and down I dropt, her
face all the time turned half from me, as she stood at the window, her
handkerchief often at her eyes] on my knees let me plead your promised
forgiveness; and let us not appear to them, on their visit, thus unhappy
with each other.  Lady Betty, the next hour that she sees you, will write
her opinion of you, and of the likelihood of our future happiness, to
Lady Sarah her sister, a weak-spirited woman, who now hopes to supply to
herself, in my bride, the lost daughter she still mourns for!

The Captain then joined in, and re-urged her uncle's hopes and
expectations, and his resolution effectually to set about the general
reconciliation; the mischief that might be prevented; and the certainty
that there was that her uncle might be prevailed on to give her to me
with his own hand, if she made it her choice to wait for his coming up.
but, for his own part, he humbly advised, and fervently pressed her, to
make the very next day, or Monday at farthest, my happy day.

Permit me, dearest lady, said he, and I could kneel to you myself,
[bending his knee,] though I have no interest in my earnestness, but the
pleasure I should have to be able to serve you all, to beseech you to
give me an opportunity to assure your uncle that I myself saw with my own
eyes the happy knot tied!--All misunderstandings, all doubts, all
diffidences, will then be at an end.

And what, Madam, rejoined I, still kneeling, can there be in your new
measures, be they what they will, that can so happily, so reputably, I
will presume to say, for all around, obviate the present difficulties?

Miss Howe herself, if she love you, and if she love your fame, Madam,
urged the Captain, his knee still bent, must congratulate you on such
happy conclusion.

Then turning her face, she saw the Captain half-kneeling--O Sir!  O Capt.
Tomlinson!--Why this undue condescension? extending her hand to his
elbow, to raise him.  I cannot bear this!--Then casting her eye on me,
Rise, Mr. Lovelace--kneel not to the poor creature whom you have
insulted!--How cruel the occasion for it!--And how mean the submission!

Not mean to such an angel!--Nor can I rise but to be forgiven!

The Captain then re-urged once more the day--he was amazed, he said, if
she ever valued me--

O Captain Tomlinson, interrupted she, how much are you the friend of this
man!--If I had never valued him, he never would have had it in his power
to insult me; nor could I, if I had never regarded him, have taken to
heart as I do, the insult (execrable as it was) so undeservedly, so
ungratefully given--but let him retire--for a moment let him retire.

I was more than half afraid to trust the Captain by himself with her.  He
gave me a sign that I might depend upon him.  And then I took out of my
pocket his letter to me, and Lady Betty's and Miss Montague's, and Lord
M.'s letters (which last she had not then seen); and giving them to him,
procure for me, in the first place, Mr. Tomlinson, a re-perusal of these
three letters; and of this from Lord M.  And I beseech you, my dearest
life, give them due consideration: and let me on my return find the happy
effects of that consideration.

I then withdrew; with slow feet, however, and a misgiving heart.

The Captain insisted upon this re-perusal previously to what she had to
say to him, as he tells me.  She complied, but with some difficulty; as
if she were afraid of being softened in my favour.

She lamented her unhappy situation; destitute of friends, and not knowing
whither to go, or what to do.  She asked questions, sifting-questions,
about her uncle, about her family, and after what he knew of Mr.
Hickman's fruitless application in her favour.

He was well prepared in this particular; for I had shown him the letters
and extracts of letter of Miss Howe, which I had so happily come at.*
Might she be assured, she asked him, that her brother, with Singleton and
Solmes, were actually in quest of her?


* Vol. IV. Letter XLIV.


He averred that they were.

She asked, if he thought I had hopes of prevailing on her to go back to
town?

He was sure I had not.

Was he really of opinion that Lady Betty would pay her a visit?

He had no doubt of it.

But, Sir; but, Captain Tomlinson--[impatiently turning from him, and
again to him] I know not what to do--but were I your daughter, Sir--were
you my own father--Alas! Sir, I have neither father nor mother!

He turned from her and wiped his eyes.

O Sir! you have humanity!  [She wept too.]  There are some men in the
world, thank Heaven, that can be moved.  O Sir, I have met with hard-
hearted men--in my own family too--or I could not have been so unhappy
as I am--but I make every body unhappy!

His eyes no doubt ran over.--

Dearest Madam!  Heavenly Lady!--Who can--who can--hesitated and blubbered
the dog, as he owned.  And indeed I heard some part of what passed,
though they both talked lower than I wished; for, from the nature of
their conversation, there was no room for altitudes.

THEM, and BOTH, and THEY!--How it goes against me to include this angel
of a creature, and any man on earth but myself, in one world!

Capt.   Who can forbear being affected?--But, Madam, you can be no other
man's.

Cl.   Nor would I be.  But he is so sunk with me!--To fire the house!--An
artifice so vile!--contrived for the worst of purposes!--Would you have a
daughter of your's--But what would I say?--Yet you see that I have nobody
in whom I can confide!--Mr. Lovelace is a vindictive man!--He could not
love the creature whom he could insult as he has insulted me!

She paused.  And then resuming--in short, I never, never can forgive him,
nor he me.--Do you think, Sir, I never would have gone so far as I have
gone, if I had intended ever to draw with him in one yoke?--I left behind
me such a letter--

You know, Madam, he has acknowledged the justice of your resentment--

O Sir, he can acknowledge, and he can retract, fifty times a day--but do
not think I am trifling with myself and you, and want to be persuaded to
forgive him, and to be his.  There is not a creature of my sex, who would
have been more explicit, and more frank, than I would have been, from the
moment I intended to be his, had I a heart like my own to deal with.  I
was always above reserve, Sir, I will presume to say, where I had no
cause of doubt.  Mr. Lovelace's conduct has made me appear, perhaps,
over-nice, when my heart wanted to be encouraged and assured! and when,
if it had been so, my whole behaviour would have been governed by it.

She stopt; her handkerchief at her eyes.

I inquired after the minutest part of her behaviour, as well as after her
words.  I love, thou knowest, to trace human nature, and more
particularly female nature, through its most secret recesses.

The pitiful fellow was lost in silent admiration of her.  And thus the
noble creature proceeded.

It is the fate in unequal unions, that tolerable creatures, through them,
frequently incur censure, when more happily yoked they might be entitled
to praise.  And shall I not shun a union with a man, that might lead into
errors a creature who flatters herself that she is blest with an
inclination to be good; and who wishes to make every one happy with whom
she has any connection, even to her very servants?

She paused, taking a turn about the room--the fellow, devil fetch him, a
mummy all the time:--Then proceeded.

Formerly, indeed, I hoped to be an humble mean of reforming him.  But,
when I have no such hope, is it right [you are a serious man, Sir] to
make a venture that shall endanger my own morals?

Still silent was the varlet.  If my advocate had nothing to say for me,
what hope of carrying my cause?

And now, Sir, what is the result of all?--It is this--that you will
endeavour, if you have that influence over him which a man of your sense
and experience ought to have, to prevail upon him, and that for his own
sake, as well as for mine, to leave me free, to pursue my own destiny.
And of this you may assure him, that I will never be any other man's.

Impossible, Madam!  I know that Mr. Lovelace would not hear me with
patience on such a topic.  And I do assure you that I have some spirit,
and should not care to take an indignity from him or from any man living.

She paused--then resuming--and think you, Sir, that my uncle will refuse
to receive a letter from me?  [How averse, Jack, to concede a tittle in
my favour!]

I know, Madam, as matters are circumstanced, that he would not answer it.
If you please I will carry one down from you.

And will he not pursue his intentions in my favour, nor be himself
reconciled to me, except I am married?

From what your brother gives out, and effects to believe, on Mr.
Lovelace's living with you in the same--

No more, Sir--I am an unhappy creature!

He then re-urged, that it would be in her power instantly, or on the
morrow, to put an end to all her difficulties.

How can that be? said she: the license still to be obtained?  The
settlements still to be signed?  Miss Howe's answer to my last
unreceived?--And shall I, Sir, be in such a HURRY, as if I thought my
honour in danger if I delayed?  Yet marry the man from whom only it can
be endangered!--Unhappy, thrice unhappy Clarissa Harlowe!--In how many
difficulties has one rash step involved thee!--And she turned from him
and wept.

The varlet, by way of comfort, wept too: yet her tears, as he might have
observed, were tears that indicated rather a yielding than a perverse
temper.

There is a sort of stone, thou knowest, so soft in the quarry, that it
may in manner be cut with a knife; but if the opportunity not be taken,
and it is exposed to the air for any time, it will become as hard as
marble, and then with difficulty it yields to the chisel.*  So this lady,
not taken at the moment, after a turn or two across the room, gained more
resolution! and then she declared, as she had done once before, that she
would wait the issue of Miss Howe's answer to the letter she had sent her
from hence, and take her measures accordingly--leaving it to him, mean
time, to make what report he thought fit to her uncle--the kindest that
truth could bear, she doubted not from Captain Tomlinson: and she should
be glad of a few lines from him, to hear what that was.


* The nature of the Bath stone, in particular.


She wished him a good journey.  She complained of her head; and was about
to withdraw: but I stept round to the door next the stairs, as if I had
but just come in from the garden (which, as I entered, I called a very
pretty one) and took her reluctant hand as she was going out: My dearest
life, you are not going?--What hopes, Captain?--Have you not some hopes
to give me of pardon and reconciliation?

She said she would not be detained.  But I would not let her go till she
had promised to return, when the Captain had reported to me what her
resolution was.

And when he had, I sent up and claimed her promise; and she came down
again, and repeated (as what she was determined upon) that she would wait
for Miss Howe's answers to the letter she had written to her, and take
her measures according to its contents.

I expostulated with her upon it, in the most submissive and earnest
manner.  She made it necessary for me to repeat many of the pleas I had
before urged.  The Captain seconded me with equal earnestness.  At last,
each fell down on our knees before her.

She was distressed.  I was afraid at one time she would have fainted.
Yet neither of us would rise without some concessions.  I pleaded my own
sake; the Captain, his dear friend, her uncle's; and both re-pleaded the
prevention of future mischief; and the peace and happiness of the two
families.

She owned herself unequal to the conflict.  She sighed.  She sobbed.  She
wept.  She wrung her hands.

I was perfectly eloquent in my vows and protestations.  Her tearful eyes
were cast down upon me; a glow upon each charming cheek; a visible
anguish in every lovely feature--at last, her trembling knees seemed to
fail her, she dropt into the next chair; her charming face, as if seeking
for a hiding place (which a mother's bosom would have best supplied)
sinking upon her own shoulder.

I forgot at the instant all my vows of revenge.  I threw myself at her
feet, as she sat; and, snatching her hand, pressed it with my lips.  I
besought Heaven to forgive my past offences, and prosper my future hopes,
as I designed honourably and justly by the charmer of my heart, if once
more she should restore me to her favour.  And I thought I felt drops of
scalding water [could they be tears?] trickle down upon my cheeks; while
my cheeks, glowing like fire, seemed to scorch up the unwelcome
strangers.

I then arose, not doubting of an implied pardon in this silent distress.
I raised the Captain.  I whispered him--by my soul, man, I am in earnest.
--Now talk of reconciliation, of her uncle, of the license, of settlement
--and raising my voice, If now at last, Captain Tomlinson, my angel will
give me leave to call so great a blessing mine, it will be impossible
that you should say too much to her uncle in praise of my gratitude, my
affection, and fidelity to his charming niece; and he may begin as soon
as he pleases his kind schemes for effecting the desirable
reconciliation!--Nor shall he prescribe any terms to me that I will not
comply with.

The Captain blessed me with his eyes and hands--Thank God! whispered he.
We approached the lady together.

Capt.   What hinders, dearest Madam, what now hinders, but that Lady
Betty Lawrance, when she comes, may be acquainted with the truth of every
thing?  And that then she may assist privately at your nuptials?  I will
stay till they are celebrated; and then shall go down with the happy
tidings to my dear Mr. Harlowe.  And all will, all must, soon be happy.

I must have an answer from Miss Howe, replied the still trembling fair-
one.  I cannot change my new measures but with her advice.  I will
forfeit all my hopes of happiness in this world, rather than forfeit her
good opinion, and that she should think me giddy, unsteady, or
precipitate.  All I shall further say on the present subject is this,
that when I have her answer to what I have written, I will write to her
the whole state of the matter, as I shall then be enabled to do.

Lovel.   Then must I despair for ever!--O Captain Tomlinson, Miss Howe
hates me!--Miss Howe--

Capt.   Not so, perhaps--when Miss Howe knows your concern for having
offended, she will never advise that, with such prospects of general
reconciliation, the hopes of so many considerable persons in both
families should be frustrated.  Some little time, as this excellent
lady had foreseen and hinted, will necessarily be taken up in actually
procuring the license, and in perusing and signing the settlements.  In
that time Miss Howe's answer may be received; and Lady Betty may arrive;
and she, no doubt, will have weight to dissipate the lady's doubts, and
to accelerate the day.  It shall be my part, mean time, to make Mr.
Harlowe easy.  All I fear is from Mr. James Harlowe's quarter; and
therefore all must be conducted with prudence and privacy: as your uncle,
Madam, has proposed.

She was silent, I rejoiced in her silence.  The dear creature, thought I,
has actually forgiven me in her heart!--But why will she not lay me under
obligation to her, by the generosity of an explicit declaration?--And
yet, as that would not accelerate any thing, while the license is not in
my hands, she is the less to be blamed (if I do her justice) for taking
more time to descend.

I proposed, as on the morrow night, to go to town; and doubted not to
bring the license up with me on Monday morning; would she be pleased to
assure me, that she would not depart form Mrs. Moore's.

She should stay at Mrs. Moore's till she had an answer from Miss Howe.

I told her that I hoped I might have her tacit consent at least to the
obtaining of the license.

I saw by the turn of her countenance that I should not have asked this
question.  She was so far from tacitly consenting, that she declared to
the contrary.

As I never intended, I said, to ask her to enter again into a house, with
the people of which she was so much offended, would she be pleased to
give orders for her clothes to be brought up hither?  Or should Dorcas
attend her for any of her commands on that head?

She desired not ever more to see any body belonging to that house.  She
might perhaps get Mrs. Moore or Mrs. Bevis to go thither for her, and
take her keys with them.

I doubted not, I said, that Lady Betty would arrive by that time.  I
hoped she had no objection to my bringing that lady and my cousin
Montague up with me?

She was silent.

To be sure, Mr. Lovelace, said the Captain, the lady can have no
objection to this.

She was still silent.  So silence in this case was assent.

Would she be pleased to write to Miss Howe?--

Sir! Sir! peevishly interrupting--no more questions; no prescribing to me
--you will do as you think fit--so will I, as I please.  I own no
obligation to you.  Captain Tomlinson, your servant.  Recommend me to my
uncle Harlowe's favour.  And was going.

I took her reluctant hand, and besought her only to promise to meet me
early in the morning.

To what purpose meet you?  Have you more to say than has been said?  I
have had enough of vows and protestations, Mr. Lovelace.  To what purpose
should I meet you to-morrow morning?

I repeated my request, and that in the most fervent manner, naming six in
the morning.

'You know that I am always stirring before that hour, at this season of
the year,' was the half-expressed consent.

She then again recommended herself to her uncle's favour; and withdrew.

And thus, Belford, has she mended her markets, as Lord M. would say, and
I worsted mine.  Miss Howe's next letter is now the hinge on which the
fate of both must turn.  I shall be absolutely ruined and undone, if I
cannot intercept it.

END OF VOL.5





End of Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 5 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 5 (OF 9) ***

***** This file should be named 10799.txt or 10799.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/7/9/10799/

Produced by Julie C. Sparks

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Clarissa, Volume 7, by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Clarissa, Volume 7

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: April 4, 2004 [EBook #11889]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 7 ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks.






CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

Nine Volumes
Volume VII.



CONTENTS OF VOLUME VII


LETTER I.  Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Beseeches her to take comfort, and not despair.  Is dreadfully
apprehensive of her own safety from Mr. Lovelace.  An instruction to
mothers.

LETTER II.  Clarissa To Miss Howe.--
Averse as she is to appear in a court of justice against Lovelace, she
will consent to prosecute him, rather than Miss Howe shall live in
terror.  Hopes she shall not despair: but doubts not, from so many
concurrent circumstances, that the blow is given.

LETTER III. IV.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Has no subject worth writing upon now he has lost his Clarissa.  Half in
jest, half in earnest, [as usual with him when vexed or disappointed,] he
deplores the loss of her.--Humourous account of Lord M., of himself, and
of his two cousins Montague.  His Clarissa has made him eyeless and
senseless to every other beauty.

LETTER V. VI. VII. VIII.  From the same.--
Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance arrive, and engage Lord M. and
his two cousins Montague against him, on account of his treatment of the
lady.  His trial, as he calls it.  After many altercations, they obtain
his consent that his two cousins should endeavour to engage Miss Howe to
prevail upon Clarissa to accept of him, on his unfeigned repentance.  It
is some pleasure to him, he however rakishly reflects, to observe how
placable the ladies of his family would have been, had they met with a
Lovelace.  MARRIAGE, says he, with these women, is an atonement for the
worst we can do to them; a true dramatic recompense.  He makes several
other whimsical, but characteristic observations, some of which may serve
as cautions and warnings to the sex.

LETTER IX.  Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Has had a visit from the two Miss Montague's.  Their errand.  Advises her
to marry Lovelace.  Reasons for her advice.

LETTER X.  Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Chides her with friendly impatience for not answering her letter.
Re-urges her to marry Lovelace, and instantly to put herself under Lady
Betty's protection.

LETTER XI.  Miss Howe to Miss Montague.--
In a phrensy of her soul, writes to her to demand news of her beloved
friend, spirited away, as she apprehends, by the base arts of the
blackest of men.

LETTER XII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
The suffering innocent arrested and confined, by the execrable woman, in
a sham action.  He curses himself, and all his plots and contrivances.
Conjures him to fly to her, and clear him of this low, this dirty
villany; to set her free without conditions; and assure her, that he will
never molest her more.  Horribly execrates the diabolical women, who
thought to make themselves a merit with him by this abominable insult.

LETTER XIII. XIV.  Miss Montague to Miss Howe,
with the particulars of all that has happened to the lady.--Mr. Lovelace
the most miserable of men.  Reflections on libertines.  She, her sister,
Lady Betty, Lady Sarah, Lord M., and Lovelace himself, all sign letters
to Miss Howe, asserting his innocence of this horrid insult, and
imploring her continued interest in his and their favour with Clarissa.

LETTER XV.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Particulars of the vile arrest.  Insolent visits of the wicked women to
her.  Her unexampled meekness and patience.  Her fortitude.  He admires
it, and prefers it to the false courage of men of their class.

LETTER XVI.  From the same.--
Goes to the officer's house.  A description of the horrid prison-room,
and of the suffering lady on her knees in one corner of it.  Her great
and moving behaviour.  Breaks off, and sends away his letter, on purpose
to harass him by suspense.

LETTER XVII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Curses him for his tormenting abruption.  Clarissa never suffered half
what he suffers.  That sex made to bear pain.  Conjures him to hasten to
him the rest of his soul-harrowing intelligence.

LETTER XVIII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
His farther proceedings.  The lady returns to her lodgings at Smith's.
Distinction between revenge and resentment in her character.  Sends her,
from the vile women, all her apparel, as Lovelace had desired.

LETTER XIX. Belford to Lovelace.--
Rejoices to find he can feel.  Will endeavour from time to time to add to
his remorse.  Insists upon his promise not to molest the lady.

LETTER XX. From the same.--
Describes her lodgings, and gives a character of the people, and of the
good widow Lovick.  She is so ill, that they provide her an honest nurse,
and send for Mr. Goddard, a worthy apothecary.  Substance of a letter to
Miss Howe, dictated by the lady.

LETTER XXI. From the same.--
Admitted to the lady's presence.  What passed on the occasion.  Really
believes that she still loves him.  Has a reverence, and even a holy love
for her.  Astonished that Lovelace could hold his purposes against such
an angel of a woman.  Condemns him for not timely exerting himself to
save her.

LETTER XXII. From the same.--
Dr. H. called in.  Not having a single guinea to give him, she accepts of
three from Mrs. Lovick on a diamond ring.  Her dutiful reasons for
admitting the doctor's visit.  His engaging and gentlemanly behaviour.
She resolves to part with some of her richest apparel.  Her reasons.

LETTER XXIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Raves at him.  For what.  Rallies him, with his usual gayety, on several
passages in his letters.  Reasons why Clarissa's heart cannot be broken
by what she has suffered.  Passionate girls easily subdued.  Sedate ones
hardly ever pardon.  He has some retrograde motions: yet is in earnest to
marry Clarissa.  Gravely concludes, that a person intending to marry
should never be a rake.  His gay resolutions.  Renews, however, his
promises not to molest her.  A charming encouragement for a man of
intrigue, when a woman is known not to love her husband.  Advantages
which men have over women, when disappointed in love.  He knows she will
permit him to make her amends, after she has plagued him heartily.

LETTER XXIV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Is shocked at receiving a letter from her written by another hand.
Tenderly consoles her, and inveighs against Lovelace.  Re-urges her,
however, to marry him.  Her mother absolutely of her opinion.  Praises
Mr. Hickman's sister, who, with her Lord, had paid her a visit.

LETTER XXV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Her condition greatly mended.  In what particulars.  Her mind begins to
strengthen; and she finds herself at times superior to her calamities.
In what light she wishes her to think of her.  Desires her to love her
still, but with a weaning love.  She is not now what she was when they
were inseparable lovers.  Their views must now be different.

LETTER XXVI. Belford to Lovelace.--
A consuming malady, and a consuming mistress, as in Belton's case,
dreadful things to struggle with.  Farther reflections on the life of
keeping.  The poor man afraid to enter into his own house.  Belford
undertakes his cause.  Instinct in brutes equivalent to natural affection
in men.  Story of the ancient Sarmatians, and their slaves.  Reflects on
the lives of rakes, and free-livers; and how ready they are in sickness
to run away from one another.  Picture of a rake on a sick bed.  Will
marry and desert them all.

LETTER XXVII. From the same.--
The lady parts with some of her laces.  Instances of the worthiness of
Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard.  He severely reflects upon Lovelace.

LETTER XXVIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Has an interview with Mr. Hickman.  On what occasion.  He endeavours to
disconcert him, by assurance and ridicule; but finds him to behave with
spirit.

LETTER XXIX. From the same.--
Rallies him on his intentional reformation.  Ascribes the lady's ill
health entirely to the arrest, (in which, he says, he had no hand,) and
to her relations' cruelty.  Makes light of her selling her clothes and
laces.  Touches upon Belton's case.  Distinguishes between companionship
and friendship.  How he purposes to rid Belton of his Thomasine and her
cubs.

LETTER XXX. Belford to Lovelace.--
The lady has written to her sister, to obtain a revocation of her
father's malediction.  Defends her parents.  He pleads with the utmost
earnestness to her for his friend.

LETTER XXXI. From the same.--
Can hardly forbear prostration to her.  Tenders himself as her banker.
Conversation on this subject.  Admires her magnanimity.  No wonder that a
virtue so solidly based could baffle all his arts.  Other instances of
her greatness of mind.  Mr. Smith and his wife invite him, and beg of her
to dine with them, it being their wedding day.  Her affecting behaviour
on the occasion.  She briefly, and with her usual noble simplicity,
relates to them the particulars of her life and misfortunes.

LETTER XXXII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Ridicules him on his address to the lady as her banker, and on his
aspirations and prostrations.  Wants to come at letters she has written.
Puts him upon engaging Mrs. Lovick to bring this about.  Weight that
proselytes have with the good people that convert them.  Reasons for it.
He has hopes still of the lady's favour; and why.  Never adored her so
much as now.  Is about to go to a ball at Colonel Ambrose's.  Who to be
there.  Censures affectation and finery in the dress of men; and
particularly with a view to exalt himself, ridicules Belford on this
subject.

LETTER XXXIII. XXXIV. XXXV. XXXVI. XXXVII.
Sharp letters that pass between Miss Howe and Arabella Harlowe.

LETTER XXXVIII. Mrs. Harlowe to Mrs. Howe.--
Sent with copies of the five foregoing letters.

LETTER XXXIX. Mrs. Howe to Mrs. Harlowe. In answer.

LETTER XL. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Desires an answer to her former letters for her to communicate to Miss
Montague.  Farther enforces her own and her mother's opinion, that she
should marry Lovelace.  Is obliged by her mother to go to a ball at
Colonel Ambrose's.  Fervent professions of her friendly love.

LETTER XLI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Her noble reasons for refusing Lovelace.  Desires her to communicate
extracts from this letter to the Ladies of his family.

LETTER XLII. From the same.--
Begs, for her sake, that she will forbear treating her relations with
freedom and asperity.  Endeavours, in her usual dutiful manner, to defend
their conduct towards her.  Presses her to make Mr. Hickman happy.

LETTER XLIII. Mrs. Norton to Clarissa.--
Excuses her long silence.  Her family, who were intending to favour her,
incensed against her by means of Miss Howe's warm letters to her sister.

LETTER XLIV. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.--
Is concerned that Miss Howe should write about her to her friends.  Gives
her a narrative of all that has befallen her since her last.  Her truly
christian frame of mind.  Makes reflections worthy of herself, upon her
present situation, and upon her hopes, with regard to a happy futurity.

LETTER XLV.
Copy of Clarissa's humble letter to her sister, imploring the revocation
of her father's heavy malediction.

LETTER XLVI. Belford to Lovelace.--
Defends the lady from the perverseness he (Lovelace) imputes to her on
parting with some of her apparel.  Poor Belton's miserable state both of
body and mind.  Observations on the friendship of libertines.  Admires
the noble simplicity, and natural ease and dignity of style, of the
sacred books.  Expatiates upon the pragmatical folly of man.  Those who
know least, the greatest scoffers.

LETTER XLVII. From the same.--
The lady parts with one of her best suits of clothes.  Reflections upon
such purchasers as take advantage of the necessities of their
fellow-creatures.  Self an odious devil.  A visible alteration in the
lady for the worse.  She gives him all Mr. Lovelace's letters.  He
(Belford) takes this opportunity to plead for him.  Mr. Hickman comes to
visit her.

LETTER XLVIII. From the same.--
Breakfasts next morning with the lady and Mr. Hickman.  His advantageous
opinion of that gentleman.  Censures the conceited pride and
narrow-mindedness of rakes and libertines.  Tender and affecting parting
between Mr. Hickman and the lady.  Observations in praise of intellectual
friendship.

LETTER XLIX. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Has no notion of coldness in friendship.  Is not a daughter of those whom
she so freely treats.  Delays giving the desired negative to the
solicitation of the ladies of Lovelace's family; and why.  Has been
exceedingly fluttered by the appearance of Lovelace at the ball given by
Colonel Ambrose.  What passed on that occasion.  Her mother and all the
ladies of their select acquaintance of opinion that she should accept of
him.

LETTER L. Clarissa. In answer.--
Chides her for suspending the decisive negative.  Were she sure she
should live many years, she would not have Mr. Lovelace.  Censures of the
world to be but of second regard with any body.  Method as to devotion
and exercise she was in when so cruelly arrested.

LETTER LI.  Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Designed to be communicated to Mr. Lovelace's relations.

LETTER LII. LIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Two letters entirely characteristic yet intermingled with lessons and
observations not unworthy of a better character.  He has great hopes from
Miss Howe's mediation in his favour.  Picture of two rakes turned
Hermits, in their penitentials.

LETTER LIV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
She now greatly approves of her rejection of Lovelace.  Admires the noble
example she has given her sex of a passion conquered.  Is sorry she wrote
to Arabella: but cannot imitate her in her self-accusations, and
acquittals of others who are all in fault.  Her notions of a husband's
prerogative.  Hopes she is employing herself in penning down the
particulars of her tragical story.  Use to be made of it to the advantage
of her sex.  Her mother earnest about it.

LETTER LV. Miss Howe to Miss Montague.--
With Clarissa's Letter, No. XLI. of this volume.  Her own sentiments of
the villanous treatment her beloved friend had met with from their
kinsman.  Prays for vengeance upon him, if she do not recover.

LETTER LVI. Mrs. Norton to Clarissa.--
Acquaints her with some of their movements at Harlowe-place.  Almost
wishes she would marry the wicked man; and why.  Useful reflections on
what has befallen a young lady so universally beloved.  Must try to move
her mother in her favour.  But by what means, will not tell her, unless
she succeed.

LETTER LVII. Mrs. Norton to Mrs. Harlowe.

LETTER LVIII. Mrs. Harlowe's affecting answer.

LETTER LIX. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.--
Earnestly begs, for reasons equally generous and dutiful, that she may be
left to her own way of working with her relations.  Has received her
sister's answer to her letter, No. XLV. of this volume.  She tries to
find an excuse for the severity of it, though greatly affected by it.
Other affecting and dutiful reflections.

LETTER LX. Her sister's cruel letter, mentioned in the preceding.

LETTER LXI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Is pleased that she now at last approved of her rejecting Lovelace.
Desires her to be comforted as to her.  Promises that she will not run
away from life.  Hopes she has already got above the shock given her by
the ill treatment she has met with from Lovelace.  Has had an escape,
rather than a loss.  Impossible, were it not for the outrage, that she
could have been happy with him; and why.  Sets in the most affecting, the
most dutiful and generous lights, the grief of her father, mother, and
other relations, on her account.  Had begun the particulars of her
tragical story; but would fain avoid proceeding with it; and why.  Opens
her design to make Mr. Belford her executor, and gives her reasons for
it.  Her father having withdrawn his malediction, she now has only a last
blessing to supplicate for.

LETTER LXII. Clarissa to her sister.--
Beseeching her, in the most humble and earnest manner, to procure her a
last blessing.

LETTER LXIII. Mrs. Norton to Clarissa.--
Mr. Brand to be sent up to inquire after her way of life and health.  His
pedantic character.  Believes they will withhold any favour till they
hear his report.  Doubts not that matters will soon take a happy turn.

LETTER LXIV. Clarissa. In answer.--
The grace she asks for is only a blessing to die with, not to live with.
Their favour, if they design her any, may come too late.  Doubts her
mother can do nothing for her of herself.  A strong confederacy against a
poor girl, their daughter, sister, niece.  Her brother perhaps got it
renewed before he went to Edinburgh.  He needed not, says she: his work
is done, and more than done.

LETTER LXV. Lovelace to Belford.--
Is mortified at receiving letters of rejection.  Charlotte writes to the
lady in his favour, in the name of all the family.  Every body approves
of what she has written; and he has great hopes from it.

LETTER LXVI. Copy of Miss Montague's letter to Clarissa.--
Beseeching her, in the names of all their noble family, to receive
Lovelace to favour.

LETTER LXVII. Belford to Lovelace.--
Proposes to put Belton's sister into possession of Belton's house for
him.  The lady visibly altered for the worse.  Again insists upon his
promise not to molest her.

LETTER LXVIII. Clarissa to Miss Montague.--
In answer to her's, No. LXVI.

LETTER LXIX. Belford to Lovelace.--
Has just now received a letter from the lady, which he encloses,
requesting extracts form the letters written to him by Mr. Lovelace
within a particular period.  The reasons which determine him to oblige
her.

LETTER LXX. Belford to Clarissa.--
With the requested extracts; and a plea in his friend's favour.

LETTER LXXI. Clarissa to Belford.--
Thanks him for his communications.  Requests that he will be her
executor; and gives her reasons for her choice of him for that solemn
office.

LETTER LXXII. Belford to Clarissa.--
His cheerful acceptance of the trust.

LETTER LXXIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
Brief account of the extracts delivered to the lady.  Tells him of her
appointing him her executor.  The melancholy pleasure he shall have in
the perusal of her papers.  Much more lively and affecting, says he, must
be the style of those who write in the height of a present distress than
the dry, narrative, unanimated style of a person relating difficulties
surmounted, can be.

LETTER LXXIV. Arabella to Clarissa.--
In answer to her letter, No. LXII., requesting a last blessing.

LETTER LXXV. Clarissa to her mother.--
Written in the fervour of her spirit, yet with the deepest humility, and
on her knees, imploring her blessing, and her father's, as what will
sprinkle comfort through her last hours.

LETTER LXXVI. Miss Montague to Clarissa.--
In reply to her's, No. LXVIII.--All their family love and admire her.
Their kinsman has not one friend among them.  Beseech her to oblige them
with the acceptance of an annuity, and the first payment now sent her, at
least till she can be put in possession of her own estate.  This letter
signed by Lord M., Lady Sarah, Lady Betty, and her sister and self.

LETTER LXXVII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Raves against the lady for rejecting him; yet adores her the more for it.
Has one half of the house to himself, and that the best; having forbid
Lord M. and the ladies to see him, in return for their forbidding him to
see them.  Incensed against Belford for the extracts he has promised from
his letters.  Is piqued to death at her proud refusal of him.  Curses the
vile women, and their potions.  But for these latter, the majesty of her
virtue, he says, would have saved her, as it did once before.

LETTER LXXVIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
He shall not, he tells him, be her executor.  Nobody shall be any thing
to her but himself.  What a reprobation of a man, who was once so dear to
her!  Farther instances of his raving impatience.

LETTER LXXIX. Lovelace to Clarissa.--
A letter full of penitence, promises, praises, and admiration of her
virtue.  Has no hopes of escaping from perdition but by her precepts and
example.  All he begs for the present is a few lines to encourage him to
hope for forgiveness, if he can justify his vows by his future conduct.

LETTER LXXX. Clarissa to Lord M. and the ladies of the house.--
Thankfully declines accepting of their offered bounty.  Pleads for their
being reconciled to their kinsman, for reasons respecting her own peace.
Hopes that they may be enabled to rejoice in the effects of his
reformation many years after she is laid low and forgotten.

LETTER LXXXI. Belford to Lovelace.--
Brief account of his expelling Thomasine, her sons, and her gallant.
Farther reflections on keeping.  A state not calculated for a sick bed.
Gives a short journal of what had passed relating to the lady since his
last.  Mr. Brand inquires after her character and behaviour of Mrs.
Smith.  His starchedness, conceit, and pedantry.

LETTER LXXXII. From the same.--
Farther particulars relating to the lady.  Power left her by her
grandfather's will.

LETTER LXXXIII. Clarissa to Lovelace.--
In answer to his letter, No. LXXIX.

LETTER LXXXIV. Her uncle Harlowe's cruel answer,
in answer to her's to her mother, No. LXXV.  Meditation stitched to it
with black silk.

LETTER LXXXV. Clarissa to her uncle Harlowe. In reply.




THE HISTORY

OF

CLARISSA HARLOWE



LETTER I

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WED. NIGHT, JULY 12.


I write, my dearest creature, I cannot but write, to express my concern
on your dejection.  Let me beseech you, my charming excellence, let me
beseech you, not to give way to it.

Comfort yourself, on the contrary, in the triumphs of a virtue unsullied;
a will wholly faultless.  Who could have withstood the trials you have
surmounted?--Your cousin Morden will soon come.  He will see justice done
you, I make no doubt, as well with regard to what concerns your person as
your estate.  And many happy days may you yet see; and much good may you
still do, if you will not heighten unavoidable accidents into guilty
despondency.

But why, why, my dear, this pining solicitude continued after a
reconciliation with relations as unworthy as implacable; whose wills are
governed by an all-grasping brother, who finds his account in keeping the
breach open?  On this over-solicitude it is now plain to me, that the
vilest of men built all his schemes.  He saw that you thirsted after it
beyond all reason for hope.  The view, the hope, I own, extremely
desirable, had your family been Christians: or even had they been Pagans
who had had bowels.

I shall send this short letter [I am obliged to make it a short one] by
young Rogers, as we call him; the fellow I sent to you to Hampstead; an
innocent, though pragmatical rustic.  Admit him, I pray you, into you
presence, that he may report to me how you look, and how you are.

Mr. Hickman should attend you; but I apprehend, that all his motions, and
mine own too, are watched by the execrable wretch: and indeed his are by
an agent of mine; for I own, that I am so apprehensive of his plots and
revenge, now I know that he has intercepted my vehement letters against
him, that he is the subject of my dreams, as well as of my waking fears.


***


My mother, at my earnest importunity, has just given me leave to write,
and to receive your letters--but fastened this condition upon the
concession, that your's must be under cover to Mr. Hickman, [this is a
view, I suppose, to give him consideration with me]; and upon this
further consideration, that she is to see all we write.--'When girls are
set upon a point,' she told one who told me again, 'it is better for a
mother, if possible, to make herself of their party, than to oppose them;
since there will be then hopes that she will still hold the reins in her
own hands.'

Pray let me know what the people are with whom you lodge?--Shall I send
Mrs. Townsend to direct you to lodgings either more safe or more
convenient for you?

Be pleased to write to me by Rogers; who will wait on you for your
answer, at your own time.

Adieu, my dearest creature.  Comfort yourself, as you would in the like
unhappy circumstances comfort

Your own
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER II

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 13.


I am extremely concerned, my dear Miss Howe, for being primarily the
occasion of the apprehensions you have of this wicked man's vindictive
attempts.  What a wide-spreading error is mine!----

If I find that he has set foot on any machination against you, or against
Mr. Hickman, I do assure you I will consent to prosecute him, although I
were sure I could not survive my first appearance at the bar he should be
arraigned at.

I own the justice of your mother's arguments on that subject; but must
say, that I think there are circumstances in my particular case, which
will excuse me, although on a slighter occasion than that you are
apprehensive of I should decline to appear against him.  I have said,
that I may one day enter more particularly into this argument.

Your messenger has now indeed seen me.  I talked with him on the cheat
put upon him at Hampstead: and am sorry to have reason to say, that had
not the poor young man been very simple, and very self-sufficient, he had
not been so grossly deluded.  Mrs. Bevis has the same plea to make for
herself.  A good-natured, thoughtless woman; not used to converse with so
vile and so specious a deceiver as him, who made his advantage of both
these shallow creatures.

I think I cannot be more private than where I am.  I hope I am safe.  All
the risque I run, is in going out, and returning from morning-prayers;
which I have two or three times ventured to do; once at Lincoln's-inn
chapel, at eleven; once at St. Dunstan's, Fleet-street, at seven in the
morning,* in a chair both times; and twice, at six in the morning, at the
neighbouring church in Covent-garden.  The wicked wretches I have escaped
from, will not, I hope, come to church to look for me; especially at so
early prayers; and I have fixed upon the privatest pew in the latter
church to hide myself in; and perhaps I may lay out a little matter in an
ordinary gown, by way of disguise; my face half hid by my mob.--I am very
careless, my dear, of my appearance now.  Neat and clean takes up the
whole of my attention.


* The seven-o'clock prayers at St. Dunstan's have been since
discontinued.


The man's name at whose house I belong, is Smith--a glove maker, as well
as seller. His wife is the shop-keeper.  A dealer also in stockings,
ribbands, snuff, and perfumes.  A matron-like woman, plain-hearted, and
prudent.  The husband an honest, industrious man.  And they live in good
understanding with each other: a proof with me that their hearts are
right; for where a married couple live together upon ill terms, it is a
sign, I think, that each knows something amiss of the other, either with
regard to temper or morals, which if the world knew as well as
themselves, it would perhaps as little like them as such people like each
other.  Happy the marriage, where neither man nor wife has any wilful or
premeditated evil in their general conduct to reproach the other with!--
for even persons who have bad hearts will have a veneration for those who
have good ones.

Two neat rooms, with plain, but clean furniture, on the first floor, are
mine; one they call the dining-room.

There is, up another pair of stairs, a very worthy widow-lodger, Mrs.
Lovick by name; who, although of low fortunes, is much respected, as Mrs.
Smith assures me, by people of condition of her acquaintance, for her
piety, prudence, and understanding.  With her I propose to be well
acquainted.

I thank you, my dear, for your kind, your seasonable advice and
consolation.  I hope I shall have more grace given me than to despond, in
the religious sense of the word: especially as I can apply to myself the
comfort you give me, that neither my will, nor my inconsiderateness, has
contributed to my calamity.  But, nevertheless, the irreconcilableness of
my relations, whom I love with an unabated reverence; my apprehensions of
fresh violences, [this wicked man, I doubt, will not let me rest]; my
being destitute of protection; my youth, my sex, my unacquaintedness with
the world, subjecting me to insults; my reflections on the scandal I have
given, added to the sense of the indignities I have received from a man,
of whom I deserved not ill; all together will undoubtedly bring on the
effect that cannot be undesirable to me.--The situation; and, as I
presume to imagine, from principles which I hope will, in due time, and
by due reflection, set me above the sense of all worldly disappointments.

At present, my head is much disordered.  I have not indeed enjoyed it
with any degree of clearness, since the violence done to that, and to my
heart too, by the wicked arts of the abandoned creatures I was cast
among.

I must have more conflicts.  At times I find myself not subdued enough to
my condition.  I will welcome those conflicts as they come, as
probationary ones.--But yet my father's malediction--the temporary part
so strangely and so literally completed!--I cannot, however, think, when
my mind is strongest--But what is the story of Isaac, and Jacob, and
Esau, and of Rebekah's cheating the latter of the blessing designed for
him, (in favour of Jacob,) given us for in the 27th chapter of Genesis?
My father used, I remember, to enforce the doctrine deducible from it, on
his children, by many arguments.  At least, therefore, he must believe
there is great weight in the curse he has announced; and shall I not be
solicitous to get it revoked, that he may not hereafter be grieved, for
my sake, that he did not revoke it?

All I will at present add, are my thanks to your mother for her
indulgence to us; due compliments to Mr. Hickman; and my request, that
you will believe me to be, to my last hour, and beyond it, if possible,
my beloved friend, and my dearer self (for what is now myself!)

Your obliged and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER III

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JULY 7.


I have three of thy letters at once before me to answer; in each of which
thou complainest of my silence; and in one of them tallest me, that thou
canst not live without I scribble to thee every day, or every other day
at least.

Why, then, die, Jack, if thou wilt.  What heart, thinkest thou, can I
have to write, when I have lost the only subject worth writing upon?

Help me again to my angel, to my CLARISSA; and thou shalt have a letter
from me, or writing at least part of a letter, every hour.  All that the
charmer of my heart shall say, that will I put down.  Every motion, every
air of her beloved person, every look, will I try to describe; and when
she is silent, I will endeavour to tell thee her thoughts, either what
they are, or what I would have them to be--so that, having her, I shall
never want a subject.  Having lost her, my whole soul is a blank: the
whole creation round me, the elements above, beneath, and every thing I
behold, (for nothing can I enjoy,) are a blank without her.

Oh! return, return, thou only charmer of my soul! return to thy adoring
Lovelace!  What is the light, what the air, what the town, what the
country, what's any thing, without thee?  Light, air, joy, harmony, in my
notion, are but parts of thee; and could they be all expressed in one
word, that word would be CLARISSA.

O my beloved CLARISSA, return thou then; once more return to bless thy
LOVELACE, who now, by the loss of thee, knows the value of the jewel he
has slighted; and rises every morning but to curse the sun that shines
upon every body but him!


***


Well, but, Jack, 'tis a surprising thing to me, that the dear fugitive
cannot be met with; cannot be heard of.  She is so poor a plotter, (for
plotting is not her talent,) that I am confident, had I been at liberty,
I should have found her out before now; although the different emissaries
I have employed about town, round the adjacent villages, and in Miss
Howe's vicinage, have hitherto failed of success.  But my Lord continues
so weak and low-spirited, that there is no getting from him.  I would not
disoblige a man whom I think in danger still: for would his gout, now it
has got him down, but give him, like a fair boxer, the rising-blow, all
would be over with him.  And here [pox of his fondness for me! it happens
at a very bad time] he makes me sit hours together entertaining him with
my rogueries: (a pretty amusement for a sick man!) and yet, whenever he
has the gout, he prays night and morning with his chaplain.  But what
must his notions of religion be, who after he has nosed and mumbled over
his responses, can give a sigh or groan of satisfaction, as if he thought
he had made up with Heaven; and return with a new appetite to my stories?
--encouraging them, by shaking his sides with laughing at them, and
calling me a sad fellow, in such an accent as shows he takes no small
delight in his kinsman.

The old peer has been a sinner in his day, and suffers for it now: a
sneaking sinner, sliding, rather than rushing into vices, for fear of his
reputation.--Paying for what he never had, and never daring to rise to
the joy of an enterprise at first hand, which could bring him within view
of a tilting, or of the honour of being considered as a principal man in
a court of justice.

To see such an old Trojan as this, just dropping into the grave, which I
hoped ere this would have been dug, and filled up with him; crying out
with pain, and grunting with weakness; yet in the same moment crack his
leathern face into an horrible laugh, and call a young sinner charming
varlet, encoreing him, as formerly he used to do to the Italian eunuchs;
what a preposterous, what an unnatural adherence to old habits!

My two cousins are generally present when I entertain, as the old peer
calls it.  Those stories must drag horribly, that have not more hearers
and applauders than relaters.

Applauders!

Ay, Belford, applauders, repeat I; for although these girls pretend to
blame me sometimes for the facts, they praise my manner, my invention, my
intrepidity.--Besides, what other people call blame, that call I praise:
I ever did; and so I very early discharged shame, that cold-water damper
to an enterprising spirit.

These are smart girls; they have life and wit; and yesterday, upon
Charlotte's raving against me upon a related enterprise, I told her, that
I had had in debate several times, whether she were or were not too near
of kin to me: and that it was once a moot point with me, whether I could
not love her dearly for a month or so: and perhaps it was well for her,
that another pretty little puss started up, and diverted me, just as I
was entering upon the course.

They all three held up their hands and eyes at once.  But I observed
that, though the girls exclaimed against me, they were not so angry at
this plain speaking as I have found my beloved upon hints so dark that
I have wondered at her quick apprehension.

I told Charlotte, that, grave as she pretended to be in her smiling
resentments on this declaration, I was sure I should not have been put to
the expense of above two or three stratagems, (for nobody admired a good
invention more than she,) could I but have disentangled her conscience
from the embarrasses of consanguinity.

She pretended to be highly displeased: so did her sister for her.  I told
her, she seemed as much in earnest as if she had thought me so; and dared
the trial.  Plain words, I said, in these cases, were more shocking to
their sex than gradatim actions.  And I bid Patty not be displeased at my
distinguishing her sister; since I had a great respect for her likewise.

An Italian air, in my usual careless way, a half-struggled-for kiss from
me, and a shrug of the shoulder, by way of admiration, from each pretty
cousin, and sad, sad fellow, from the old peer, attended with a
side-shaking laugh, made us all friends.

There, Jack!--Wilt thou, or wilt thou not, take this for a letter?
there's quantity, I am sure.--How have I filled a sheet (not a short-hand
one indeed) without a subject!  My fellow shall take this; for he is
going to town.  And if thou canst think tolerably of such execrable
stuff, I will send thee another.



LETTER IV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SIX, SATURDAY MORNING, JULY 8.


Have I nothing new, nothing diverting, in my whimsical way, thou askest,
in one of thy three letters before me, to entertain thee with?--And thou
tallest me, that, when I have least to narrate, to speak, in the Scottish
phrase, I am most diverting.  A pretty compliment, either to thyself, or
to me.  To both indeed!--a sign that thou hast as frothy a heart as I a
head.  But canst thou suppose that this admirable woman is not all, is
not every thing with me?  Yet I dread to think of her too; for detection
of all my contrivances, I doubt, must come next.

The old peer is also full of Miss Harlowe: and so are my cousins.  He
hopes I will not be such a dog [there's a specimen of his peer-like
dialect] as to think of doing dishonourably by a woman of so much merit,
beauty, and fortune; and he says of so good a family.  But I tell him,
that this is a string he must not touch: that it is a very tender point:
in short, is my sore place; and that I am afraid he would handle it too
roughly, were I to put myself in the power of so ungentle an operator.

He shakes his crazy head.  He thinks all is not as it should be between
us; longs to have me present her to him as my wife; and often tells me
what great things he will do, additional to his former proposals; and
what presents he will make on the birth of the first child.  But I hope
the whole of his estate will be in my hands before such an event takes
place.  No harm in hoping, Jack!  Lord M. says, were it not for hope, the
heart would break.


***


Eight o'clock at Midsummer, and these lazy varletesses (in full health)
not come down yet to breakfast!--What a confounded indecency in young
ladies, to let a rake know that they love their beds so dearly, and, at
the same time, where to have them!  But I'll punish them--they shall
breakfast with their old uncle, and yawn at one another as if for a
wager; while I drive my phaeton to Colonel Ambroses's, who yesterday gave
me an invitation both to breakfast and dine, on account of two Yorkshire
nieces, celebrated toasts, who have been with him this fortnight past;
and who, he says, want to see me.  So, Jack, all women do not run away
from me, thank Heaven!--I wish I could have leave of my heart, since the
dear fugitive is so ungrateful, to drive her out of it with another
beauty.  But who can supplant her?  Who can be admitted to a place in it
after Miss Clarissa Harlowe?

At my return, if I can find a subject, I will scribble on, to oblige
thee.

My phaeton's ready.  My cousins send me word they are just coming down:
so in spite I'll be gone.


SATURDAY AFTERNOON.

I did stay to dine with the Colonel, and his lady, and nieces: but I
could not pass the afternoon with them, for the heart of me.  There was
enough in the persons and faces of the two young ladies to set me upon
comparisons.  Particular features held my attention for a few moments:
but these served but to whet my impatience to find the charmer of my
soul; who, for person, for air, for mind, never had any equal.  My heart
recoiled and sickened upon comparing minds and conversation.  Pert wit, a
too-studied desire to please; each in high good humour with herself; an
open-mouth affectation in both, to show white teeth, as if the principal
excellence; and to invite amorous familiarity, by the promise of a sweet
breath; at the same time reflecting tacitly upon breaths arrogantly
implied to be less pure.

Once I could have borne them.

They seemed to be disappointed that I was so soon able to leave them.
Yet have I not at present so much vanity [my Clarissa has cured me of my
vanity] as to attribute their disappointment so much to particular liking
of me, as to their own self-admiration.  They looked upon me as a
connoisseur in beauty.  They would have been proud of engaging my
attention, as such: but so affected, so flimsy-witted, mere skin-deep
beauties!--They had looked no farther into themselves than what their
glasses were flattering-glasses too; for I thought them passive-faced,
and spiritless; with eyes, however, upon the hunt for conquests, and
bespeaking the attention of others, in order to countenance their own.
----I believe I could, with a little pains, have given them life and
soul, and to every feature of their faces sparkling information--but my
Clarissa!--O Belford, my Clarissa has made me eyeless and senseless to
every other beauty!--Do thou find her for me, as a subject worthy of my
pen, or this shall be the last from

Thy
LOVELACE.




LETTER V

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT, JULY 9.


Now, Jack, have I a subject with a vengeance.  I am in the very height of
my trial for all my sins to my beloved fugitive.  For here to-day, at
about five o'clock, arrived Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance,
each in her chariot-and-six.  Dowagers love equipage; and these cannot
travel ten miles without a sett, and half a dozen horsemen.

My time had hung heavy upon my hands; and so I went to church after
dinner.  Why may not handsome fellows, thought I, like to be looked at,
as well as handsome wenches?  I fell in, when service was over, with
Major Warneton; and so came not home till after six; and was surprised,
at entering the court-yard here, to find it littered with equipages and
servants.  I was sure the owners of them came for no good to me.

Lady Sarah, I soon found, was raised to this visit by Lady Betty; who has
health enough to allow her to look out to herself, and out of her own
affairs, for business.  Yet congratulation to Lord M. on his amendment,
[spiteful devils on both accounts!] was the avowed errand.  But coming in
my absence, I was their principal subject; and they had opportunity to
set each other's heart against me.

Simon Parsons hinted this to me, as I passed by the steward's office; for
it seems they talked loud; and he was making up some accounts with old
Pritchard.

However, I hastened to pay my duty to them--other people not performing
theirs, is no excuse for the neglect of our own, you know.


      And now I enter upon my TRIAL.


With horrible grave faces was I received.  The two antiquities only bowed
their tabby heads; making longer faces than ordinary; and all the old
lines appearing strong in their furrowed foreheads and fallen cheeks; How
do you, Cousin?  And how do you, Mr. Lovelace? looking all round at one
another, as who should say, do you speak first: and, do you: for they
seemed resolved to lose no time.

I had nothing for it, but an air as manly, as theirs was womanly.  Your
servant, Madam, to Lady Betty; and, Your servant, Madam, I am glad to see
you abroad, to Lady Sarah.

I took my seat.  Lord M. looked horribly glum; his fingers claspt, and
turning round and round, under and over, his but just disgouted thumb;
his sallow face, and goggling eyes, on his two kinswomen, by turns; but
not once deigning to look upon me.

Then I began to think of the laudanum, and wet cloth, I told thee of long
ago; and to call myself in question for a tenderness of heart that will
never do me good.

At last, Mr. Lovelace!----Cousin Lovelace!----Hem!--Hem!--I am sorry,
very sorry, hesitated Lady Sarah, that there is no hope of your ever
taking up----

What's the matter now, Madam?

The matter now!----Why Lady Betty has two letters from Miss Harlowe,
which have told us what's the matter----Are all women alike with you?

Yes; I could have answered; 'bating the difference which pride makes.

Then they all chorus'd upon me--Such a character as Miss Harlowe's!
cried one----A lady of so much generosity and good sense!  Another--How
charmingly she writes! the two maiden monkeys, looking at her find
handwriting: her perfections my crimes.  What can you expect will be the
end of these things! cried Lady Sarah--d----d, d----d doings! vociferated
the Peer, shaking his loose-fleshe'd wabbling chaps, which hung on his
shoulders like an old cow's dewlap.

For my part, I hardly knew whether to sing or say what I had to reply to
these all-at-once attacks upon me!-Fair and softly, Ladies--one at a
time, I beseech you.  I am not to be hunted down without being heard, I
hope.  Pray let me see these letters.  I beg you will let me see them.

There they are:--that's the first--read it out, if you can.

I opened a letter from my charmer, dated Thursday, June 29, our
wedding-day, that was to be, and written to Lady Betty Lawrance.  By the
contents, to my great joy, I find the dear creature is alive and well,
and in charming spirits.  But the direction where to send an answer to
was so scratched out that I could not read it; which afflicted me much.

She puts three questions in it to Lady Betty.

1st.  About a letter of her's, dated June 7, congratulating me on my
nuptials, and which I was so good as to save Lady Betty the trouble of
writing----A very civil thing of me, I think!

Again--'Whether she and one of her nieces Montague were to go to town, on
an old chancery suit?'--And, 'Whether they actually did go to town
accordingly, and to Hampstead afterwards?' and, 'Whether they brought to
town from thence the young creature whom they visited?' was the subject
of the second and third questions.

A little inquisitive, dear rogue! and what did she expect to be the
better for these questions?----But curiosity, d----d curiosity, is the
itch of the sex--yet when didst thou know it turned to their benefit?--
For they seldom inquire, but what they fear--and the proverb, as my Lord
has it, says, It comes with a fear.  That is, I suppose, what they fear
generally happens, because there is generally occasion for the fear.

Curiosity indeed she avows to be her only motive for these
interrogatories: for, though she says her Ladyship may suppose the
questions are not asked for good to me, yet the answer can do me no harm,
nor her good, only to give her to understand, whether I have told her a
parcel of d----d lyes; that's the plain English of her inquiry.

Well, Madam, said I, with as much philosophy as I could assume; and may I
ask--Pray, what was your Ladyship's answer?

There's a copy of it, tossing it to me, very disrespectfully.

This answer was dated July 1.  A very kind and complaisant one to the
lady, but very so-so to her poor kinsman--That people can give up their
own flesh and blood with so much ease!--She tells her 'how proud all our
family would be of an alliance with such an excellence.'  She does me
justice in saying how much I adore her, as an angel of a woman; and begs
of her, for I know not how many sakes, besides my soul's sake, 'that she
will be so good as to have me for a husband:' and answers--thou wilt
guess how--to the lady's questions.

Well, Madam; and pray, may I be favoured with the lady's other letter?
I presume it is in reply to your's.

It is, said the Peer: but, Sir, let me ask you a few questions, before
you read it--give me the letter, Lady Betty.

There it is, my Lord.

Then on went the spectacles, and his head moved to the lines--a charming
pretty hand!--I have often heard that this lady is a genius.

And so, Jack, repeating my Lord's wise comments and questions will let
thee into the contents of this merciless letter.

'Monday, July 3,' [reads my Lord.]--Let me see!--that was last Monday; no
longer ago!  'Monday, July the third--Madam--I cannot excuse myself'--um,
um, um, um, um, um, [humming inarticulately, and skipping,]--'I must own
to you, Madam, that the honour of being related'----

Off went the spectacles--Now, tell me, Sir-r, Has not this lady lost all
the friends she had in the world for your sake?

She has very implacable friends, my Lord: we all know that.

But has she not lost them all for your sake?--Tell me that.

I believe so, my Lord.

Well then!--I am glad thou art not so graceless as to deny that.

On went the spectacles again--'I must own to you, Madam, that the honour
of being related to ladies as eminent for their virtue as for their
descent.'--Very pretty, truly! saith my Lord, repeating, 'as eminent for
their virtue as for their descent, was, at first, no small inducement
with me to lend an ear to Mr. Lovelace's address.'

There is dignity, born-dignity, in this lady, cried my Lord.

Lady Sarah.   She would have been a grace to our family.

Lady Betty.   Indeed she would.

Lovel.   To a royal family, I will venture to say.

Lord M.   Then what a devil---

Lovel.   Please to read on, my Lord.  It cannot be her letter, if it does
not make you admire her more and more as you read.  Cousin Charlotte,
Cousin Patty, pray attend----Read on, my Lord.

Miss Charlotte.   Amazing fortitude!

Miss Patty only lifted up her dove's eyes.

Lord M.   [Reading.]  'And the rather, as I was determined, had it come
to effect, to do every thing in my power to deserve your favourable
opinion.'

Then again they chorus'd upon me!

A blessed time of it, poor I!--I had nothing for it but impudence!

Lovel.   Pray read on, my Lord--I told you how you would all admire her
----or, shall I read?

Lord M.   D----d assurance!  [Then reading.]  'I had another motive,
which I knew would of itself give me merit with your whole family: [they
were all ear:] a presumptuous one; a punishably-presumptuous one, as it
has proved: in the hope that I might be an humble mean, in the hand of
Providence, to reclaim a man who had, as I thought, good sense enough at
bottom to be reclaimed; or at least gratitude enough to acknowledge the
intended obligation, whether the generous hope were to succeed or not.'
--Excellent young creature!--

Excellent young creature! echoed the Ladies, with their handkerchiefs at
their eyes, attended with music.

Lovel.   By my soul, Miss Patty, you weep in the wrong place: you shall
never go with me to a tragedy.

Lady Betty.   Hardened wretch.

His Lordship had pulled off his spectacles to wipe them.  His eyes were
misty; and he thought the fault in his spectacles.

I saw they were all cocked and primed--to be sure that is a very pretty
sentence, said I----that is the excellency of this lady, that in every
line, as she writes on, she improves upon herself.  Pray, my Lord,
proceed--I know her style; the next sentence will still rise upon us.

Lord M.   D----d fellow!  [Again saddling, and reading.]  'But I have
been most egregiously mistaken in Mr. Lovelace!'  [Then they all
clamoured again.]--'The only man, I persuade myself'----

Lovel.   Ladies may persuade themselves to any thing: but how can she
answer for what other men would or would not have done in the same
circumstances?

I was forced to say any thing to stifle their outcries.  Pox take ye
altogether, thought I; as if I had not vexation enough in losing her!

Lord M.   [Reading.]  'The only man, I persuade myself, pretending to be
a gentleman, in whom I could have been so much mistaken.'

They were all beginning again--Pray, my Lord, proceed!--Hear, hear--pray,
Ladies, hear!--Now, my Lord, be pleased to proceed.  The Ladies are
silent.

So they were; lost in admiration of me, hands and eyes uplifted.

Lord M.   I will, to thy confusion; for he had looked over the next
sentence.

What wretches, Belford, what spiteful wretches, are poor mortals!--So
rejoiced to sting one another! to see each other stung!

Lord M.   [Reading.]  'For while I was endeavouring to save a drowning
wretch, I have been, not accidentally, but premeditatedly, and of set
purpose, drawn in after him.'--What say you to that, Sir-r?

Lady S. |  Ay, Sir, what say you to this?
Lady B. |

Lovel.   Say!  Why I say it is a very pretty metaphor, if it would but
hold.--But, if you please, my Lord, read on.  Let me hear what is further
said, and I will speak to it all together.

Lord M.   I will.  'And he has had the glory to add to the list of those
he has ruined, a name that, I will be bold to say, would not have
disparaged his own.'

They all looked at me, as expecting me to speak.

Lovel.   Be pleased to proceed, my Lord: I will speak to this by-and-by--
How came she to know I kept a list?--I will speak to this by-and-by.

Lord M.   [Reading on.]  'And this, Madam, by means that would shock
humanity to be made acquainted with.'

Then again, in a hurry, off went the spectacles.

This was a plaguy stroke upon me.  I thought myself an oak in impudence;
but, by my troth, this almost felled me.

Lord M.   What say you to this, SIR-R!

Remember, Jack, to read all their Sirs in this dialogue with a double rr,
Sir-r! denoting indignation rather than respect.

They all looked at me as if to see if I could blush.

Lovel.   Eyes off, my Lord!----Eyes off, Ladies!  [Looking bashfully, I
believe.]--What say I to this, my Lord!--Why, I say, that this lady has a
strong manner of expressing herself!--That's all.--There are many things
that pass among lovers, which a man cannot explain himself upon before
grave people.

Lady Betty.   Among lovers, Sir-r!  But, Mr. Lovelace, can you say that
this lady behaved either like a weak, or a credulous person?--Can you say--

Lovel.   I am ready to do the lady all manner of justice.--But, pray now,
Ladies, if I am to be thus interrogated, let me know the contents of the
rest of the letter, that I may be prepared for my defence, as you are all
for my arraignment.  For, to be required to answer piecemeal thus,
without knowing what is to follow, is a cursed ensnaring way of
proceeding.

They gave me the letter: I read it through to myself:--and by the
repetition of what I said, thou wilt guess at the remaining contents.

You shall find, Ladies, you shall find, my Lord, that I will not spare
myself.  Then holding the letter in my hand, and looking upon it, as a
lawyer upon his brief,

Miss Harlowe says, 'That when your Ladyship,' [turning to Lady Betty,]
'shall know, that, in the progress to her ruin, wilful falsehoods,
repeated forgeries, and numberless perjuries, were not the least of my
crimes, you will judge that she can have no principles that will make her
worthy of an alliance with ladies of your's, and your noble sister's
character, if she could not, from her soul, declare, that such an
alliance can never now take place.'

Surely, Ladies, this is passion!  This is not reason.  If our family
would not think themselves dishonoured by my marrying a person whom I had
so treated; but, on the contrary, would rejoice that I did her this
justice: and if she has come out pure gold from the assay; and has
nothing to reproach herself with; why should it be an impeachment of her
principles, to consent that such an alliance take place?

She cannot think herself the worse, justly she cannot, for what was done
against her will.

Their countenances menaced a general uproar--but I proceeded.

Your Lordship read to us, that she had an hope, a presumptuous one: nay,
a punishably-presumptuous one, she calls it; 'that she might be a mean,
in the hand of Providence, to reclaim me; and that this, she knew, if
effected, would give her a merit with you all.'  But from what would she
reclaim me?--She had heard, you'll say, (but she had only heard, at the
time she entertained that hope,) that, to express myself in the women's
dialect, I was a very wicked fellow!--Well, and what then?--Why, truly,
the very moment she was convinced, by her own experience, that the charge
against me was more than hearsay; and that, of consequence, I was a fit
subject for her generous endeavours to work upon; she would needs give me
up.  Accordingly, she flies out, and declares, that the ceremony which
would repair all shall never take place!--Can this be from any other
motive than female resentment?

This brought them all upon me, as I intended it should: it was as a tub
to a whale; and after I had let them play with it a while, I claimed
their attention, and, knowing that they always loved to hear me prate,
went on.

The lady, it is plain, thought, that the reclaiming of a man from bad
habits was a much easier task than, in the nature of things, it can be.

She writes, as your Lordship has read, 'That, in endeavouring to save a
drowning wretch, she had been, not accidentally, but premeditatedly, and
of set purpose, drawn in after him.'  But how is this, Ladies?--You see
by her own words, that I am still far from being out of danger myself.
Had she found me, in a quagmire suppose, and I had got out of it by her
means, and left her to perish in it; that would have been a crime indeed.
--But is not the fact quite otherwise?  Has she not, if her allegory
prove what she would have it prove, got out herself, and left me
floundering still deeper and deeper in?--What she should have done, had
she been in earnest to save me, was, to join her hand with mine, that so
we might by our united strength help one another out.--I held out my hand
to her, and besought her to give me her's:--But, no truly! she was
determined to get out herself as fast as she could, let me sink or swim:
refusing her assistance (against her own principles) because she saw I
wanted it.--You see, Ladies, you see, my Lord, how pretty tinkling words
run away with ears inclined to be musical.

They were all ready to exclaim again: but I went on, proleptically, as a
rhetorician would say, before their voices would break out into words.

But my fair accuser says, that, 'I have added to the list of those I have
ruined, a name that would not have disparaged my own.'  It is true, I
have been gay and enterprising.  It is in my constitution to be so.  I
know not how I came by such a constitution: but I was never accustomed to
check or controul; that you all know.  When a man finds himself hurried
by passion into a slight offence, which, however slight, will not be
forgiven, he may be made desperate: as a thief, who only intends a
robbery, is often by resistance, and for self-preservation, drawn in to
commit murder.

I was a strange, a horrid wretch, with every one.  But he must be a silly
fellow who has not something to say for himself, when every cause has its
black and its white side.--Westminster-hall, Jack, affords every day as
confident defences as mine.

But what right, proceeded I, has this lady to complain of me, when she as
good as says--Here, Lovelace, you have acted the part of a villain by me!
--You would repair your fault: but I won't let you, that I may have the
satisfaction of exposing you; and the pride of refusing you.

But, was that the case?  Was that the case?  Would I pretend to say, I
would now marry the lady, if she would have me?

Lovel.   You find she renounces Lady Betty's mediation----

Lord M.   [Interrupting me.]  Words are wind; but deeds are mind: What
signifies your cursed quibbling, Bob?--Say plainly, if she will have
you, will you have her?  Answer me, yes or no; and lead us not a
wild-goose chace after your meaning.

Lovel.   She knows I would.  But here, my Lord, if she thus goes on to
expose herself and me, she will make it a dishonour to us both to marry.

Charl.   But how must she have been treated--

Lovel.   [Interrupting her.]  Why now, Cousin Charlotte, chucking her
under the chin, would you have me tell you all that has passed between
the lady and me?  Would you care, had you a bold and enterprizing lover,
that proclamation should be made of every little piece of amorous
roguery, that he offered to you?

Charlotte reddened.  They all began to exclaim.  But I proceeded.

The lady says, 'She has been dishonoured' (devil take me, if I spare
myself!) 'by means that would shock humanity to be made acquainted with
them.'  She is a very innocent lady, and may not be a judge of the means
she hints at.  Over-niceness may be under-niceness: Have you not such a
proverb, my Lord?--tantamount to, One extreme produces another!----Such
a lady as this may possibly think her case more extraordinary than it is.
This I will take upon me to say, that if she has met with the only man in
the world who would have treated her, as she says I have treated her, I
have met in her with the only woman in the world who would have made such
a rout about a case that is uncommon only from the circumstances that
attend it.

This brought them all upon me; hands, eyes, voices, all lifted at once.
But my Lord M. who has in his head (the last seat of retreating lewdness)
as much wickedness as I have in my heart, was forced (upon the air I
spoke this with, and Charlotte's and all the rest reddening) to make a
mouth that was big enough to swallow up the other half of his face;
crying out, to avoid laughing, Oh!  Oh!--as if under the power of a gouty
twinge.

Hadst thou seen how the two tabbies and the young grimalkins looked at
one another, at my Lord, and at me, by turns, thou would have been ready
to split thy ugly face just in the middle.  Thy mouth hath already done
half the work.  And, after all, I found not seldom in this conversation,
that my humourous undaunted airs forced a smile into my service from the
prim mouths of the young ladies.  They perhaps, had they met with such
another intrepid fellow as myself, who had first gained upon their
affections, would not have made such a rout as my beloved has done, about
such an affair as that we were assembled upon.  Young ladies, as I have
observed on an hundred occasions, fear not half so much for themselves
as their mothers do for them.  But here the girls were forced to put on
grave airs, and to seem angry, because the antiques made the matter of
such high importance.  Yet so lightly sat anger and fellow-feeling at
their hearts, that they were forced to purse in their mouths, to
suppress the smiles I now-and-then laid out for: while the elders
having had roses (that is to say, daughters) of their own, and knowing
how fond men are of a trifle, would have been very loth to have had
them nipt in the bud, without saying to the mother of them, By your
leave, Mrs. Rose-bush.

The next article of my indictment was for forgery; and for personating
of Lady Betty and my cousin Charlotte.

Two shocking charges, thou'lt say: and so they were!--The Peer was
outrageous upon the forgery charge.  The Ladies vowed never to forgive
the personating part.

Not a peace-maker among them.  So we all turned women, and scolded.

My Lord told me, that he believed in his conscience there was not a
viler fellow upon God's earth than me.--What signifies mincing the
matter? said he--and that it was not the first time I had forged his
hand.

To this I answered, that I supposed, when the statute of Scandalum
Magnatum was framed, there were a good many in the peerage who knew
they deserved hard names; and that that law therefore was rather made
to privilege their qualities, than to whiten their characters.

He called upon me to explain myself, with a Sir-r, so pronounced, as to
show that one of the most ignominious words in our language was in his
head.

People, I said, that were fenced in by their quality, and by their
years, should not take freedoms that a man of spirit could not put up
with, unless he were able heartily to despise the insulter.

This set him in a violent passion.  He would send for Pritchard
instantly.  Let Pritchard be called.  He would alter his will; and all
he could leave from me, he would.

Do, do, my Lord, said I: I always valued my own pleasure above your
estate.  But I'll let Pritchard know, that if he draws, he shall sign
and seal.

Why, what would I do to Pritchard?--shaking his crazy head at me.

Only, what he, or any man else, writes with his pen, to despoil me of
what I think my right, he shall seal with his ears; that's all, my
Lord.

Then the two Ladies interposed.

Lady Sarah told me, that I carried things a great way; and that neither
Lord M. nor any of them, deserved the treatment I gave them.

I said, I could not bear to be used ill by my Lord, for two reasons;
first, because I respected his Lordship above any man living; and next,
because it looked as if I were induced by selfish considerations to
take that from him, which nobody else would offer to me.

And what, returned he, shall be my inducement to take what I do at your
hands?--Hay, Sir?

Indeed, Cousin Lovelace, said Lady Betty, with great gravity, we do not
any of us, as Lady Sarah says, deserve at your hands the treatment you
give us: and let me tell you, that I don't think my character and your
cousin Charlotte's ought to be prostituted, in order to ruin an innocent
lady.  She must have known early the good opinion we all have of her, and
how much we wished her to be your wife.  This good opinion of ours has
been an inducement to her (you see she says so) to listen to your
address.  And this, with her friends' folly, has helped to throw her into
your power.  How you have requited her is too apparent.  It becomes the
character we all bear, to disclaim your actions by her.  And let me tell
you, that to have her abused by wicked people raised up to personate us,
or any of us, makes a double call upon us to disclaim them.

Lovel.   Why this is talking somewhat like.  I would have you all
disclaim my actions.  I own I have done very vilely by this lady.  One
step led to another.  I am curst with an enterprizing spirit.  I hate
to be foiled--

Foiled! interrupted Lady Sarah.  What a shame to talk at this
rate!--Did the lady set up a contention with you?  All nobly sincere,
and plain-hearted, have I heard Miss Clarissa Harlowe is: above art,
above disguise; neither the coquette, nor the prude!--Poor lady! she
deserved a better fare from the man for whom she took the step which
she so freely blames!

This above half affected me.--Had this dispute been so handled by every
one, I had been ashamed to look up.  I began to be bashful.

Charlotte asked if I did not still seem inclinable to do the lady
justice, if she would accept of me?  It would be, she dared to say, the
greatest felicity the family could know (she would answer for one) that
this fine lady were of it.

They all declared to the same effect; and Lady Sarah put the matter
home to me.

But my Lord Marplot would have it that I could not be serious for six
minutes together.

I told his Lordship that he was mistaken; light as he thought I made of
his subject, I never knew any that went so near my heart.

Miss Patty said she was glad to hear that: and her soft eyes glistened
with pleasure.

Lord M. called her sweet soul, and was ready to cry.

Not from humanity neither, Jack.  This Peer has no bowels; as thou
mayest observe by this treatment of me.  But when people's minds are
weakened by a sense of their own infirmities, and when they are drawing
on to their latter ends, they will be moved on the slightest occasions,
whether those offer from within or without them.  And this, frequently,
the unpenetrating world, calls humanity; when all the time, in
compassionating the miseries of human nature, they are but pitying
themselves; and were they in strong health and spirits, would care as
little for any body else as thou or I do.

Here broke they off my trial for this sitting.  Lady Sarah was much
fatigued.  It was agreed to pursue the subject in the morning.  They
all, however, retired together, and went into private conference.



LETTER VI

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


The Ladies, instead of taking up the subject where we had laid it down,
must needs touch upon passage in my fair accuser's letter, which I was in
hopes they would have let rest, as we were in a tolerable way.  But,
truly, they must hear all they could hear of our story, and what I had to
say to those passages, that they might be better enabled to mediate
between us, if I were really and indeed inclined to do her the hoped-for
justice.

These passages were, 1st, 'That, after I had compulsorily tricked her
into the act of going off with me, I carried her to one of the worst
houses in London.'

2nd, 'That I had made a wicked attempt upon her; in resentment of which
she fled to Hampstead privately.'

3dly, Came the forgery, and personating charges again; and we were upon
the point of renewing out quarrel, before we could get to the next
charge: which was still worse.

For that (4thly) was 'That having betrayed her back to the vile house, I
first robbed her of her senses, and then her honour; detaining her
afterwards a prisoner there.'

Were I to tell thee the glosses I put upon these heavy charges, what
would it be, but repeat many of the extenuating arguments I have used in
my letters to thee?--Suffice it, therefore, to say, that I insisted much,
by way of palliation, on the lady's extreme niceness: on her diffidence
in my honour: on Miss Howe's contriving spirit; plots on their parts
begetting plots on mine: on the high passions of the sex.  I asserted,
that my whole view, in gently restraining her, was to oblige her to
forgive me, and to marry me; and this for the honour of both families.
I boasted of my own good qualities; some of which none that knew me deny;
and to which few libertines can lay claim.

They then fell into warm admirations and praises of the lady; all of them
preparatory, as I knew, to the grand question: and thus it was introduced
by Lady Sarah.

We have said as much as I think we can say upon these letters of the poor
lady.  To dwell upon the mischiefs that may ensue from the abuse of a
person of her rank, if all the reparation be not made that now can be
made, would perhaps be to little purpose.  But you seem, Sir, still to
have a just opinion of her, as well as affection for her.  Her virtue is
not in the least questionable.  She could not resent as she does, had she
any thing to reproach herself with.  She is, by every body's account, a
fine woman; has a good estate in her own right; is of no contemptible
family; though I think, with regard to her, they have acted as
imprudently as unworthily.  For the excellency of her mind, for good
economy, the common speech of her, as the worthy Dr. Lewen once told me,
is that her prudence would enrich a poor man, and her piety reclaim a
licentious one.  I, who have not been abroad twice this twelvemonth, came
hither purposely, so did Lady Betty, to see if justice may not be done
her; and also whether we, and my Lord M. (your nearest relations, Sir,)
have, or have not, any influence over you.  And, for my own part, as your
determination shall be in this article, such shall be mine, with regard
to the disposition of all that is within my power.

Lady Betty.   And mine.

And mine, said my Lord: and valiantly he swore to it.

Lovel.   Far be it from me to think slightly of favours you may any of
you be glad I would deserve! but as far be it from me to enter into
conditions against my own liking, with sordid views!--As to future
mischiefs, let them come.  I have not done with the Harlowes yet.  They
were the aggressors; and I should be glad they would let me hear from
them, in the way they should hear from me in the like case.  Perhaps I
should not be sorry to be found, rather than be obliged to seek, on this
occasion.

Miss Charlotte.   [Reddening.]  Spoke like a man of violence, rather than
a man of reason!  I hope you'll allow that, Cousin.

Lady Sarah.  Well, but since what is done, and cannot be undone, let us
think of the next best, Have you any objection against marrying Miss
Harlowe, if she will have you?

Lovel.   There can possibly be but one: That she is to every body, no
doubt, as well as to Lady Betty, pursuing that maxim peculiar to herself,
(and let me tell you so it ought to be:) that what she cannot conceal
from herself, she will publish to the world.

Miss Patty.   The lady, to be sure, writes this in the bitterness of her
grief, and in despair.----

Lovel.   And so when her grief is allayed; when her despairing fit is
over--and this from you, Cousin Patty!--Sweet girl!  And would you, my
dear, in the like case [whispering her] have yielded to entreaty--would
you have meant no more by the like exclamations?

I had a rap with her fan, and blush; and from Lord M. a reflection, That
I turn'd into jest every thing they said.

I asked, if they thought the Harlowes deserved any consideration from me?
And whether that family would not exult over me, were I to marry their
daughter, as if I dared not to do otherwise?

Lady Sarah.   Once I was angry with that family, as we all were.  But now
I pity them; and think, that you have but too well justified the worse
treatment they gave you.

Lord M.   Their family is of standing.  All gentlemen of it, and rich,
and reputable.  Let me tell you, that many of our coronets would be glad
they could derive their descents from no worse a stem than theirs.

Lovel.   The Harlowes are a narrow-souled and implacable family.  I hate
them: and, though I revere the lady, scorn all relation to them.

Lady Betty.   I wish no worse could be said of him, who is such a scorner
of common failings in others.

Lord M.   How would my sister Lovelace have reproached herself for all
her indulgent folly to this favourite boy of her's, had she lived till
now, and been present on this occasion!

Lady Sarah.   Well, but, begging your Lordship's pardon, let us see if
any thing can be done for this poor lady.

Miss Ch.   If Mr. Lovelace has nothing to object against the lady's
character, (and I presume to think he is not ashamed to do her justice,
though it may make against himself,) I cannot but see her honour and
generosity will compel from him all that we expect.  If there be any
levities, any weaknesses, to be charged upon the lady, I should not open
my lips in her favour; though in private I would pity her, and deplore
her hard hap.  And yet, even then, there might not want arguments, from
honour to gratitude, in so particular a case, to engage you, Sir, to make
good the vows it is plain you have broken.

Lady Betty.  My niece Charlotte has called upon you so justly, and has
put the question to you so properly, that I cannot but wish you would
speak to it directly, and without evasion.

All in a breath then bespoke my seriousness, and my justice: and in this
manner I delivered myself, assuming an air sincerely solemn.

'I am very sensible that the performance of the task you have put me upon
will leave me without excuse: but I will not have recourse either to
evasion or palliation.

'As my cousin Charlotte has severely observed, I am not ashamed to do
justice to Miss Harlowe's merit.

'I own to you all, and, what is more, with high regret, (if not with
shame, cousin Charlotte,) that I have a great deal to answer for in my
usage of this lady.  The sex has not a nobler mind, nor a lovelier person
of it.  And, for virtue, I could not have believed (excuse me, Ladies)
that there ever was a woman who gave, or could have given, such
illustrious, such uniform proofs of it: for, in her whole conduct, she
has shown herself to be equally above temptation and art; and, I had
almost said, human frailty.

'The step she so freely blames herself for taking, was truly what she
calls compulsatory: for though she was provoked to think of going off
with me, she intended it not, nor was provided to do so: neither would
she ever have had the thought of it, had her relations left her free,
upon her offered composition to renounce the man she did not hate, in
order to avoid the man she did.

'It piqued my pride, I own, that I could so little depend upon the force
of those impressions which I had the vanity to hope I had made in a heart
so delicate; and, in my worst devices against her, I encouraged myself
that I abused no confidence; for none had she in my honour.

'The evils she has suffered, it would have been more than a miracle had
she avoided.  Her watchfulness rendered more plots abortive than those
which contributed to her fall; and they were many and various.  And all
her greater trials and hardships were owing to her noble resistance and
just resentment.

'I know, proceeded I, how much I condemn myself in the justice I am doing
to this excellent creature.  But yet I will do her justice, and cannot
help it if I would.  And I hope this shows that I am not so totally
abandoned as I have been thought to be.

'Indeed, with me, she has done more honour to her sex in her fall, if it
be to be called a fall, (in truth it ought not,) than ever any other
could do in her standing.

'When, at length, I had given her watchful virtue cause of suspicion, I
was then indeed obliged to make use of power and art to prevent her
escaping from me.  She then formed contrivances to elude mine; but all
her's were such as strict truth and punctilious honour would justify.
She could not stoop to deceit and falsehood, no, not to save herself.
More than once justly did she tell me, fired by conscious worthiness,
that her soul was my soul's superior!--Forgive me, Ladies, for saying,
that till I knew her, I questioned a soul in a sex, created, as I was
willing to suppose, only for temporary purposes.--It is not to be
imagined into what absurdities men of free principle run in order to
justify to themselves their free practices; and to make a religion to
their minds: and yet, in this respect, I have not been so faulty as some
others.

'No wonder that such a noble creature as this looked upon every studied
artifice as a degree of baseness not to be forgiven: no wonder that she
could so easily become averse to the man (though once she beheld him with
an eye not wholly indifferent) whom she thought capable of premeditated
guilt.  Nor, give me leave, on the other hand, to say, is it to be
wondered at, that the man who found it so difficult to be forgiven for
the slighter offences, and who had not the grace to recede or repent,
(made desperate,) should be hurried on to the commission of the greater.

'In short, Ladies, in a word, my Lord, Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an angel;
if ever there was or could be one in human nature: and is, and ever was,
as pure as an angel in her will: and this justice I must do her, although
the question, I see by every glistening eye, is ready to be asked, What
then, Lovelace, art thou?'--

Lord M.   A devil!--a d----d devil! I must answer.  And may the curse of
God follow you in all you undertake, if you do not make her the best
amends now in your power to make her!

Lovel.   From you, my Lord, I could expect no other: but from the Ladies
I hope for less violence from the ingenuousness of my confession.

The Ladies, elder and younger, had their handkerchiefs to their eyes, at
the just testimony which I bore to the merits of this exalted creature;
and which I would make no scruple to bear at the bar of a court of
justice, were I to be called to it.

Lady Betty.   Well, Sir, this is a noble character.  If you think as you
speak, surely you cannot refuse to do the lady all the justice now in
your power to do her.

They all joined in this demand.

I pleaded, that I was sure she would not have me: that, when she had
taken a resolution, she was not to be moved.  Unpersuadableness was an
Harlowe sin: that, and her name, I told them, were all she had of theirs.

All were of opinion, that she might, in her present desolate
circumstances, be brought to forgive me.  Lady Sarah said, that Lady
Betty and she would endeavour to find out the noble sufferer, as they
justly called her; and would take her into their protection, and be
guarantees of the justice that I would do her; as well after marriage as
before.

It was some pleasure to me, to observe the placability of these ladies of
my own family, had they, any or either of them, met with a LOVELACE.  But
'twould be hard upon us honest fellows, Jack, if all women were
CLARISSAS.

Here I am obliged to break off.



LETTER VII

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]


It is much better, Jack, to tell your own story, when it must be known,
than to have an adversary tell it for you.  Conscious of this, I gave
them a particular account how urgent I had been with her to fix upon the
Thursday after I left her (it being her uncle Harlowe's anniversary
birth-day, and named to oblige her) for the private celebration; having
some days before actually procured a license, which still remained with
her.

That, not being able to prevail upon her to promise any thing, while
under a supposed restraint!  I offered to leave her at full liberty, if
she would give me the least hope for that day.  But neither did this
offer avail me.

That this inflexibleness making me desperate, I resolved to add to my
former fault, by giving directions that she should not either go or
correspond out of the house, till I returned from M. Hall; well knowing,
that if she were at full liberty, I must for ever lose her.

That this constraint had so much incensed her, that although I wrote no
less than four different letters, I could not procure a single word in
answer; though I pressed her but for four words to signify the day and
the church.

I referred to my two cousins to vouch for me the extraordinary methods I
took to send messengers to town, though they knew not the occasion; which
now I told them was this.

I acquainted them, that I even had wrote to you, Jack, and to another
gentleman of whom I thought she had a good opinion, to attend her, in
order to press for her compliance; holding myself in readiness the last
day, at Salt-hill, to meet the messenger they should send, and proceed to
London, if his message were favourable.  But that, before they could
attend her, she had found means to fly away once more: and is now, said
I, perched perhaps somewhere under Lady Betty's window at Glenham-hall;
and there, like the sweet Philomela, a thorn in her breast, warbles forth
her melancholy complaints against her barbarous Tereus.

Lady Betty declared that she was not with her; nor did she know where she
was.  She should be, she added, the most welcome guest to her that she
ever received.

In truth, I had a suspicion that she was already in their knowledge, and
taken into their protection; for Lady Sarah I imagined incapable of being
roused to this spirit by a letter only from Miss Harlowe, and that not
directed to herself; she being a very indolent and melancholy woman.  But
her sister, I find had wrought her up to it: for Lady Betty is as
officious and managing a woman as Mrs. Howe; but of a much more generous
and noble disposition--she is my aunt, Jack.

I supposed, I said, that her Ladyship might have a private direction
where to send to her.  I spoke as I wished: I would have given the world
to have heard that she was inclined to cultivate the interest of any of
my family.

Lady Betty answered that she had no direction but what was in the letter;
which she had scratched out, and which, it was probable, was only a
temporary one, in order to avoid me: otherwise she would hardly have
directed an answer to be left at an inn.  And she was of opinion, that to
apply to Miss Howe would be the only certain way to succeed in any
application for forgiveness, would I enable that young lady to interest
herself in procuring it.

Miss Charlotte.   Permit me to make a proposal.----Since we are all of
one mind, in relation to the justice due to Miss Harlowe, if Mr. Lovelace
will oblige himself to marry her, I will make Miss Howe a visit, little
as I am acquainted with her; and endeavour to engage her interest to
forward the desired reconciliation.  And if this can be done, I make no
question but all may be happily accommodated; for every body knows the
love there is between Miss Harlowe and Miss Howe.

MARRIAGE, with these women, thou seest, Jack, is an atonement for all we
can do to them.  A true dramatic recompense!

This motion was highly approved of; and I gave my honour, as desired, in
the fullest manner they could wish.

Lady Sarah.   Well then, Cousin Charlotte, begin your treaty with Miss
Howe, out of hand.

Lady Betty.   Pray do.  And let Miss Harlowe be told, that I am ready to
receive her as the most welcome of guests: and I will not have her out of
my sight till the knot is tied.

Lady Sarah.   Tell her from me, that she shall be my daughter, instead of
my poor Betsey!----And shed a tear in remembrance of her lost daughter.

Lord M.   What say you, Sir, to this?

Lovel.   CONTENT, my Lord, I speak in the language of your house.

Lord M.   We are not to be fooled, Nephew.  No quibbling.  We will have
no slur put upon us.

Lovel.   You shall not.  And yet, I did not intend to marry, if she
exceeded the appointed Thursday.  But, I think (according to her own
notions) that I have injured her beyond reparation, although I were to
make her the best of husbands; as I am resolved to be, if she will
condescend, as I will call it, to have me.  And be this, Cousin
Charlotte, my part of your commission to say.

This pleased them all.

Lord M.   Give me thy hand, Bob!--Thou talkest like a man of honour at
last.  I hope we may depend upon what thou sayest!

The Ladies eyes put the same question to me.

Lovel.   You may, my Lord--You may, Ladies--absolutely you may.

Then was the personal character of the lady, as well as her more
extraordinary talents and endowments again expatiated upon: and Miss
Patty, who had once seen her, launched out more than all the rest in her
praise.  These were followed by such inquiries as are never forgotten to
be made in marriage-treaties, and which generally are the principal
motives with the sages of a family, though the least to be mentioned by
the parties themselves, and yet even by them, perhaps, the first thought
of: that is to say, inquisition into the lady's fortune; into the
particulars of the grandfather's estate; and what her father, and her
single-souled uncles, will probably do for her, if a reconciliation be
effected; as, by their means, they make no doubt but it will be between
both families, if it be not my fault.  The two venerables [no longer
tabbies with me now] hinted at rich presents on their own parts; and my
Lord declared that he would make such overtures in my behalf, as should
render my marriage with Miss Harlowe the best day's work I ever made;
and what, he doubted not, would be as agreeable to that family as to
myself.

Thus, at present, by a single hair, hangs over my head the matrimonial
sword.  And thus ended my trial.  And thus are we all friends, and Cousin
and Cousin, and Nephew and Nephew, at every word.

Did ever comedy end more happily than this long trial?



LETTER VIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDN. JULY 12.


So, Jack, they think they have gained a mighty point.  But, were I to
change my mind, were I to repent, I fancy I am safe.--And yet this very
moment it rises to my mind, that 'tis hard trusting too; for surely there
must be some embers, where there was fire so lately, that may be stirred
up to give a blaze to combustibles strewed lightly upon them.  Love, like
some self-propagating plants, or roots, (which have taken strong hold in
the earth) when once got deep into the heart, is hardly ever totally
extirpated, except by matrimony indeed, which is the grave of love,
because it allows of the end of love.  Then these ladies, all advocates
for herself, with herself, Miss Howe at their head, perhaps,----not in
favour to me--I don't expect that from Miss Howe--but perhaps in favour
to herself: for Miss Howe has reason to apprehend vengeance from me, I
ween.  Her Hickman will be safe too, as she may think, if I marry her
beloved friend: for he has been a busy fellow, and I have long wished to
have a slap at him!--The lady's case desperate with her friends too; and
likely to be so, while single, and her character exposed to censure.

A husband is a charming cloke, a fig-leaved apron for a wife: and for a
lady to be protected in liberties, in diversions, which her heart pants
after--and all her faults, even the most criminal, were she to be
detected, to be thrown upon the husband, and the ridicule too; a charming
privilege for a wife!

But I shall have one comfort, if I marry, which pleases me not a little.
If a man's wife has a dear friend of her sex, a hundred liberties may be
taken with that friend, which could not be taken, if the single lady
(knowing what a title to freedoms marriage had given him with her friend)
was not less scrupulous with him than she ought to be as to herself.
Then there are broad freedoms (shall I call them?) that may be taken by
the husband with his wife, that may not be quite shocking, which, if the
wife bears before her friends, will serve for a lesson to that friend;
and if that friend bears to be present at them without check or
bashfulness, will show a sagacious fellow that she can bear as much
herself, at proper time and place.

Chastity, Jack, like piety, is an uniform thing.  If in look, if in
speech, a girl give way to undue levity, depend upon it the devil has
got one of his cloven feet in her heart already--so, Hickman, take care
of thyself, I advise thee, whether I marry or not.

Thus, Jack, have I at once reconciled myself to all my relations--and if
the lady refuses me, thrown the fault upon her.  This, I knew, would be
in my power to do at any time: and I was the more arrogant to them, in
order to heighten the merit of my compliance.

But, after all, it would be very whimsical, would it not, if all my plots
and contrivances should end in wedlock?  What a punishment should this
come out to be, upon myself too, that all this while I have been
plundering my own treasury?

And then, can there be so much harm done, if it can be so easily repaired
by a few magical words; as I Robert take thee, Clarissa; and I Clarissa
take thee, Robert, with the rest of the for-better and for-worse
legerdemain, which will hocus pocus all the wrongs, the crying wrongs,
that I have done to Miss Harlowe, into acts of kindness and benevolence
to Mrs. Lovelace?

But, Jack, two things I must insist upon with thee, if this is to be the
case.--Having put secrets of so high a nature between me and my spouse
into thy power, I must, for my own honour, and for the honour of my wife
and illustrious progeny, first oblige thee to give up the letters I have
so profusely scribbled to thee; and in the next place, do by thee, as I
have head whispered in France was done by the true father of a certain
monarque; that is to say, cut thy throat, to prevent thy telling of
tales.

I have found means to heighten the kind opinion my friends here have
begun to have of me, by communicating to them the contents of the four
last letters which I wrote to press my elected spouse to solemnize.  My
Lord repeated one of his phrases in my favour, that he hopes it will come
out, that the devil is not quite so black as he is painted.

Now pr'ythee, dear Jack, since so many good consequences are to flow from
these our nuptials, (one of which to thyself; since the sooner thou
diest, the less thou wilt have to answer for); and that I now-and-then am
apt to believe there may be something in the old fellow's notion, who
once told us, that he who kills a man, has all that man's sins to answer
for, as well as his own, because he gave him not the time to repent of
them that Heaven designed to allow him, [a fine thing for thee, if thou
consentest to be knocked of the head; but a cursed one for the
manslayer!] and since there may be room to fear that Miss Howe will not
give us her help; I pr'ythee now exert thyself to find out my Clarissa
Harlowe, that I may make a LOVELACE of her.  Set all the city bellmen,
and the country criers, for ten miles round the metropolis, at work, with
their 'Oye's! and if any man, woman, or child can give tale or tidings.'
--Advertise her in all the news-papers; and let her know, 'That if she
will repair to Lady Betty Lawrance, or to Miss Charlotte Montague, she
may hear of something greatly to her advantage.'


***


My two cousins Montague are actually to set out to-morrow to Mrs. Howe's,
to engage her vixen daughter's interest with her friend.  They will
flaunt it away in a chariot-and-six, for the greater state and
significance.

Confounded mortification to be reduced this low!--My pride hardly knows
how to brook it.

Lord M. has engaged the two venerables to stay here to attend the issue:
and I, standing very high at present in their good graces, am to gallant
them to Oxford, to Blenheim, and to several other places.



LETTER IX

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, JULY 13.


Collins sets not out to-morrow.  Some domestic occasion hinders him.
Rogers is but now returned from you, and cannot be well spared.  Mr.
Hickman is gone upon an affair of my mother's, and has taken both his
servants with him, to do credit to his employer: so I am forced to
venture this by post, directed by your assumed name.

I am to acquaint you, that I have been favoured with a visit from Miss
Montague and her sister, in Lord M.'s chariot-and-six.  My Lord's
gentleman rode here yesterday, with a request that I would receive a
visit from the two young ladies, on a very particular occasion; the
greater favour if it might be the next day.

As I had so little personal knowledge of either, I doubted not but it
must be in relation to the interests of my dear friend; and so consulting
with my mother, I sent them an invitation to favour me (because of the
distance) with their company at dinner; which they kindly accepted.

I hope, my dear, since things have been so very bad, that their errand to
me will be as agreeable to you, as any thing that can now happen.  They
came in the name of Lord M. and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty his two
sisters, to desire my interest to engage you to put yourself into the
protection of Lady Betty; who will not part with you till she sees all
the justice done you that now can be done.

Lady Sarah had not stirred out for a twelve-month before; never since she
lost her agreeable daughter whom you and I saw at Mrs. Benson's: but was
induced to take this journey by Lady Betty, purely to procure you
reparation, if possible.  And their joint strength, united with Lord
M.'s, has so far succeeded, that the wretch has bound himself to them,
and to these young ladies, in the solemnest manner, to wed you in their
presence, if they can prevail upon you to give him your hand.

This consolation you may take to yourself, that all this honourable
family have a due (that is, the highest) sense of your merit, and greatly
admire you.  The horrid creature has not spared himself in doing justice
to your virtue; and the young ladies gave us such an account of his
confessions, and self-condemnation, that my mother was quite charmed with
you; and we all four shed tears of joy, that there is one of our sex [I,
that that one is my dearest friend,] who has done so much honour to it,
as to deserve the exalted praises given you by a wretch so
self-conceited; though pity for the excellent creature mixed with our
joy.

He promises by them to make the best of husbands; and my Lord, and Lady
Sarah, and Lady Betty, are all three to be guarantees that he will be so.
Noble settlements, noble presents, they talked of: they say, they left
Lord M. and his two sisters talking of nothing else but of those presents
and settlements, how most to do you honour, the greater in proportion for
the indignities you have suffered; and of changing of names by act of
parliament, preparative to the interest they will all join to make to get
the titles to go where the bulk of the estate must go, at my Lord's
death, which they apprehend to be nearer than they wish.  Nor doubt they
of a thorough reformation in his morals, from your example and influence
over him.

I made a great many objections for you--all, I believe, that you could
have made yourself, had you been present.  But I have no doubt to advise
you, my dear, (and so does my mother,) instantly to put yourself into
Lady Betty's protection, with a resolution to take the wretch for your
husband.  All his future grandeur [he wants not pride] depends upon his
sincerity to you; and the young ladies vouch for the depth of his concern
for the wrongs he has done you.

All his apprehension is, in your readiness to communicate to every one,
as he fears, the evils you have suffered; which he thinks will expose you
both.  But had you not revealed them to Lady Betty, you had not had so
warm a friend; since it is owing to two letters you wrote to her, that
all this good, as I hope it will prove, was brought about.  But I advise
you to be more sparing in exposing what is past, whether you have
thoughts of accepting him or not: for what, my dear, can that avail now,
but to give a handle to vile wretches to triumph over your friends; since
every one will not know how much to your honour your very sufferings have
been?

Your melancholy letter brought by Rogers,* with his account of your
indifferent health, confirmed to him by the woman of the house, as well
as by your looks and by your faintness while you talked with him, would
have given me inexpressible affliction, had I not bee cheered by this
agreeable visit from the young ladies.  I hope you will be equally so on
my imparting the subject of it to you.


* See Letter II. of this volume.


Indeed, my dear, you must not hesitate.  You must oblige them.  The
alliance is splendid and honourable.  Very few will know any thing of his
brutal baseness to you.  All must end, in a little while, in a general
reconciliation; and you will be able to resume your course of doing the
good to every deserving object, which procured you blessings wherever you
set your foot.

I am concerned to find, that your father's inhuman curse affects you so
much as it does.  Yet you are a noble creature to put it, as you put it--
I hope you are indeed more solicitous to get it revoked for their sakes
than for your own.  It is for them to be penitent, who hurried you into
evils you could not well avoid.  You are apt to judge by the unhappy
event, rather than upon the true merits of your case.  Upon my honour, I
think you faultless almost in every step you have taken.  What has not
that vilely-insolent and ambitious, yet stupid, brother of your's to
answer for?--that spiteful thing your sister too!

But come, since what is past cannot be helped, let us look forward.  You
have now happy prospects opening to you: a family, already noble,
prepared to receive you with open arms and joyful heart; and who, by
their love to you, will teach another family (who know not what an
excellence they have confederated to persecute) how to value you.  Your
prudence, your piety, will crown all.  You will reclaim a wretch that,
for an hundred sakes more than for his own, one would wish to be
reclaimed.

Like a traveller, who has been put out of his way, by the overflowing of
some rapid stream, you have only had the fore-right path you were in
overwhelmed.  A few miles about, a day or two only lost, as I may say,
and you are in a way to recover it; and, by quickening your speed, will
get up the lost time.  The hurry upon your spirits, mean time, will be
all your inconvenience; for it was not your fault you were stopped in
your progress.

Think of this, my dear; and improve upon the allegory, as you know how.
If you can, without impeding your progress, be the means of assuaging the
inundation, of bounding the waters within their natural channel, and
thereby of recovering the overwhelmed path for the sake of future
passengers who travel the same way, what a merit will your's be!

I shall impatiently expect your next letter.  The young ladies proposed
that you should put yourself, if in town, or near it, into the Reading
stage-coach, which inns somewhere in Fleet-street: and, if you give
notice of the day, you will be met on the road, and that pretty early in
your journey, by some of both sexes; one of whom you won't be sorry to
see.

Mr. Hickman shall attend you at Slough; and Lady Betty herself, and one
of the Miss Montagues, with proper equipages, will be at Reading to
receive you; and carry you directly to the seat of the former: for I have
expressly stipulated, that the wretch himself shall not come into your
presence till your nuptials are to be solemnized, unless you give leave.

Adieu, my dearest friend.  Be happy: and hundreds will then be happy of
consequence.  Inexpressibly so, I am sure, will then be

Your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER X

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SUNDAY NIGHT, JULY 16.


MY DEAREST FRIEND,

Why should you permit a mind, so much devoted to your service, to labour
under such an impatience as you must know it would labour under, for want
of an answer to a letter of such consequence to you, and therefore to me,
as was mine of Thursday night?--Rogers told me, on Thursday, you were so
ill; your letter sent by him was so melancholy!--Yet you must be ill
indeed, if you could not write something to such a letter; were it but a
line, to say you would write as soon as you could.  Sure you have
received it.  The master of your nearest post-office will pawn his
reputation that it went safe: I gave him particular charge of it.

God send me good news of your health, of your ability to write; and then
I will chide you--indeed I will--as I never yet did chide you.

I suppose your excuse will be, that the subject required consideration--
Lord! my dear, so it might; but you have so right a mind, and the matter
in question is so obvious, that you could not want half an hour to
determine.--Then you intended, probably, to wait Collins's call for your
letter as on to-morrow!--Suppose something were to happen, as it did on
Friday, that he should not be able to go to town to-morrow?--How, child,
could you serve me so!--I know not how to leave off scolding you!

Dear, honest Collins, make haste: he will: he will.  He sets out, and
travels all night: for I have told him, that the dearest friend I have in
the world has it in her own choice to be happy, and to make me so; and
that the letter he will bring from her will assure it to me.

I have ordered him to go directly (without stopping at the
Saracen's-head-inn) to you at your lodgings.  Matters are now in so good
a way, that he safely may.

Your expected letter is ready written I hope: if it can be not, he will
call for it at your hour.

You can't be so happy as you deserve to be: but I doubt not that you will
be as happy as you can; that is, that you will choose to put yourself
instantly into Lady Betty's protection.  If you would not have the wretch
for your own sake; have him you must, for mine, for your family's, for
your honour's, sake!--Dear, honest Collins, make haste! make haste! and
relieve the impatient heart of my beloved's

Ever faithful, ever affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER XI

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE
TUESDAY MORN. JULY 18.


MADAM,

I take the liberty to write to you, by this special messenger.  In the
phrensy of my soul I write to you, to demand of you, and of any of your
family who can tell news of my beloved friend, who, I doubt, has been
spirited away by the base arts of one of the blackest--O help me to a
name black enough to call him by!  Her piety is proof against
self-attempts.  It must, it must be he, the only wretch, who could injure
such an innocent; and now--who knows what he has done with her!

If I have patience, I will give you the occasion of this distracted
vehemence.

I wrote to her the very moment you and your sister left me.  But being
unable to procure a special messenger, as I intended, was forced to send
by the post.  I urged her, [you know I promised that I would: I urged
her,] with earnestness, to comply with the desires of all your family.
Having no answer, I wrote again on Sunday night; and sent it by a
particular hand, who travelled all night; chiding her for keeping a heart
so impatient as mine in such cruel suspense, upon a matter of so much
importance to her, and therefore to me.  And very angry I was with her in
my mind.

But, judge my astonishment, my distraction, when last night, the
messenger, returning post-haste, brought me word, that she had not been
heard of since Friday morning! and that a letter lay for her at her
lodgings, which came by the post; and must be mine!

She went out about six that morning; only intending, as they believe, to
go to morning-prayers at Covent-Garden church, just by her lodgings, as
she had done divers times before--Went on foot!--Left word she should be
back in an hour!--Very poorly in health!

Lord, have mercy upon me!  What shall I do!--I was a distracted creature
all last night!

O Madam! you know not how I love her!--My own soul is not dearer to me,
than my Clarissa Harlowe!--Nay! she is my soul--for I now have none--only
a miserable one, however--for she was the joy, the stay, the prop of my
life.  Never woman loved woman as we love one another.  It is impossible
to tell you half her excellencies.  It was my glory and my pride, that I
was capable of so fervent a love of so pure and matchless a creature.--
But now--who knows, whether the dear injured has not all her woes, her
undeserved woes, completed in death; or is not reserved for a worse fate!
--This I leave to your inquiry--for--your--[shall I call the man----
your?] relation I understand is still with you.

Surely, my good Ladies, you were well authorized in the proposals you
made in presence of my mother!--Surely he dare not abuse your confidence,
and the confidence of your noble relations!  I make no apology for giving
you this trouble, nor for desiring you to favour with a line, by this
messenger,

Your almost distracted
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER XII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, SAT. NIGHT, JUNE 15.


All undone, undone, by Jupiter!--Zounds, Jack, what shall I do now! a
curse upon all my plots and contrivances!--But I have it----in the very
heart and soul of me I have it!

Thou toldest me, that my punishments were but beginning--Canst thou, O
fatal prognosticator, cans thou tell me, where they will end?

Thy assistance I bespeak.  The moment thou receivest this, I bespeak thy
assistance.  This messenger rides for life and death--and I hope he'll
find you at your town-lodgings; if he meet not with you at Edgware;
where, being Sunday, he will call first.

This cursed, cursed woman, on Friday dispatched man and horse with the
joyful news (as she thought it would be to me) in an exulting letter from
Sally Martin, that she had found out my angel as on Wednesday last; and
on Friday morning, after she had been at prayers at Covent-Garden church
--praying for my reformation perhaps--got her arrested by two sheriff's
officers, as she was returning to her lodgings, who (villains!) put her
into a chair they had in readiness, and carried her to one of the cursed
fellow's houses.

She has arrested her for 150L. pretendedly due for board and lodging: a
sum (besides the low villany of the proceeding) which the dear soul could
not possibly raise: all her clothes and effects, except what she had on
and with her when she went away, being at the old devil's.

And here, for an aggravation, has the dear creature lain already two
days; for I must be gallanting my two aunts and my two cousins, and
giving Lord M. an airing after his lying-in--pox upon the whole family
of us! and returned not till within this hour: and now returned to my
distraction, on receiving the cursed tidings, and the exulting letter.

Hasten, hasten, dear Jack; for the love of God, hasten to the injured
charmer! my heart bleeds for her!--she deserved not this!--I dare not
stir.  It will be thought done by my contrivance--and if I am absent from
this place, that will confirm the suspicion.

Damnation seize quick this accursed woman!--Yet she thinks she has made
no small merit with me.  Unhappy, thrice unhappy circumstances!--At a
time too, when better prospects were opening for the sweet creature!

Hasten to her!--Clear me of this cursed job.  Most sincerely, by all
that's sacred, I swear you may!----Yet have I been such a villanous
plotter, that the charming sufferer will hardly believe it: although the
proceeding be so dirtily low.

Set her free the moment you see her: without conditioning, free!--On your
knees, for me, beg her pardon: and assure her, that, wherever she goes, I
will not molest her: no, nor come near her without her leave: and be sure
allow not any of the d----d crew to go near her--only let her permit you
to receive her commands from time to time.--You have always been her
friend and advocate.  What would I now give, had I permitted you to have
been a successful one!

Let her have all her clothes and effects sent her instantly, as a small
proof of my sincerity.  And force upon the dear creature, who must be
moneyless, what sums you can get her to take.  Let me know how she has
been treated.  If roughly, woe be to the guilty!

Take thy watch in thy hand, after thou hast freed her, and d--n the whole
brood, dragon and serpents, by the hour, till thou'rt tired; and tell
them, I bid thee do so for their cursed officiousness.

They had nothing to do when they had found her, but to wait my orders how
to proceed.

The great devil fly away with them all, one by one, through the roof of
their own cursed house, and dash them to pieces against the tops of
chimneys as he flies; and let the lesser devils collect the scattered
scraps, and bag them up, in order to put them together again in their
allotted place, in the element of fire, with cements of molten lead.

A line! a line! a kingdom for a line! with tolerable news, the first
moment thou canst write!--This fellow waits to bring it.



LETTER XIII

MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE, TO MISS HOWE
M. HALL, TUESDAY AFTERNOON.


DEAR MISS HOWE,

Your letter has infinitely disturbed us all.

This wretched man has been half distracted ever since Saturday night.

We knew not what ailed him, till your letter was brought.

Vile wretch, as he is, he is however innocent of this new evil.

Indeed he is, he must be; as I shall more at large acquaint you.

But will not now detain your messenger.

Only to satisfy your just impatience, by telling you, that the dear young
lady is safe, and we hope well.

A horrid mistake of his general orders has subjected her to the terror
and disgrace of an arrest.

Poor dear Miss Harlowe!--Her sufferings have endeared her to us, almost
as much as her excellencies can have endeared her to you.

But she must now be quite at liberty.

He has been a distracted man, ever since the news was brought him; and we
knew not what ailed him.

But that I said before.

My Lord M. my lady Sarah Sadleir, and my Lady Betty Lawrance, will all
write to you this very afternoon.

And so will the wretch himself.

And send it by a servant of their own, not to detain your's.

I know not what I write.

But you shall have all the particulars, just, and true, and fair, from

Dear Madam,
Your most faithful and obedient servant,
CH. MONTAGUE.



LETTER XIV

MISS MONTAGUE, TO MISS HOWE
M. HALL, JULY 18.


DEAR MADAM,

In pursuance of my promise, I will minutely inform you of every thing we
know relating to this shocking transaction.

When we returned from you on Thursday night, and made our report of the
kind reception both we and our message met with, in that you had been so
good as to promise to use your interest with your dear friend, it put us
all into such good humour with one another, and with my cousin Lovelace,
that we resolved upon a little tour of two days, the Friday and Saturday,
in order to give an airing to my Lord, and Lady Sarah, both having been
long confined, one by illness, the other by melancholy.  My Lord, Lady
Sarah, Lady Betty, and myself, were in the coach; and all our talk was of
dear Miss Harlowe, and of our future happiness with her: Mr. Lovelace and
my sister (who is his favourite, as he is her's) were in his phaeton:
and, whenever we joined company, that was still the subject.

As to him, never man praised woman as he did her: Never man gave greater
hopes, and made better resolutions.  He is none of those that are
governed by interest.  He is too proud for that.  But most sincerely
delighted was he in talking of her; and of his hopes of her returning
favour.  He said, however, more than once, that he feared she would not
forgive him; for, from his heart, he must say, he deserved not her
forgiveness: and often and often, that there was not such a woman in the
world.

This I mention to show you, Madam, that he could not at this time be
privy to such a barbarous and disgraceful treatment of her.

We returned not till Saturday night, all in as good humour with one
another as we went out.  We never had such pleasure in his company
before.  If he would be good, and as he ought to be, no man would be
better beloved by relations than he.  But never was there a greater
alteration in man when he came home, and received a letter from a
messenger, who, it seems, had been flattering himself in hopes of a
reward, and had been waiting for his return from the night before.  In
such a fury!--The man fared but badly.  He instantly shut himself up to
write, and ordered man and horse to be ready to set out before day-light
the next morning, to carry the letter to a friend in London.

He would not see us all that night; neither breakfast nor dine with us
next day.  He ought, he said, never to see the light; and bid my sister,
whom he called an innocent, (and who was very desirous to know the
occasion of all this,) shun him, saying, he was a wretch, and made so by
his own inventions, and the consequences of them.

None of us could get out of him what so disturbed him.  We should too
soon hear, he said, to the utter dissipation of all his hopes, and of all
ours.

We could easily suppose that all was not right with regard to the worthy
young lady and him.

He went out each day; and said he wanted to run away from himself.

Late on Monday night he received a letter from Mr. Belford, his most
favoured friend, by his own messenger; who came back in a foam, man and
horse.  Whatever were the contents, he was not easier, but like a madman
rather: but still would not let us know the occasion.  But to my sister
he said, nobody, my dear Patsey, who can think but of half the plagues
that pursue an intriguing spirit, would ever quit the fore-right path.

He was out when your messenger came: but soon came in; and bad enough was
his reception from us all.  And he said, that his own torments were
greater than ours, than Miss Harlowe's, or your's, Madam, all put
together.  He would see your letter.  He always carries every thing
before him: and said, when he had read it, that he thanked God, he was
not such a villain, as you, with too great an appearance of reason,
thought him.

Thus, then, he owned the matter to be.

He had left general instructions to the people of the lodgings the dear
lady went from, to find out where she was gone to, if possible, that he
might have an opportunity to importune her to be his, before their
difference was public.  The wicked people (officious at least, if not
wicked) discovered where she was on Wednesday; and, for fear she should
remove before they could have his orders, they put her under a gentle
restraint, as they call it; and dispatched away a messenger to acquaint
him with it; and to take his orders.

This messenger arrived Friday afternoon; and staid here till we returned
on Saturday night:--and, when he read the letter he brought--I have told
you, Madam, what a fury he was in.

The letter he retired to write, and which he dispatched away so early on
Sunday morning, was to conjure his friend, Mr. Belford, on receipt of it,
to fly to the lady, and set her free; and to order all her things to be
sent to her; and to clear him of so black and villanous a fact, as he
justly called it.

And by this time he doubts not that all is happily over; and the beloved
of his soul (as he calls her at ever word) in an easier and happier way
than she was before the horrid fact.  And now he owns that the reason why
Mr. Belford's letter set him into stronger ravings was, because of his
keeping him wilfully (and on purpose to torment him) in suspense; and
reflecting very heavily upon him, (for Mr. Belford, he says, was ever the
lady's friend and advocate); and only mentioning, that he had waited upon
her; referring to his next for further particulars; which Mr. Belford
could have told him at the time.

He declares, and we can vouch for him, that he has been, ever since last
Saturday night, the most miserable of men.

He forbore going up himself, that it might not be imagined he was guilty
of so black a contrivance; and that he went up to complete any base views
in consequence of it.

Believe us all, dear Miss Howe, under the deepest concern at this unhappy
accident; which will, we fear, exasperate the charming sufferer; not too
much for the occasion, but too much for our hopes.

O what wretches are these free-living men, who love to tread in intricate
paths; and, when once they err, know not how far out of the way their
headstrong course may lead them!

My sister joins her thanks with mine to your good mother and self, for
the favours you heaped upon us last Thursday.  We beseech your continued
interest as to the subject of our visit.  It shall be all our studies to
oblige and recompense the dear lady to the utmost of our power, and for
what she has suffered from the unhappy man.

We are, dear Madam,
Your obliged and faithful servants,
CHARLOTTE | MONTAGUE.
MARTHA    |


***


DEAR MISS HOWE,

We join in the above request of Miss Charlotte and Miss Patty Montague,
for your favour and interest; being convinced that the accident was an
accident, and no plot or contrivance of a wretch too full of them.  We
are, Madam,

Your most obedient humble servants,

M.
SARAH SADLEIR.
ELIZ. LAWRANCE.


***


DEAR MISS HOWE,

After what is written above, by names and characters of unquestionable
honour, I might have been excused signing a name almost as hateful to
myself, as I KNOW it is to you.  But the above will have it so.  Since,
therefore, I must write, it shall be the truth; which is, that if I may
be once more admitted to pay my duty to the most deserving and most
injured of her sex, I will be content to do it with a halter about my
neck; and, attended by a parson on my right hand, and the hangman on my
left, be doomed, at her will, either to the church or the gallows.

Your most humble servant,
ROBERT LOVELACE.

TUESDAY, JULY 18.



LETTER XV

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT, JULY 16.


What a cursed piece of work hast thou made of it, with the most excellent
of women!  Thou mayest be in earnest, or in jest, as thou wilt; but the
poor lady will not be long either thy sport, or the sport of fortune!

I will give thee an account of a scene that wants but her affecting pen
to represent it justly; and it would wring all the black blood out of thy
callous heart.

Thou only, who art the author of her calamities, shouldst have attended
her in her prison.  I am unequal to such a task: nor know I any other man
but would.

This last act, however unintended by thee, yet a consequence of thy
general orders, and too likely to be thought agreeable to thee, by those
who know thy other villanies by her, has finished thy barbarous work.
And I advise thee to trumpet forth every where, how much in earnest thou
art to marry her, whether true or not.

Thou mayest safely do it.  She will not live to put thee to the trial;
and it will a little palliate for thy enormous usage of her, and be a
mean to make mankind, who know not what I know of the matter, herd a
little longer with thee, and forbear to hunt thee to thy fellow-savages
in the Lybian wilds and desarts.

Your messenger found me at Edgware expecting to dinner with me several
friends, whom I had invited three days before.  I sent apologies to them,
as in a case of life and death; and speeded to town to the
woman's: for how knew I but shocking attempts might be made upon her by
the cursed wretches: perhaps by your connivance, in order to mortify her
into your measures?

Little knows the public what villanies are committed by vile wretches, in
these abominable houses upon innocent creatures drawn into their snares.

Finding the lady not there, I posted away to the officer's, although
Sally told me that she had but just come from thence; and that she had
refused to see her, or (as she sent down word) any body else; being
resolved to have the remainder of that Sunday to herself, as it might,
perhaps, be the last she should ever see.

I had the same thing told me, when I got thither.

I sent up to let her know, that I came with a commission to set her at
liberty.  I was afraid of sending up the name of a man known to be your
friend.  She absolutely refused to see any man, however, for that day, or
to answer further to any thing said from me.

Having therefore informed myself of all that the officer, and his wife,
and servant, could acquaint me with, as well in relation to the horrid
arrest, as to her behaviour, and the women's to her; and her ill state of
health; I went back to Sinclair's, as I will still call her, and heard
the three women's story.  From all which I am enabled to give you the
following shocking particulars: which may serve till I can see the
unhappy lady herself to-morrow, if then I gain admittance to her.  You
will find that I have been very minute in my inquiries.

Your villain it was that set the poor lady, and had the impudence to
appear, and abet the sheriff's officers in the cursed transaction.  He
thought, no doubt, that he was doing the most acceptable service to his
blessed master.  They had got a chair; the head ready up, as soon as
service was over.  And as she came out of the church, at the door
fronting Bedford-street, the officers, stepping up to her, whispered that
they had an action against her.

She was terrified, trembled, and turned pale.

Action, said she!  What is that!----I have committed no bad action!----
Lord bless me! men, what mean you?

That you are our prisoner, Madam.

Prisoner, Sirs!--What--How--Why--What have I done?

You must go with us.  Be pleased, Madam, to step into this chair.

With you!--With men!  Must go with men!--I am not used to go with strange
men!----Indeed you must excuse me!

We can't excuse you.  We are sheriff's officers,  We have a writ against
you.  You must go with us, and you shall know at whose suit.

Suit! said the charming innocent; I don't know what you mean.  Pray, men,
don't lay hands upon me; (they offering to put her into the chair.)  I am
not used to be thus treated--I have done nothing to deserve it.

She then spied thy villain--O thou wretch, said she, where is thy vile
master?--Am I again to be his prisoner?  Help, good people!

A crowd had begun to gather.

My master is in the country, Madam, many miles off.  If you please to go
with these men, they will treat you civilly.

The people were most of them struck with compassion.  A fine young
creature!--A thousand pities cried some. While some few threw out vile
and shocking reflections!  But a gentleman interposed, and demanded to
see the fellow's authority.

They showed it.  Is your name Clarissa Harlowe, Madam? said he.

Yes, yes, indeed, ready to sink, my name was Clarissa Harlowe:--but it is
now Wretchedness!----Lord be merciful to me, what is to come next?

You must go with these men, Madam, said the gentleman: they have
authority for what they do.

He pitied her, and retired.

Indeed you must, said one chairman.

Indeed you must, said the other.

Can nobody, joined in another gentleman, be applied to, who will see that
so fine a creature is not ill used?

Thy villain answered, orders were given particularly for that.  She had
rich relations.  She need but ask and have.  She would only be carried to
the officer's house till matters could be made up.  The people she had
lodged with loved her:--but she had left her lodgings privately.

Oh! had she those tricks already? cried one or two.

She heard not this--but said--Well, if I must go, I must--I cannot resist
--but I will not be carried to the woman's!  I will rather die at your
feet, than be carried to the woman's.

You won't be carried there, Madam, cried thy fellow.

Only to my house, Madam, said one of the officers.

Where is that?

In High-Holborn, Madam.

I know not where High-Holborn is: but any where, except to the woman's.
----But am I to go with men only?

Looking about her, and seeing the three passages, to wit, that leading to
Henrietta-street, that to King-street, and the fore-right one, to
Bedford-street, crowded, she started--Any where--any where, said she, but
to the woman's!  And stepping into the chair, threw herself on the seat,
in the utmost distress and confusion--Carry me, carry me out of sight--
cover me--cover me up--for ever--were her words.

Thy villain drew the curtain: she had not power: and they went away with
her through a vast crowd of people.

Here I must rest.  I can write no more at present.

Only, Lovelace, remember, all this was to a Clarissa.


***


The unhappy lady fainted away when she was taken out of the chair at the
officer's house.

Several people followed the chair to the very house, which is in a
wretched court.  Sally was there; and satisfied some of the inquirers,
that the young gentlewoman would be exceedingly well used: and they soon
dispersed.

Dorcas was also there; but came not in her sight.  Sally, as a favour,
offered to carry her to her former lodgings: but she declared they should
carry her thither a corpse, if they did.

Very gentle usage the women boast of: so would a vulture, could it speak,
with the entrails of its prey upon its rapacious talons.  Of this you'll
judge from what I have to recite.

She asked, what was meant by this usage of her?  People told me, said
she, that I must go with the men: that they had authority to take me: so
I submitted.  But now, what is to be the end of this disgraceful
violence?

The end, said the vile Sally Martin, is, for honest people to come at
their own.

Bless me! have I taken away any thing that belongs to those who have
obtained the power over me?--I have left very valuable things behind me;
but have taken away that is not my own.

And who do you think, Miss Harlowe; for I understand, said the cursed
creature, you are not married; who do you think is to pay for your board
and your lodgings! such handsome lodgings! for so long a time as you were
at Mrs. Sinclair's?

Lord have mercy upon me!--Miss Martin, (I think you are Miss Martin!)--
And is this the cause of such a disgraceful insult upon me in the open
streets?

And cause enough, Miss Harlowe! (fond of gratifying her jealous revenge,
by calling her Miss,)--One hundred and fifty guineas, or pounds, is no
small sum to lose--and by a young creature who would have bilked her
lodgings.

You amaze me, Miss Martin!--What language do you talk in?--Bilk my
lodgings?--What is that?

She stood astonished and silent for a few moments.

But recovering herself, and turning from her to the window, she wrung her
hands [the cursed Sally showed me how!] and lifting them up--Now,
Lovelace: now indeed do I think I ought to forgive thee!--But who shall
forgive Clarissa Harlowe!----O my sister!--O my brother!--Tender mercies
were your cruelties to this!

After a pause, her handkerchief drying up her falling tears, she turned
to Sally: Now, have I noting to do but acquiesce--only let me say, that
if this aunt of your's, this Mrs. Sinclair, or this man, this Mr.
Lovelace, come near me; or if I am carried to the horrid house; (for
that, I suppose, is the design of this new outrage;) God be merciful to
the poor Clarissa Harlowe!----Look to the consequence!----Look, I charge
you, to the consequence!

The vile wretch told her, it was not designed to carry her any where
against her will: but, if it were, they should take care not to be
frighted again by a penknife.

She cast up her eyes to Heaven, and was silent--and went to the farthest
corner of the room, and, sitting down, threw her handkerchief over her
face.

Sally asked her several questions; but not answering her, she told her,
she would wait upon her by-and-by, when she had found her speech.

She ordered the people to press her to eat and drink.  She must be
fasting--nothing but her prayers and tears, poor thing!--were the
merciless devil's words, as she owned to me.--Dost think I did not curse
her?

She went away; and, after her own dinner, returned.

The unhappy lady, by this devil's account of her, then seemed either
mortified into meekness, or to have made a resolution not to be provoked
by the insults of this cursed creature.

Sally inquired, in her presence, whether she had eat or drank any thing;
and being told by the woman, that she could not prevail upon her to taste
a morsel, or drink a drop, she said, this is wrong, Miss Harlowe!  Very
wrong!--Your religion, I think, should teach you, that starving yourself
is self-murder.

She answered not.

The wretch owned she was resolved to make her speak.

She asked if Mabell should attend her, till it were seen what her friends
would do for her in discharge of the debt?  Mabell, said she, had not yet
earned the clothes you were so good as to give her.

Am I not worthy an answer, Miss Harlowe?

I would answer you (said the sweet sufferer, without any emotion) if I
knew how.

I have ordered pen, ink, and paper, to be brought you, Miss Harlowe.
There they are.  I know you love writing.  You may write to whom you
please.  Your friend, Miss Howe, will expect to hear from you.

I have no friend, said she, I deserve none.

Rowland, for that's the officer's name, told her, she had friends enow to
pay the debt, if she would write.

She would trouble nobody; she had no friends; was all they could get from
her, while Sally staid: but yet spoken with a patience of spirit, as if
she enjoyed her griefs.

The insolent creature went away, ordering them, in the lady's hearing, to
be very civil to her, and to let her want for nothing.  Now had she, she
owned, the triumph of her heart over this haughty beauty, who kept them
all at such a distance in their own house!

What thinkest thou, Lovelace, of this!--This wretch's triumph was over a
Clarissa!

About six in the evening, Rowland's wife pressed her to drink tea.  She
said, she had rather have a glass of water; for her tongue was ready to
cleave to the roof of her mouth.

The woman brought her a glass, and some bread and butter.  She tried to
taste the latter; but could not swallow it: but eagerly drank the water;
lifting up her eyes in thankfulness for that!!!

The divine Clarissa, Lovelace,--reduced to rejoice for a cup of cold
water!--By whom reduced?

About nine o'clock she asked if any body were to be her bedfellow.

Their maid, if she pleased; or, as she was so weak and ill, the girl
should sit up with her, if she chose she should.

She chose to be alone both night and day, she said.  But might she not be
trusted with the key of the room where she was to lie down; for she
should not put off her clothes!

That, they told her, could not be.

She was afraid not, she said.--But indeed she would not get away, if she
could.

They told me, that they had but one bed, besides that they lay in
themselves, (which they would fain have had her accept of,) and besides
that their maid lay in, in a garret, which they called a hole of a
garret: and that that one bed was the prisoner's bed; which they made
several apologies to me about.  I suppose it is shocking enough.

But the lady would not lie in theirs.  Was she not a prisoner? she said
--let her have the prisoner's room.

Yet they owned that she started, when she was conducted thither.  But
recovering herself, Very well, said she--why should not all be of a
piece?--Why should not my wretchedness be complete?

She found fault, that all the fastenings were on the outside, and none
within; and said, she could not trust herself in a room where others
could come in at their pleasure, and she not go out.  She had not been
used to it!!!

Dear, dear soul!--My tears flow as I write!----Indeed, Lovelace, she had
not been used to such treatment.

They assured her, that it was as much their duty to protect her from
other persons' insults, as from escaping herself.

Then they were people of more honour, she said, than she had been of late
used to.

She asked if they knew Mr. Lovelace?

No, was their answer.

Have you heard of him?

No.

Well, then, you may be good sort of folks in your way.

Pause here for a moment, Lovelace!--and reflect--I must.


***


Again they asked her if they should send any word to her lodgings?

These are my lodgings now; are they not?--was all her answer.

She sat up in a chair all night, the back against the door; having, it
seems, thrust a piece of a poker through the staples where a bolt had
been on the inside.


***


Next morning Sally and Polly both went to visit her.

She had begged of Sally, the day before, that she might not see Mrs.
Sinclair, nor Dorcas, nor the broken-toothed servant, called William.

Polly would have ingratiated herself with her; and pretended to be
concerned for her misfortunes.  But she took no more notice of her than
of the other.

They asked if she had any commands?--If she had, she only need to mention
what they were, and she should be obeyed.

None at all, she said.

How did she like the people of the house?  Were they civil to her?

Pretty well, considering she had no money to give them.

Would she accept of any money? they could put it to her account.

She would contract no debts.

Had she any money about her?

She meekly put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out half a guinea, and
a little silver.  Yes, I have a little.----But here should be fees paid,
I believe.  Should there not?  I have heard of entrance-money to compound
for not being stript.  But these people are very civil people, I fancy;
for they have not offered to take away my clothes.

They have orders to be civil to you.

It is very kind.

But we two will bail you, Miss, if you will go back with us to Mrs.
Sinclair's.

Not for the world!

Her's are very handsome apartments.

The fitter for those who own them!

These are very sad ones.

The fitter for me!

You may be happy yet, Miss, if you will.

I hope I shall.

If you refuse to eat or drink, we will give bail, and take you with us.

Then I will try to eat and drink.  Any thing but go with you.

Will you not send to your new lodgings; the people will be frighted.

So they will, if I send.  So they will, if they know where I am.

But have you no things to send for from thence?

There is what will pay for their lodgings and trouble: I shall not lessen
their security.

But perhaps letters or messages may be left for you there.

I have very few friends; and to those I have I will spare the
mortification of knowing what has befallen me.

We are surprised at your indifference, Miss Harlowe!  Will you not write
to any of your friends?

No.

Why, you don't think of tarrying here always?

I shall not live always.

Do you think you are to stay here as long as you live?

That's as it shall please God, and those who have brought me hither.

Should you like to be at liberty?

I am miserable!--What is liberty to the miserable, but to be more
miserable.

How miserable, Miss?--You may make yourself as happy as you please.

I hope you are both happy.

We are.

May you be more and more happy!

But we wish you to be so too.

I shall never be of your opinion, I believe, as to what happiness is.

What do you take our opinion of happiness to be?

To live at Mrs. Sinclair's.

Perhaps, said Sally, we were once as squeamish and narrow-minded as you.

How came it over with you?

Because we saw the ridiculousness of prudery.

Do you come hither to persuade me to hate prudery, as you call it, as
much as you do?

We came to offer our service to you.

It is out of your power to serve me.

Perhaps not.

It is not in my inclination to trouble you.

You may be worse offered.

Perhaps I may.

You are mighty short, Miss.

As I wish your visit to be, Ladies.

They owned to me, that they cracked their fans, and laughed.

Adieu, perverse beauty!

Your servant, Ladies.

Adieu, haughty airs!

You see me humbled--

As you deserve, Miss Harlowe.  Pride will have a fall.

Better fall, with what you call pride, than stand with meanness.

Who does?

I had once a better opinion of you, Miss Horton!--Indeed you should not
insult the miserable.

Neither should the miserable, said Sally, insult people for their
civility.

I should be sorry if I did.

Mrs. Sinclair shall attend you by-and-by, to know if you have any
commands for her.

I have no wish for any liberty, but that of refusing to see her, and one
more person.

What we came for, was to know if you had any proposals to make for your
enlargement.

Then, it seems, the officer put in.  You have very good friends, Madam,
I understand.  Is it not better that you make it up?  Charges will run
high.  A hundred and fifty guineas are easier paid than two hundred.  Let
these ladies bail you, and go along with them; or write to your friends
to make it up.

Sally said, There is a gentleman who saw you taken, and was so much moved
for you, Miss Harlowe, that he would gladly advance the money for you,
and leave you to pay it when you can.

See, Lovelace, what cursed devils these are!  This is the way, we know,
that many an innocent heart is thrown upon keeping, and then upon the
town.  But for these wretches thus to go to work with such an angel as
this!--How glad would have been the devilish Sally, to have had the least
handle to report to thee a listening ear, or patient spirit, upon this
hint!

Sir, said she, with high indignation, to the officer, did not you say,
last night, that it was as much your business to protect me from the
insults of others, as from escaping?--Cannot I be permitted to see whom
I please? and to refuse admittance to those I like not?

Your creditors, Madam, will expect to see you.

Not if I declare I will not treat with them.

Then, Madam, you will be sent to prison.

Prison, friend!--What dost thou call thy house?

Not a prison, Madam.

Why these iron-barred windows, then?  Why these double locks and bolts
all on the outside, none on the in?

And down she dropt into her chair, and they could not get another word
from her.  She threw her handkerchief over her face, as one before, which
was soon wet with tears; and grievously, they own, she sobbed.

Gentle treatment, Lovelace!--Perhaps thou, as well as these wretches,
will think it so!

Sally then ordered a dinner, and said, They would soon be back a gain,
and see that she eat and drank, as a good christian should, comporting
herself to her condition, and making the best of it.

What has not this charming creature suffered, what has she not gone
through, in these last three months, that I know of!--Who would think
such a delicately-framed person could have sustained what she has
sustained!  We sometimes talk of bravery, of courage, of fortitude!--Here
they are in perfection!--Such bravoes as thou and I should never have
been able to support ourselves under half the persecutions, the
disappointments, and contumelies, that she has met with; but, like
cowards, should have slid out of the world, basely, by some back-door;
that is to say, by a sword, by a pistol, by a halter, or knife;--but here
is a fine-principled woman, who, by dint of this noble consideration, as
I imagine, [What else can support her?] that she has not deserved the
evils she contends with; and that this world is designed but as a
transitory state of the probation; and that she is travelling to another
and better; puts up with all the hardships of the journey; and is not to
be diverted from her course by the attacks of thieves and robbers, or any
other terrors and difficulties; being assured of an ample reward at the
end of it.

If thou thinkest this reflection uncharacteristic from a companion and
friend of thine, imaginest thou, that I profited nothing by my long
attendance on my uncle in his dying state; and from the pious reflections
of the good clergyman, who, day by day, at the poor man's own request,
visited and prayed by him?--And could I have another such instance, as
this, to bring all these reflections home to me?

Then who can write of good persons, and of good subjects, and be capable
of admiring them, and not be made serious for the time?  And hence may we
gather what a benefit to the morals of men the keeping of good company
must be; while those who keep only bad, must necessarily more and more
harden, and be hardened.


***


'Tis twelve of the clock, Sunday night--I can think of nothing but this
excellent creature.  Her distresses fill my head and my heart.  I was
drowsy for a quarter of an hour; but the fit is gone off.  And I will
continue the melancholy subject from the information of these wretches.
Enough, I dare say, will arise in the visit I shall make, if admitted
to-morrow, to send by thy servant, as to the way I am likely to find her
in.

After the women had left her, she complained of her head and her heart;
and seemed terrified with apprehensions of being carried once more to
Sinclair's.

Refusing any thing for breakfast, Mrs. Rowland came up to her, and told
her, (as these wretches owned they had ordered her, for fear she should
starve herself,) that she must and should have tea, and bread and butter:
and that, as she had friends who could support her, if she wrote to them,
it was a wrong thing, both for herself and them, to starve herself thus.

If it be for your own sakes, said she, that is another thing: let coffee,
or tea, or chocolate, or what you will, be got: and put down a chicken to
my account every day, if you please, and eat it yourselves.  I will taste
it, if I can.  I would do nothing to hinder you.  I have friends will pay
you liberally, when they know I am gone.

They wondered, they told her, at her strange composure in such
distresses.

They were nothing, she said, to what she had suffered already from the
vilest of all men.  The disgrace of seizing her in the street; multitudes
of people about her; shocking imputations wounding her ears; had indeed
been very affecting to her.  But that was over.--Every thing soon would!
--And she should be still more composed, were it not for the
apprehensions of seeing one man, and one woman; and being tricked or
forced back to the vilest house in the world.

Then were it not better to give way to the two gentlewoman's offer to
bail her?--They could tell her, it was a very kind proffer; and what was
not to be met every day.

She believed so.

The ladies might, possibly, dispense with her going back to the house to
which she had such an antipathy.  Then the compassionate gentleman, who
was inclined to make it up with her creditors on her own bond--it was
very strange to them she hearkened not to so generous a proposal.

Did the two ladies tell you who the gentleman was?--Or, did they say any
more on the subject?

Yes, they did! and hinted to me, said the woman, that you had nothing to
do but to receive a visit from the gentleman, and the money, they
believed, would be laid down on your own bond or note.

She was startled.

I charge you, said she, as you will answer it one day to my friends, I
charge you don't.  If you do, you know not what may be the consequence.

They apprehended no bad consequence, they said, in doing their duty: and
if she knew not her own good, her friends would thank them for taking any
innocent steps to serve her, though against her will.

Don't push me upon extremities, man!--Don't make me desperate, woman!--I
have no small difficulty, notwithstanding the seeming composure you just
now took notice of, to bear, as I ought to bear, the evils I suffer.  But
if you bring a man or men to me, be the pretence what it will----

She stopt there, and looked so earnestly, and so wildly, they said, that
they did not know but she would do some harm to herself, if they
disobeyed her; and that would be a sad thing in their house, and might be
their ruin.  They therefore promised, that no man should be brought to
her but by her own consent.

Mrs. Rowland prevailed on her to drink a dish of tea, and taste some
bread and butter, about eleven on Saturday morning: which she probably
did to have an excuse not to dine with the women when they returned.

But she would not quit her prison-room, as she called it, to go into
their parlour.

'Unbarred windows, and a lightsomer apartment,' she said, 'had too
cheerful an appearance for her mind.'

A shower falling, as she spoke, 'What,' said she, looking up, 'do the
elements weep for me?'

At another time, 'The light of the sun was irksome to her.  The sun
seemed to shine in to mock her woes.'

'Methought,' added she, 'the sun darting in, and gilding these iron bars,
plays upon me like the two women, who came to insult my haggard looks, by
the word beauty; and my dejected heart, by the word haughty airs!'

Sally came again at dinner-time, to see how she fared, as she told her;
and that she did not starve herself: and, as she wanted to have some talk
with her, if she gave her leave, she would dine with her.

I cannot eat.

You must try, Miss Harlowe.

And, dinner being ready just then, she offered her hand, and desired her
to walk down.

No; she would not stir out of her prison-room.

These sullen airs won't do, Miss Harlowe: indeed they won't.

She was silent.

You will have harder usage than any you have ever yet known, I can tell
you, if you come not into some humour to make matters up.

She was still silent.

Come, Miss, walk down to dinner.  Let me entreat you, do.  Miss Horton is
below: she was once your favourite.

She waited for an answer: but received none.

We came to make some proposals to you, for your good; though you
affronted us so lately.  And we would not let Mrs. Sinclair come in
person, because we thought to oblige you.

This is indeed obliging.

Come, give me your hand.  Miss Harlowe: you are obliged to me, I can tell
you that: and let us go down to Miss Horton.

Excuse me: I will not stir out of this room.

Would you have me and Miss Horton dine in this filthy bed-room?

It is not a bed-room to me.  I have not been in bed; nor will, while I am
here.

And yet you care not, as I see, to leave the house.--And so, you won't go
down, Miss Harlowe?

I won't, except I am forced to it.

Well, well, let it alone.  I sha'n't ask Miss Horton to dine in this
room, I assure you.  I will send up a plate.

And away the little saucy toad fluttered down.

When they had dined, up they came together.

Well, Miss, you would not eat any thing, it seems?--Very pretty sullen
airs these!--No wonder the honest gentleman had such a hand with you.

She only held up her hands and eyes; the tears trickling down her cheeks.

Insolent devils!--how much more cruel and insulting are bad women even
than bad men!

Methinks, Miss, said Sally, you are a little soily, to what we have seen
you.  Pity such a nice lady should not have changes of apparel!  Why
won't you send to your lodgings for linen, at least?

I am not nice now.

Miss looks well and clean in any thing, said Polly.  But, dear Madam, why
won't you send to your lodgings?  Were it but in kindness to the people?
They must have a concern about you.  And your Miss Howe will wonder
what's become of you; for, no doubt, you correspond.

She turned from them, and, to herself, said, Too much!  Too much!--She
tossed her handkerchief, wet before with her tears, from her, and held
her apron to her eyes.

Don't weep, Miss! said the vile Polly.

Yet do, cried the viler Sally, it will be a relief.  Nothing, as Mr.
Lovelace once told me, dries sooner than tears.  For once I too wept
mightily.

I could not bear the recital of this with patience.  Yet I cursed them
not so much as I should have done, had I not had a mind to get from them
all the particulars of their gentle treatment: and this for two reasons;
the one, that I might stab thee to the heart with the repetition; and the
other, that I might know upon what terms I am likely to see the unhappy
lady to-morrow.

Well, but, Miss Harlowe, cried Sally, do you think these forlorn airs
pretty?  You are a good christian, child.  Mrs. Rowland tells me, she has
got you a Bible-book.--O there it lies!--I make no doubt but you have
doubled down the useful places, as honest Matt. Prior says.

Then rising, and taking it up.--Ay, so you have.--The Book of Job!  One
opens naturally here, I see--My mamma made me a fine Bible-scholar.--You
see, Miss Horton, I know something of the book.

They proposed once more to bail her, and to go home with them.  A motion
which she received with the same indignation as before.

Sally told her, That she had written in a very favourable manner, in her
behalf, to you; and that she every hour expected an answer; and made no
doubt, that you would come up with a messenger, and generously pay the
whole debt, and ask her pardon for neglecting it.

This disturbed her so much, that they feared she would have fallen into
fits.  She could not bear your name, she said.  She hoped she should
never see you more: and, were you to intrude yourself, dreadful
consequences might follow.

Surely, they said, she would be glad to be released from her confinement.

Indeed she should, now they had begun to alarm her with his name, who was
the author of all her woes: and who, she now saw plainly, gave way to
this new outrage, in order to bring her to his own infamous terms.

Why then, they asked, would she not write to her friends, to pay Mrs.
Sinclair's demand?

Because she hoped she should not trouble any body; and because she knew
that the payment of the money if she should be able to pay it, was not
what was aimed at.

Sally owned that she told her, That, truly, she had thought herself as
well descended, and as well educated, as herself, though not entitled to
such considerable fortunes.  And had the impudence to insist upon it to
me to be truth.

She had the insolence to add, to the lady, That she had as much reason as
she to expect Mr. Lovelace would marry her; he having contracted to do so
before he knew Miss Clarissa Harlowe: and that she had it under his hand
and seal too--or else he had not obtained his end: therefore it was not
likely she should be so officious as to do his work against herself, if
she thought Mr. Lovelace had designs upon her, like what she presumed to
hint at: that, for her part, her only view was, to procure liberty to a
young gentlewoman, who made those things grievous to her which would not
be made such a rout about by any body else--and to procure the payment of
a just debt to her friend Mrs. Sinclair.

She besought them to leave her.  She wanted not these instances, she
said, to convince her of the company she was in; and told them, that, to
get rid of such visiters, and of the still worse she was apprehensive of,
she would write to one friend to raise the money for her; though it would
be death for her to do so; because that friend could not do it without
her mother, in whose eye it would give a selfish appearance to a
friendship that was above all sordid alloys.

They advised her to write out of hand.

But how much must I write for?  What is the sum?  Should I not have had a
bill delivered me?  God knows, I took not your lodgings.  But he that
could treat me as he has done, could do this!

Don't speak against Mr. Lovelace, Miss Harlowe.  He is a man I greatly
esteem.  [Cursed toad!]  And, 'bating that he will take his advantage,
where he can, of US silly credulous women, he is a man of honour.

She lifted up her hands and eyes, instead of speaking: and well she
might!  For any words she could have used could not have expressed the
anguish she must feel on being comprehended in the US.

She must write for one hundred and fifty guineas, at least: two hundred,
if she were short of more money, might well be written for.

Mrs. Sinclair, she said, had all her clothes.  Let them be sold, fairly
sold, and the money go as far as it would go.  She had also a few other
valuables; but no money, (none at all,) but the poor half guinea, and the
little silver they had seen.  She would give bond to pay all that her
apparel, and the other maters she had, would fall short of.  She had
great effects belonging to her of right.  Her bond would, and must be
paid, were it for a thousand pounds.  But her clothes she should never
want.  She believed, if not too much undervalued, those, and her few
valuables, would answer every thing.  She wished for no surplus but to
discharge the last expenses; and forty shillings would do as well for
those as forty pounds.  'Let my ruin, said she, lifting up her eyes, be
LARGE!  Let it be COMPLETE, in this life!--For a composition, let it be
COMPLETE.'--And there she stopped.

The wretches could not help wishing to me for the opportunity of making
such a purchase for their own wear.  How I cursed them! and, in my heart,
thee!--But too probable, thought I, that this vile Sally Martin may hope,
[though thou art incapable of it,] that her Lovelace, as she has the
assurance, behind thy back, to call thee, may present her with some of
the poor lady's spoils!

Will not Mrs. Sinclair, proceeded she, think my clothes a security, till
they can be sold?  They are very good clothes.  A suit or two but just
put on, as it were; never worn.  They cost much more than it demanded of
me.  My father loved to see me fine.--All shall go.  But let me have the
particulars of her demand.  I suppose I must pay for my destroyer [that
was her well-adapted word!] and his servants, as well as for myself.  I
am content to do so--I am above wishing that any body, who could thus
act, should be so much as expostulated with, as to the justice and equity
of this payment.  If I have but enough to pay the demand, I shall be
satisfied; and will leave the baseness of such an action as this, as ana
aggravation of a guilt which I thought could not be aggravated.

I own, Lovelace, I have malice in this particularity, in order to sting
thee on the heart.  And, let me ask thee, what now thou can'st think of
thy barbarity, thy unprecedented barbarity, in having reduced a person of
her rank, fortune, talents, and virtue, so low?

The wretched women, it must be owned, act but in their profession: a
profession thou hast been the principal means of reducing these two to
act in.  And they know what thy designs have been, and how far
prosecuted.  It is, in their opinions, using her gently, that they have
forborne to bring her to the woman so justly odious to her: and that they
have not threatened her with the introducing to her strange men: nor yet
brought into her company their spirit-breakers, and humbling-drones,
(fellows not allowed to carry stings,) to trace and force her back to
their detested house; and, when there, into all their measures.

Till I came, they thought thou wouldst not be displeased at any thing she
suffered, that could help to mortify her into a state of shame and
disgrace; and bring her to comply with thy views, when thou shouldst come
to release her from these wretches, as from a greater evil than
cohabiting with thee.

When thou considerest these things, thou wilt make no difficulty of
believing, that this their own account of their behaviour to this
admirable woman has been far short of their insults: and the less, when I
tell thee, that, all together, their usage had such effect upon her, that
they left her in violent hysterics; ordering an apothecary to be sent
for, if she should continue in them, and be worse; and particularly (as
they had done from the first) that they kept out of her way any edged or
pointed instrument; especially a pen-knife; which, pretending to mend a
pen, they said, she might ask for.

At twelve, Saturday night, Rowland sent to tell them, that she was so
ill, that he knew not what might be the issue; and wished her out of his
house.

And this made them as heartily wish to hear from you.  For their
messenger, to their great surprise, was not then returned from M. Hall.
And they were sure he must have reached that place by Friday night.

Early on Sunday morning, both devils went to see how she did.  They had
such an account of her weakness, lowness, and anguish, that they forebore
(out of compassion, they said, finding their visits so disagreeable to
her) to see her.  But their apprehension of what might be the issue was,
no doubt, their principal consideration: nothing else could have softened
such flinty bosoms.

They sent for the apothecary Rowland had had to her, and gave him, and
Rowland, and his wife and maid, strict orders, many times repeated, for
the utmost care to be taken of her--no doubt, with an Old-Bailey
forecast.  And they sent up to let her know what orders they had given:
but that, understanding she had taken something to compose herself, they
would not disturb her.

She had scrupled, it seems, to admit the apothecary's visit over night,
because he was a MAN.  Nor could she be prevailed upon to see him, till
they pleaded their own safety to her.

They went again, from church, [Lord, Bob., these creatures go to church!]
but she sent them down word that she must have all the remainder of the
day to herself.

When I first came, and told them of thy execrations for what they had
done, and joined my own to them, they were astonished.  The mother said,
she had thought she had known Mr. Lovelace better; and expected thanks,
and not curses.

While I was with them, came back halting and cursing, most horribly,
their messenger; by reason of the ill-usage he had received from you,
instead of the reward he had been taught to expect for the supposed good
news that he carried down.--A pretty fellow, art thou not, to abuse
people for the consequences of thy own faults?

Dorcas, whose acquaintance this fellow is, and who recommended him for
the journey, had conditioned with him, it seems, for a share in the
expected bounty from you.  Had she been to have had her share made good,
I wish thou hadst broken every bone in his skin.

Under what shocking disadvantages, and with this addition to them, that I
am thy friend and intimate, am I to make a visit to this unhappy lady
to-morrow morning!  In thy name, too!--Enough to be refused, that I am of
a sex, to which, for thy sake, she has so justifiable an aversion: nor,
having such a tyrant of a father, and such an implacable brother, has she
the reason to make an exception in favour of any of it on their accounts.

It is three o'clock.  I will close here; and take a little rest: what I
have written will be a proper preparative for what shall offer by-and-by.

Thy servant is not to return without a letter, he tells me; and that thou
expectest him back in the morning.  Thou hast fellows enough where thou
art at thy command.  If I find any difficulty in seeing the lady, thy
messenger shall post away with this.--Let him look to broken bones, and
other consequences, if what he carries answer not thy expectation.  But,
if I am admitted, thou shalt have this and the result of my audience both
together.  In the former case, thou mayest send another servant to wait
the next advices from

J. BELFORD.



LETTER XVI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, JULY 17.


About six this morning, I went to Rowland's.  Mrs. Sinclair was to follow
me, in order to dismiss the action; but not to come in sight.

Rowland, upon inquiry, told me, that the lady was extremely ill; and that
she had desired, that no one but his wife or maid should come near her.

I said, I must see her.  I had told him my business over-night, and I
must see her.

His wife went up: but returned presently, saying, she could not get her
to speak to her; yet that her eyelids moved; though she either would not,
or could not, open them, to look up at her.

Oons, woman, said I, the lady may be in a fit: the lady may be dying--let
me go up.  Show me the way.

A horrid hole of a house, in an alley they call a court; stairs
wretchedly narrow, even to the first-floor rooms: and into a den they led
me, with broken walls, which had been papered, as I saw by a multitude of
tacks, and some torn bits held on by the rusty heads.

The floor indeed was clean, but the ceiling was smoked with variety of
figures, and initials of names, that had been the woeful employment of
wretches who had no other way to amuse themselves.

A bed at one corner, with coarse curtains tacked up at the feet to the
ceiling; because the curtain-rings were broken off; but a coverlid upon
it with a cleanish look, though plaguily in tatters, and the corners tied
up in tassels, that the rents in it might go no farther.

The windows dark and double-barred, the tops boarded up to save mending;
and only a little four-paned eyelet-hole of a casement to let in air;
more, however, coming in at broken panes than could come in at that.

Four old Turkey-worked chairs, bursten-bottomed, the stuffing staring
out.

An old, tottering, worm-eaten table, that had more nails bestowed in
mending it to make it stand, than the table cost fifty years ago, when
new.

On the mantle-piece was an iron shove-up candlestick, with a lighted
candle in it, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, four of them, I suppose, for a
penny.

Near that, on the same shelf, was an old looking-glass, cracked through
the middle, breaking out into a thousand points; the crack given it,
perhaps, in a rage, by some poor creature, to whom it gave the
representation of his heart's woes in his face.

The chimney had two half-tiles in it on one side, and one whole one on
the other; which showed it had been in better plight; but now the very
mortar had followed the rest of the tiles in every other place, and left
the bricks bare.

An old half-barred stove grate was in the chimney; and in that a large
stone-bottle without a neck, filled with baleful yew, as an evergreen,
withered southern-wood, dead sweet-briar, and sprigs of rue in flower.

To finish the shocking description, in a dark nook stood an old
broken-bottomed cane couch, without a squab, or coverlid, sunk at one
corner, and unmortised by the failing of one of its worm-eater legs,
which lay in two pieces under the wretched piece of furniture it could
no longer support.

And this, thou horrid Lovelace, was the bed-chamber of the divine
Clarissa!!!

I had leisure to cast my eye on these things: for, going up softly, the
poor lady turned not about at our entrance; nor, till I spoke, moved her
head.

She was kneeling in a corner of the room, near the dismal window, against
the table, on an old bolster (as it seemed to be) of the cane couch,
half-covered with her handkerchief; her back to the door; which was only
shut to, [no need of fastenings;] her arms crossed upon the table, the
fore-finger of her right-hand in her Bible.  She had perhaps been reading
in it, and could read no longer.  Paper, pens, ink, lay by her book on
the table.  Her dress was white damask, exceeding neat; but her stays
seemed not tight-laced.  I was told afterwards, that her laces had been
cut, when she fainted away at her entrance into this cursed place; and
she had not been solicitous enough about her dress to send for others.
Her head-dress was a little discomposed; her charming hair, in natural
ringlets, as you have heretofore described it, but a little tangled, as
if not lately combed, irregularly shading one side of the loveliest neck
in the world; as her disordered rumpled handkerchief did the other.  Her
face [O how altered from what I had seen it! yet lovely in spite of all
her griefs and sufferings!] was reclined, when we entered, upon her
crossed arms; but so, as not more than one side of it could be hid.

When I surveyed the room around, and the kneeling lady, sunk with majesty
too in her white flowing robes, (for she had not on a hoop,) spreading
the dark, though not dirty, floor, and illuminating that horrid corner;
her linen beyond imagination white, considering that she had not been
undressed every since she had been here; I thought my concern would have
choked me.  Something rose in my throat, I know not what, which made me,
for a moment, guggle, as it were, for speech: which, at last, forcing its
way, con--con--confound you both, said I, to the man and woman, is this
an apartment for such a lady? and could the cursed devils of her own sex,
who visited this suffering angel, see her, and leave her, in so d----d a
nook?

Sir, we would have had the lady to accept of our own bed-chamber: but she
refused it.  We are poor people--and we expect nobody will stay with us
longer than they can help it.

You are people chosen purposely, I doubt not, by the d----d woman who has
employed you: and if your usage of this lady has been but half as bad as
your house, you had better never to have seen the light.

Up then raised the charming sufferer her lovely face; but with such a
significance of woe overspreading it, that I could not, for the soul of
me, help being visibly affected.

She waved her hand two or three times towards the door, as if commanding
me to withdraw; and displeased at my intrusion; but did not speak.

Permit me, Madam--I will not approach one step farther without your leave
--permit me, for one moment, the favour of your ear!

No--no--go, go, MAN! with an emphasis--and would have said more; but, as
if struggling in vain for words, she seemed to give up speech for lost,
and dropped her head down once more, with a deep sigh, upon her left arm;
her right, as if she had not the use of it (numbed, I suppose)
self-moved, dropping on her side.

O that thou hadst been there! and in my place!--But by what I then felt,
in myself, I am convinced, that a capacity of being moved by the
distresses of our fellow creatures, is far from being disgraceful to a
manly heart.  With what pleasure, at that moment, could I have given up
my own life, could I but first have avenged this charming creature, and
cut the throat of her destroyer, as she emphatically calls thee, though
the friend that I best love: and yet, at the same time, my heart and my
eyes gave way to a softness of which (though not so hardened a wretch as
thou) they were never before so susceptible.

I dare not approach you, dearest lady, without your leave: but on my
knees I beseech you to permit me to release you from this d----d house,
and out of the power of the cursed woman, who was the occasion of your
being here!

She lifted up her sweet face once more, and beheld me on my knees.  Never
knew I before what it was to pray so heartily.

Are you not--are you not Mr. Belford, Sir?  I think your name is Belford?

It is, Madam, and I ever was a worshipper of your virtues, and an
advocate for you; and I come to release you from the hands you are in.

And in whose to place me?--O leave me, leave me! let me never rise from
this spot! let me never, never more believe in man!

This moment, dearest lady, this very moment, if you please, you may
depart whithersoever you think fit.  You are absolutely free, and your
own mistress.

I had now as lieve die here in this place, as any where.  I will owe no
obligation to any friend of him in whose company you have seen me.  So,
pray, Sir, withdraw.

Then turning to the officer, Mr. Rowland I think your name is?  I am
better reconciled to your house than I was at first.  If you can but
engage that I shall have nobody come near me but your wife, (no man!)
and neither of those women who have sported with my calamities, I will
die with you, and in this very corner.  And you shall be well satisfied
for the trouble you have had with me--I have value enough for that--for,
see, I have a diamond ring; taking it out of her bosom; and I have
friends will redeem it at a high price, when I am gone.

But for you, Sir, looking at me, I beg you to withdraw.  If you mean well
by me, God, I hope, will reward you for your good meaning; but to the
friend of my destroyer will I not owe an obligation.

You will owe no obligation to me, nor to any body.  You have been
detained for a debt you do not owe.  The action is dismissed; and you
will only be so good as to give me your hand into the coach, which stands
as near to this house as it could draw up.  And I will either leave you
at the coach-door, or attend you whithersoever you please, till I see you
safe where you would wish to be.

Will you then, Sir, compel me to be beholden to you?

You will inexpressibly oblige me, Madam, to command me to do you either
service or pleasure.

Why then, Sir, [looking at me]--but why do you mock me in that humble
posture!  Rise, Sir!  I cannot speak to you else.

I rose.

Only, Sir, take this ring.  I have a sister, who will be glad to have it,
at the price it shall be valued at, for the former owner's sake!--Out of
the money she gives, let this man be paid! handsomely paid: and I have a
few valuables more at my lodging, (Dorcas, or the MAN William, can tell
where that is;) let them, and my clothes at the wicked woman's, where you
have seen me, be sold for the payment of my lodging first, and next of
your friend's debts, that I have been arrested for, as far as they will
go; only reserving enough to put me into the ground, any where, or any
how, no matter----Tell your friend, I wish it may be enough to satisfy
the whole demand; but if it be not, he must make it up himself; or, if he
think fit to draw for it on Miss Howe, she will repay it, and with
interest, if he insist upon it.----And this, Sir, if you promise to
perform, you will do me, as you offer, both pleasure and service: and say
you will, and take the ring and withdraw.  If I want to say any thing
more to you (you seem to be an humane man) I will let you know----and so,
Sir, God bless you!

I approached her, and was going to speak----

Don't speak, Sir: here's the ring.

I stood off.

And won't you take it? won't you do this last office for me?--I have no
other person to ask it of; else, believe me, I would not request it of
you.  But take it, or not, laying it upon the table----you must withdraw,
Sir: I am very ill.  I would fain get a little rest, if I could.  I find
I am going to be bad again.

And offering to rise, she sunk down through excess of weakness and grief,
in a fainting fit.

Why, Lovelace, was thou not present thyself?----Why dost thou commit such
villanies, as even thou art afraid to appear in; and yet puttest a weaker
heart and head upon encountering with them?

The maid coming in just then, the woman and she lifted her up on a
decrepit couch; and I withdrew with this Rowland; who wept like a child,
and said, he never in his life was so moved.

Yet so hardened a wretch art thou, that I question whether thou wilt shed
a tear at my relation.

They recovered her by hartshorn and water.  I went down mean while; for
the detestable woman had been below some time.  O how I did curse her!  I
never before was so fluent in curses.

She tried to wheedle me; but I renounced her; and, after she had
dismissed the action, sent her away crying, or pretending to cry, because
of my behaviour to her.

You will observe, that I did not mention one word to the lady about you.
I was afraid to do it.  For 'twas plain, that she could not bear your
name: your friend, and the company you have seen me in, were the words
nearest to naming you she could speak: and yet I wanted to clear your
intention of this brutal, this sordid-looking villany.

I sent up again, by Rowland's wife, when I heard that the lady was
recovered, beseeching her to quit that devilish place; and the woman
assured her that she was at liberty to do so, for that the action was
dismissed.

But she cared not to answer her: and was so weak and low, that it was
almost as much out of her power as inclination, the woman told me, to
speak.

I would have hastened away for my friend Doctor H., but the house is such
a den, and the room she was in such a hole, that I was ashamed to be seen
in it by a man of his reputation, especially with a woman of such an
appearance, and in such uncommon distress; and I found there was no
prevailing upon her to quit it for the people's bed-room, which was neat
and lightsome.

The strong room she was in, the wretches told me, should have been in
better order, but that it was but the very morning that she was brought
in that an unhappy man had quitted it; for a more eligible prison, no
doubt; since there could hardly be a worse.

Being told that she desired not to be disturbed, and seemed inclined to
doze, I took this opportunity to go to her lodgings in Covent-garden: to
which Dorcas (who first discovered her there, as Will. was the setter
from church) had before given me a direction.

The man's name is Smith, a dealer in gloves, snuff, and such petty
merchandize: his wife the shopkeeper: he a maker of the gloves they sell.
Honest people, it seems.

I thought to have got the woman with me to the lady; but she was not
within.

I talked with the man, and told him what had befallen the lady; owing, as
I said, to a mistake of orders; and gave her the character she deserved;
and desired him to send his wife, the moment she came in, to the lady;
directing him whither; not doubting that her attendance would be very
welcome to her; which he promised.

He told me that a letter was left for her there on Saturday; and, about
half an hour before I came, another, superscribed by the same hand; the
first, by the post; the other, by a countryman; who having been informed
of her absence, and of all the circumstances they could tell him of it,
posted away, full of concern, saying, that the lady he was sent from
would be ready to break her heart at the tidings.

I thought it right to take the two letters back with me; and, dismissing
my coach, took a chair, as a more proper vehicle for the lady, if I (the
friend of her destroyer) could prevail upon her to leave Rowland's.

And here, being obliged to give way to an indispensable avocation, I will
make thee taste a little, in thy turn, of the plague of suspense; and
break off, without giving thee the least hint of the issue of my further
proceedings.  I know, that those least bear disappointment, who love most
to give it.  In twenty instances, hast thou afforded me proof of the
truth of this observation.  And I matter not thy raving.

Another letter, however, shall be ready, send for it a soon as thou wilt.
But, were it not, have I not written enough to convince thee, that I am

Thy ready and obliging friend,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XVII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, JULY 17, ELEVEN AT NIGHT.


Curse upon thy hard heart, thou vile caitiff!  How hast thou tortured me,
by thy designed abruption! 'tis impossible that Miss Harlowe should have
ever suffered as thou hast made me suffer, and as I now suffer!

That sex is made to bear pain.  It is a curse that the first of it
entailed upon all her daughters, when she brought the curse upon us all.
And they love those best, whether man or child, who give them most--But
to stretch upon thy d----d tenter-hooks such a spirit as mine--No rack,
no torture, can equal my torture!

And must I still wait the return of another messenger?

Confound thee for a malicious devil!  I wish thou wert a post-horse, and
I upon the back of thee! how would I whip and spur, and harrow up thy
clumsy sides, till I make thee a ready-roasted, ready-flayed, mess of
dog's meat; all the hounds in the country howling after thee, as I drove
thee, to wait my dismounting, in order to devour thee piece-meal; life
still throbbing in each churned mouthful!

Give this fellow the sequel of thy tormenting scribble.

Dispatch him away with it.  Thou hast promised it shall be ready.  Every
cushion or chair I shall sit upon, the bed I shall lie down upon (if I go
to bed) till he return, will be stuffed with bolt-upright awls, bodkins,
corking-pins, and packing needles: already I can fancy that, to pink my
body like my mind, I need only to be put into a hogshead stuck full of
steel-pointed spikes, and rolled down a hill three times as high as the
Monument.

But I lose time; yet know not how to employ it till this fellow returns
with the sequel of thy soul-harrowing intelligence!



LETTER XVIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY NIGHT, JULY 17.


On my return to Rowland's, I found that the apothecary was just gone up.
Mrs. Rowland being above with him, I made the less scruple to go up too,
as it was probable, that to ask for leave would be to ask to be denied;
hoping also, that the letters had with me would be a good excuse.

She was sitting on the side of the broken couch, extremely weak and low;
and, I observed, cared not to speak to the man: and no wonder; for I
never saw a more shocking fellow, of a profession tolerably genteel, nor
heard a more illiterate one prate--physician in ordinary to this house,
and others like it, I suppose!  He put me in mind of Otway's apothecary
in his Caius Marius; as borrowed from the immortal Shakspeare:

      Meagre and very rueful were his looks:
      Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
            ------------ Famine in his cheeks:
      Need and oppression staring in his eyes:
      Contempt and beggary hanging on his back:
      The world no friend of his, nor the world's law.

As I am in black, he took me, at my entrance, I believe, to be a doctor;
and slunk behind me with his hat upon his two thumbs, and looked as if he
expected the oracle to open, and give him orders.

The lady looked displeased, as well at me as at Rowland, who followed me,
and at the apothecary.  It was not, she said, the least of her present
misfortunes, that she could not be left to her own sex; and to her option
to see whom she pleased.

I besought her excuse; and winking for the apothecary to withdraw, [which
he did,] told her, that I had been at her new lodgings, to order every
thing to be got ready for reception, presuming she would choose to go
thither: that I had a chair at the door: that Mr. Smith and his wife [I
named their names, that she should not have room for the least fear of
Sinclair's] had been full of apprehensions for her safety: that I had
brought two letters, which were left there fore her; the one by the post,
the other that very morning.

This took her attention.  She held out her charming hand for them; took
them, and, pressing them to her lips--From the only friend I have in the
world! said she; kissing them again; and looking at the seals, as if to
see whether they had been opened.  I can't read them, said she, my eyes
are too dim; and put them into her bosom.

I besought her to think of quitting that wretched hole.

Whither could she go, she asked, to be safe and uninterrupted for the
short remainder of her life; and to avoid being again visited by the
creatures who had insulted her before?

I gave her the solemnest assurances that she should not be invaded in her
new lodgings by any body; and said that I would particularly engage my
honour, that the person who had most offended her should not come near
her, without her own consent.

Your honour, Sir!  Are you not that man's friend!

I am not a friend, Madam, to his vile actions to the most excellent of
women.

Do you flatter me, Sir? then you are a MAN.--But Oh, Sir, your friend,
holding her face forward with great earnestness, your barbarous friend,
what has he not to answer for!

There she stopt: her heart full; and putting her hand over her eyes and
forehead, the tears tricked through her fingers: resenting thy barbarity,
it seemed, as Caesar did the stab from his distinguished Brutus!

Though she was so very much disordered, I thought I would not lose this
opportunity to assert your innocence of this villanous arrest.

There is no defending the unhappy man in any of his vile actions by you,
Madam; but of this last outrage, by all that's good and sacred, he is
innocent.

O wretches; what a sex is your's!--Have you all one dialect? good and
sacred!--If, Sir, you can find an oath, or a vow, or an adjuration, that
my ears have not been twenty times a day wounded with, then speak it, and
I may again believe a MAN.

I was excessively touched at these words, knowing thy baseness, and the
reason she had for them.

But say you, Sir, for I would not, methinks, have the wretch capable of
this sordid baseness!--Say you, that he is innocent of this last
wickedness? can you truly say that he is?

By the great God of Heaven!----

Nay, Sir, if you swear, I must doubt you!--If you yourself think your
WORD insufficient, what reliance can I have on your OATH!--O that this my
experience had not cost me so dear! but were I to love a thousand years,
I would always suspect the veracity of a swearer.  Excuse me, Sir; but is
it likely, that he who makes so free with his GOD, will scruple any thing
that may serve his turn with his fellow creature?

This was a most affecting reprimand!

Madam, said I, I have a regard, a regard a gentleman ought to have, to my
word; and whenever I forfeit it to you----

Nay, Sir, don't be angry with me.  It is grievous to me to question a
gentleman's veracity.  But your friend calls himself a gentleman--you
know not what I have suffered by a gentleman!----And then again she wept.

I would give you, Madam, demonstration, if your grief and your weakness
would permit it, that he has no hand in this barbarous baseness: and that
he resents it as it ought to be resented.

Well, well, Sir, [with quickness,] he will have his account to make up
somewhere else; not to me.  I should not be sorry to find him able to
acquit his intention on this occasion.  Let him know, Sir, only one
thing, that when you heard me in the bitterness of my spirit, most
vehemently exclaim against the undeserved usage I have met with from him,
that even then, in that passionate moment, I was able to say [and never
did I see such an earnest and affecting exultation of hands and eyes,]
'Give him, good God! repentance and amendment; that I may be the last
poor creature, who shall be ruined by him!--and, in thine own good time,
receive to thy mercy the poor wretch who had none on me!--'

By my soul, I could not speak.--She had not her Bible before her for
nothing.

I was forced to turn my head away, and to take out my handkerchief.

What an angel is this!--Even the gaoler, and his wife and maid, wept.

Again I wish thou hadst been there, that thou mightest have sunk down at
her feet, and begun that moment to reap the effect of her generous wishes
for thee; undeserving, as thou art, of any thing but perdition.

I represented to her that she would be less free where she was from
visits she liked not, than at her own lodgings.  I told her, that it
would probably bring her, in particular, one visiter, who, otherwise I
would engage, [but I durst not swear again, after the severe reprimand
she had just given me,] should not come near her, without her consent.
And I expressed my surprize, that she should be unwilling to quit such a
place as this; when it was more than probable that some of her friends,
when it was known how bad she was, would visit her.

She said the place, when she was first brought into it, was indeed very
shocking to her: but that she had found herself so weak and ill, and her
griefs had so sunk her, that she did not expect to have lived till now:
that therefore all places had been alike to her; for to die in a prison,
was to die; and equally eligible as to die in a palace, [palaces, she
said, could have no attractions for a dying person:] but that, since she
feared she was not so soon to be released, as she had hoped; since she
was suffered to be so little mistress of herself here; and since she
might, by removal, be in the way of her dear friend's letters; she would
hope that she might depend upon the assurances I gave her of being at
liberty to return to her last lodgings, (otherwise she would provide
herself with new ones, out of my knowledge, as well as your's;) and that
I was too much of a gentleman, to be concerned in carrying her back to
the house she had so much reason to abhor, and to which she had been once
before most vilely betrayed to her ruin.

I assured her, in the strongest terms [but swore not,] that you were
resolved not to molest her: and, as a proof of the sincerity of my
professions, besought her to give me directions, (in pursuance of my
friend's express desire,) about sending all her apparel, and whatever
belonged to her, to her new lodgings.

She seemed pleased; and gave me instantly out of her pocket her keys;
asking me, If Mrs. Smith, whom I had named, might not attend me; and she
would give her further directions?  To which I cheerfully assented; and
then she told me that she would accept of the chair I had offered her.

I withdrew; and took the opportunity to be civil to Rowland and his maid;
for she found no fault with their behaviour, for what they were; and the
fellow seems to be miserably poor.  I sent also for the apothecary, who
is as poor as the officer, (and still poorer, I dare say, as to the skill
required in his business,) and satisfied him beyond his hopes.

The lady, after I had withdrawn, attempted to read the letters I had
brought her.  But she could read but a little way in one of them, and had
great emotions upon it.

She told the woman she would take a speedy opportunity to acknowledge her
civilities and her husband's, and to satisfy the apothecary, who might
send her his bill to her lodgings.

She gave the maid something; probably the only half-guinea she had: and
then with difficulty, her limbs trembling under her, and supported by
Mrs. Rowland, got down stairs.

I offered my arm: she was pleased to lean upon it.  I doubt, Sir, said
she, as she moved, I have behaved rudely to you: but, if you knew all,
you would forgive me.

I know enough, Madam, to convince me, that there is not such purity and
honour in any woman upon earth; nor any one that has been so barbarously
treated.

She looked at me very earnestly.  What she thought, I cannot say; but, in
general, I never saw so much soul in a woman's eyes as in her's.

I ordered my servant, (whose mourning made him less observable as such,
and who had not been in the lady's eye,) to keep the chair in view; and
to bring me word, how she did, when set down.  The fellow had the thought
to step into the shop, just before the chair entered it, under pretence
of buying snuff; and so enabled himself to give me an account, that she
was received with great joy by the good woman of the house; who told her,
she was but just come in; and was preparing to attend her in High
Holborn.--O Mrs. Smith, said she, as soon as she saw her, did you not
think I was run away?--You don't know what I have suffered since I saw
you.  I have been in a prison!----Arrested for debts I owe not!--But,
thank God, I am here!--Will your maid--I have forgot her name already----

Catharine, Madam----

Will you let Catharine assist me to bed?--I have not had my clothes off
since Thursday night.

What she further said the fellow heard not, she leaning upon the maid,
and going up stairs.

But dost thou not observe, what a strange, what an uncommon openness of
heart reigns in this lady?  She had been in a prison, she said, before a
stranger in the shop, and before the maid-servant: and so, probably, she
would have said, had there been twenty people in the shop.

The disgrace she cannot hide from herself, as she says in her letter to
Lady Betty, she is not solicitous to conceal from the world!

But this makes it evident to me, that she is resolved to keep no terms
with thee.  And yet to be able to put up such a prayer for thee, as she
did in her prison; [I will often mention the prison-room, to tease thee!]
Does this not show, that revenge has very little sway in her mind; though
she can retain so much proper resentment?

And this is another excellence in this admirable woman's character: for
whom, before her, have we met with in the whole sex, or in ours either,
that knew how, in practice, to distinguish between REVENGE and
RESENTMENT, for base and ungrateful treatment?

'Tis a cursed thing, after all, that such a woman as this should be
treated as she has been treated.  Hadst thou been a king, and done as
thou hast done by such a meritorious innocent, I believe, in my heart, it
would have been adjudged to be a national sin, and the sword, the
pestilence, or famine, must have atoned for it!--But as thou art a
private man, thou wilt certainly meet with thy punishment, (besides what
thou mayest expect from the justice of the country, and the vengeance of
her friends,) as she will her reward, HEREAFTER.

It must be so, if there be really such a thing as future remuneration; as
now I am more and more convinced there must:--Else, what a hard fate is
her's, whose punishment, to all appearance, has so much exceeded her
fault?  And, as to thine, how can temporary burnings, wert thou by some
accident to be consumed in thy bed, expiate for thy abominable vileness
to her, in breach of all obligations moral and divine?

I was resolved to lose no time in having every thing which belonged to
the lady at the cursed woman's sent her.  Accordingly, I took coach to
Smith's, and procured the lady, (to whom I sent up my compliments, and
inquiries how she bore her removal,) ill as she sent down word she was,
to give proper direction to Mrs. Smith: whom I took with me to
Sinclair's: and who saw every thing looked out, and put into the trunks
and boxes they were first brought in, and carried away in two coaches.

Had I not been there, Sally and Polly would each of them have taken to
herself something of the poor lady's spoils.  This they declared: and I
had some difficulty to get from Sally a fine Brussels-lace head, which
she had the confidence to say she would wear for Miss Harlowe's sake.
Nor should either I or Mrs. Smith have known she had got it, had she not
been in search of the ruffles belonging to it.

My resentment on this occasion, and the conversation which Mrs. Smith and
I had, (in which I not only expatiated on the merits of the lady, but
expressed my concern for her sufferings; though I left her room to
suppose her married, yet without averring it,) gave me high credit with
the good woman: so that we are perfectly well acquainted already: by
which means I shall be enabled to give you accounts from time to time of
all that passes; and which I will be very industrious to do, provided I
may depend upon the solemn promises I have given the lady, in your name,
as well as in my own, that she shall be free from all personal
molestation from you.  And thus shall I have it in my power to return in
kind your writing favours; and preserve my short-hand besides: which,
till this correspondence was opened, I had pretty much neglected.

I ordered the abandoned women to make out your account.  They answered,
That they would do it with a vengeance.  Indeed they breathe nothing but
vengeance.  For now, they say, you will assuredly marry; and your example
will be followed by all your friends and companions--as the old one says,
to the utter ruin of her poor house.



LETTER XIX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY MORN. JULY 18, SIX O'CLOCK.


Having sat up so late to finish and seal in readiness my letter to the
above period, I am disturbed before I wished to have risen, by the
arrival of thy second fellow, man and horse in a foam.

While he baits, I will write a few lines, most heartily to congratulate
thee on thy expected rage and impatience, and on thy recovery of mental
feeling.

How much does the idea thou givest me of thy deserved torments, by thy
upright awls, bodkins, pins, and packing-needles, by thy rolling hogshead
with iron spikes, and by thy macerated sides, delight me!

I will, upon every occasion that offers, drive more spikes into thy
hogshead, and roll thee down hill, and up, as thou recoverest to sense,
or rather returnest back to senselessness.  Thou knowest therefore the
terms on which thou art to enjoy my correspondence.  Am not I, who have
all along, and in time, protested against thy barbarous and ungrateful
perfidies to a woman so noble, entitled to drive remorse, if possible,
into thy hitherto-callous heart?

Only let me repeat one thing, which perhaps I mentioned too slightly
before.  That the lady was determined to remove to new lodgings, where
neither you nor I should be able to find her, had I not solemnly assured
her, that she might depend upon being free from your visits.

These assurances I thought I might give her, not only because of your
promise, but because it is necessary for you to know where she is, in
order to address yourself to her by your friends.

Enable me therefore to make good to her this my solemn engagement; or
adieu to all friendship, at least to all correspondence, with thee for
ever.

J. BELFORD.



LETTER XX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, JULY 18.  AFTERNOON.


I renewed my inquiries after the lady's health, in the morning, by my
servant: and, as soon as I had dined, I went myself.

I had but a poor account of it: yet sent up my compliments.  She returned
me thanks for all my good offices; and her excuses, that they could not
be personal just then, being very low and faint: but if I gave myself the
trouble of coming about six this evening, she should be able, she hoped,
to drink a dish of tea with me, and would then thank me herself.

I am very proud of this condescension; and think it looks not amiss for
you, as I am your avowed friend.  Methinks I want fully to remove from
her mind all doubts of you in this last villanous action: and who knows
then what your noble relations may be able to do for you with her, if you
hold your mind?  For your servant acquainted me with their having
actually engaged Miss Howe in their and your favour, before this cursed
affair happened.  And I desire the particulars of all from yourself, that
I may the better know how to serve you.

She has two handsome apartments, a bed-chamber and dining-room, with
light closets in each.  She has already a nurse, (the people of the house
having but one maid,) a woman whose care, diligence, and honesty, Mrs.
Smith highly commends.  She has likewise the benefit of a widow
gentlewoman, Mrs. Lovick her name, who lodges over her apartment, and of
whom she seems very fond, having found something in her, she thinks,
resembling the qualities of her worthy Mrs. Norton.

About seven o'clock this morning, it seems, the lady was so ill, that she
yielded to their desires to have an apothecary sent for--not the fellow,
thou mayest believe, she had had before at Rowland's; but one Mr.
Goddard, a man of skill and eminence; and of conscience too; demonstrated
as well by general character, as by his prescriptions to this lady: for
pronouncing her case to be grief, he ordered, for the present, only
innocent juleps, by way of cordial; and, as soon as her stomach should be
able to bear it, light kitchen-diet; telling Mrs. Lovick, that that, with
air, moderate exercise, and cheerful company, would do her more good than
all the medicines in his shop.

This has given me, as it seems it has the lady, (who also praises his
modest behaviour, paternal looks, and genteel address,) a very good
opinion of the man; and I design to make myself acquainted with him, and,
if he advises to call in a doctor, to wish him, for the fair patient's
sake, more than the physician's, (who wants not practice,) my worthy
friend Dr. H.--whose character is above all exception, as his humanity, I
am sure, will distinguish him to the lady.

Mrs. Lovick gratified me with an account of a letter she had written from
the lady's mouth to Miss Howe; she being unable to write herself with
steadiness.

It was to this effect; in answer, it seems, to her two letters, whatever
were the contents of them:

'That she had been involved in a dreadful calamity, which she was sure,
when known, would exempt her from the effects of her friendly
displeasure, for not answering her first; having been put under an
arrest.--Could she have believed it?--That she was released but the day
before: and was now so weak and so low, that she was obliged to account
thus for her silence to her [Miss Howe's] two letters of the 13th and
16th: that she would, as soon as able, answer them--begged of her, mean
time, not to be uneasy for her; since (only that this was a calamity
which came upon her when she was far from being well, a load laid upon
the shoulders of a poor wretch, ready before to sink under too heavy a
burden) it was nothing to the evil she had before suffered: and one
felicity seemed likely to issue from it; which was, that she would be
at rest, in an honest house, with considerate and kind-hearted people;
having assurance given her, that she should not be molested by the
wretch, whom it would be death for her to see: so that now she, [Miss
Howe,] needed not to send to her by private and expensive conveyances:
nor need Collins to take precautions for fear of being dogged to her
lodgings; nor need she write by a fictitious name to her, but by her
own.'

You can see I am in a way to oblige you: you see how much she depends
upon my engaging for your forbearing to intrude yourself into her
company: let not your flaming impatience destroy all; and make me look
like a villain to a lady who has reason to suspect every man she sees to
be so.--Upon this condition, you may expect all the services that can
flow from

Your sincere well-wisher,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XXI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, JULY 18.


I am just come from the lady.  I was admitted into the dining-room, where
she was sitting in an elbow-chair, in a very weak and low way.  She made
an effort to stand up when I entered; but was forced to keep her seat.
You'll excuse me, Mr. Belford: I ought to rise to thank you for all your
kindness to me.  I was to blame to be so loth to leave that sad place;
for I am in heaven here, to what I was there; and good people about me
too!--I have not had good people about me for a long, long time before;
so that [with a half-smile] I had begun to wonder whither they were all
gone.

Her nurse and Mrs. Smith, who were present, took occasion to retire: and,
when we were alone, You seem to be a person of humanity, Sir, said she:
you hinted, as I was leaving my prison, that you were not a stranger to
my sad story.  If you know it truly, you must know that I have been most
barbarously treated; and have not deserved it at the man's hands by whom
I have suffered.

I told her I knew enough to be convinced that she had the merit of a
saint, and the purity of an angel: and was proceeding, when she said, No
flighty compliments! no undue attributes, Sir!

I offered to plead for my sincerity; and mentioned the word politeness;
and would have distinguished between that and flattery.  Nothing can be
polite, said she, that is not just: whatever I may have had; I have now
no vanity to gratify.

I disclaimed all intentions of compliment: all I had said, and what I
should say, was, and should be, the effect of sincere veneration.  My
unhappy friend's account of her had entitled her to that.

I then mentioned your grief, your penitence, your resolutions of making
her all the amends that were possible now to be made her: and in the most
earnest manner, I asserted your innocence as to the last villanous
outrage.

Her answer was to this effect--It is painful to me to think of him.  The
amends you talk of cannot be made.  This last violence you speak of, is
nothing to what preceded it.  That cannot be atoned for: nor palliated:
this may: and I shall not be sorry to be convinced that he cannot be
guilty of so very low a wickedness.----Yet, after his vile forgeries of
hands--after his baseness in imposing upon me the most infamous persons
as ladies of honour of his own family--what are the iniquities he is not
capable of?

I would then have given her an account of the trial you stood with your
friends: your own previous resolutions of marriage, had she honoured you
with the requested four words: all your family's earnestness to have the
honour of her alliance: and the application of your two cousins to Miss
Howe, by general consent, for that young lady's interest with her: but,
having just touched upon these topics, she cut me short, saying, that was
a cause before another tribunal: Miss Howe's letters to her were upon the
subject; and as she would write her thoughts to her as soon as she was
able.

I then attempted more particularly to clear you of having any hand in the
vile Sinclair's officious arrest; a point she had the generosity to wish
you cleared of: and, having mentioned the outrageous letter you had
written to me on this occasion, she asked, If I had that letter about me?

I owned I had.

She wished to see it.

This puzzled me horribly: for you must needs think that most of the free
things, which, among us rakes, pass for wit and spirit, must be shocking
stuff to the ears or eyes of persons of delicacy of that sex: and then
such an air of levity runs through thy most serious letters; such a false
bravery, endeavouring to carry off ludicrously the subjects that most
affect thee; that those letters are generally the least fit to be seen,
which ought to be most to thy credit.

Something like this I observed to her; and would fain have excused myself
from showing it: but she was so earnest, that I undertook to read some
parts of it, resolving to omit the most exceptionable.

I know thou'lt curse me for that; but I thought it better to oblige her
than to be suspected myself; and so not have it in my power to serve thee
with her, when so good a foundation was laid for it; and when she knows
as bad of thee as I can tell her.

Thou rememberest the contents, I suppose, of thy furious letter.*  Her
remarks upon the different parts of it, which I read to her, were to the
following effect:


* See Letter XII. of this volume.


Upon the last two lines, All undone! undone, by Jupiter!  Zounds, Jack,
what shall I do now? a curse upon all my plots and contrivances! thus she
expressed herself:

'O how light, how unaffected with the sense of its own crimes, is the
heart that could dictate to the pen this libertine froth?'

The paragraph which mentions the vile arrest affected her a good deal.

In the next I omitted thy curse upon thy relations, whom thou wert
gallanting: and read on the seven subsequent paragraphs down to thy
execrable wish; which was too shocking to read to her.  What I read
produced the following reflections from her:

'The plots and contrivances which he curses, and the exultings of the
wicked wretches on finding me out, show me that all his guilt was
premeditated: nor doubt I that his dreadful perjuries, and inhuman arts,
as he went along, were to pass for fine stratagems; for witty sport; and
to demonstrate a superiority of inventive talents!--O my cruel, cruel
brother! had it not been for thee, I had not been thrown upon so
pernicious and so despicable a plotter!--But proceed, Sir; pray proceed.'

At that part, Canst thou, O fatal prognosticator! tell me where my
punishment will end?--she sighed.  And when I came to that sentence,
praying for my reformation, perhaps--Is that there? said she, sighing
again.  Wretched man!--and shed a tear for thee.--By my faith, Lovelace,
I believe she hates thee not! she has at least a concern, a generous
concern for thy future happiness--What a noble creature hast thou
injured!

She made a very severe reflection upon me, on reading the words--On your
knees, for me, beg her pardon--'You had all your lessons, Sir, said she,
when you came to redeem me--You was so condescending as to kneel: I
thought it was the effect of your own humanity, and good-natured
earnestness to serve me--excuse me, Sir, I knew not that it was in
consequence of a prescribed lesson.'

This concerned me not a little; I could not bear to be thought such a
wretched puppet, such a Joseph Leman, such a Tomlinson.  I endeavoured,
therefore, with some warmth, to clear myself of this reflection; and she
again asked my excuse: 'I was avowedly, she said, the friend of a man,
whose friendship, she had reason to be sorry to say, was no credit to any
body.'--And desired me to proceed.

I did; but fared not much better afterwards: for on that passage where
you say, I had always been her friend and advocate, this was her
unanswerable remark: 'I find, Sir, by this expression, that he had always
designs against me; and that you all along knew that he had.  Would to
Heaven, you had had the goodness to have contrived some way, that might
not have endangered your own safety, to give me notice of his baseness,
since you approved not of it!  But you gentlemen, I suppose, had rather
see an innocent fellow-creature ruined, than be thought capable of an
action, which, however generous, might be likely to loosen the bands of a
wicked friendship!'

After this severe, but just reflection, I would have avoided reading the
following, although I had unawares begun the sentence, (but she held me
to it:) What would I now give, had I permitted you to have been a
successful advocate!  And this was her remark upon it--'So, Sir, you see,
if you had been the happy means of preventing the evils designed me, you
would have had your friend's thanks for it when he came to his
consideration.  This satisfaction, I am persuaded every one, in the long
run, will enjoy, who has the virtue to withstand, or prevent, a wicked
purpose.  I was obliged, I see, to your kind wishes--but it was a point
of honour with you to keep his secret; the more indispensable with you,
perhaps, the viler the secret.  Yet permit me to wish, Mr. Belford, that
you were capable of relishing the pleasures that arise to a benevolent
mind from VIRTUOUS friendship!--none other is worthy of the sacred name.
You seem an humane man: I hope, for your own sake, you will one day
experience the difference: and, when you do, think of Miss Howe and
Clarissa Harlowe, (I find you know much of my sad story,) who were the
happiest creatures on earth in each other's friendship till this friend
of your's'--And there she stopt, and turned from me.

Where thou callest thyself a villanous plotter; 'To take a crime to
himself, said she, without shame, O what a hardened wretch is this man!'

On that passage, where thou sayest, Let me know how she has been treated:
if roughly, woe be to the guilty! this was her remark, with an air of
indignation: 'What a man is your friend, Sir!--Is such a one as he to set
himself up to punish the guilty?--All the rough usage I could receive
from them, was infinitely less'--And there she stopt a moment or two:
then proceeding--'And who shall punish him? what an assuming wretch!--
Nobody but himself is entitled to injure the innocent;--he is, I suppose,
on the earth, to act the part which the malignant fiend is supposed to
act below--dealing out punishments, at his pleasure, to every inferior
instrument of mischief!'

What, thought I, have I been doing!  I shall have this savage fellow
think I have been playing him booty, in reading part of his letter to
this sagacious lady!--Yet, if thou art angry, it can only, in reason,
be at thyself; for who would think I might not communicate to her some
of thy sincerity in exculpating thyself from a criminal charge, which
thou wrotest to thy friend, to convince him of thy innocence?  But a bad
heart, and a bad cause are confounded things: and so let us put it to its
proper account.

I passed over thy charge to me, to curse them by the hour; and thy names
of dragon and serpents, though so applicable; since, had I read them,
thou must have been supposed to know from the first what creatures they
were; vile fellow as thou wert, for bringing so much purity among them!
And I closed with thy own concluding paragraph, A line! a line! a kingdom
for a line! &c.  However, telling her (since she saw that I omitted some
sentences) that there were farther vehemences in it; but as they were
better fitted to show to me the sincerity of the writer than for so
delicate an ear as her's to hear, I chose to pass them over.

You have read enough, said she--he is a wicked, wicked man!--I see he
intended to have me in his power at any rate; and I have no doubt of what
his purposes were, by what his actions have been.  You know his vile
Tomlinson, I suppose--You know--But what signifies talking?--Never was
there such a premeditated false heart in man, [nothing can be truer,
thought I!]  What has he not vowed! what has he not invented! and all for
what?--Only to ruin a poor young creature, whom he ought to have
protected; and whom he had first deceived of all other protection!

She arose and turned from me, her handkerchief at her eyes: and, after a
pause, came towards me again--'I hope, said she, I talk to a man who has
a better heart: and I thank you, Sir, for all your kind, though
ineffectual pleas in my favour formerly, whether the motives for them
were compassion, or principle, or both.  That they were ineffectual,
might very probably be owing to your want of earnestness; and that, as
you might think, to my want of merit.  I might not, in your eye, deserve
to be saved!--I might appear to you a giddy creature, who had run away
from her true and natural friends; and who therefore ought to take the
consequence of the lot she had drawn.'

I was afraid, for thy sake, to let her know how very earnest I had been:
but assured her that I had been her zealous friend; and that my motives
were founded upon a merit, that, I believed, was never equaled: that,
however indefensible Mr. Lovelace was, he had always done justice to her
virtue: that to a full conviction of her untainted honour it was owing
that he so earnestly desired to call so inestimable a jewel his--and was
proceeding, when she again cut me short--

Enough, and too much, of this subject, Sir!--If he will never more let me
behold his face, that is all I have now to ask of him.--Indeed, indeed,
clasping her hands, I never will, if I can, by any means not criminally
desperate, avoid it.

What could I say for thee?--There was no room, however, at that time, to
touch this string again, for fear of bringing upon myself a prohibition,
not only of the subject, but of ever attending her again.

I gave some distant intimations of money-matters.  I should have told
thee, when I read to her that passage, where thou biddest me force what
sums upon her I can get her to take--she repeated, No, no, no, no!
several times with great quickness; and I durst no more than just
intimate it again--and that so darkly, as left her room to seem not to
understand me.

Indeed I know not the person, man or woman, I should be so much afraid
of disobliging, or incurring a censure from, as from her.  She has so
much true dignity in her manner, without pride or arrogance, (which, in
those who have either, one is tempted to mortify,) such a piercing eye,
yet softened so sweetly with rays of benignity, that she commands all
one's reverence.

Methinks I have a kind of holy love for this angel of a woman; and it is
matter of astonishment to me, that thou couldst converse with her a
quarter of an hour together, and hold thy devilish purposes.

Guarded as she was by piety, prudence, virtue, dignity, family, fortune,
and a purity of heart that never woman before her boasted, what a real
devil must he be (yet I doubt I shall make thee proud!) who could resolve
to break through so many fences!

For my own part, I am more and more sensible that I ought not to have
contented myself with representing against, and expostulating with thee
upon, thy base intentions: and indeed I had it in my head, more than
once, to try to do something for her.  But, wretch that I was! I was
with-held by notions of false honour, as she justly reproached me,
because of thy own voluntary communications to me of thy purposes: and
then, as she was brought into such a cursed house, and was so watched by
thyself, as well as by thy infernal agents, I thought (knowing my man!)
that I should only accelerate the intended mischiefs.--Moreover, finding
thee so much over-awed by her virtue, that thou hadst not, at thy first
carrying her thither, the courage to attempt her; and that she had, more
than once, without knowing thy base views, obliged thee to abandon them,
and to resolve to do her justice, and thyself honour; I hardly doubted,
that her merit would be triumphant at last.

It is my opinion, (if thou holdest thy purposes to marry,) that thou
canst not do better than to procure thy real aunts, and thy real cousins,
to pay her a visit, and to be thy advocates.  But if they decline
personal visits, letters from them, and from my Lord M. supported by Miss
Howe's interest, may, perhaps, effect something in thy favour.

But these are only my hopes, founded on what I wish for thy sake.  The
lady, I really think, would choose death rather than thee: and the two
women are of opinion, though they knew not half of what she has suffered,
that her heart is actually broken.

At taking my leave, I tendered my best services to her, and besought her
to permit me frequently to inquire after her health.

She made me no answer, but by bowing her head.



LETTER XXII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, JULY 19.


This morning I took a chair to Smith's; and, being told that the lady had
a very bad night, but was up, I sent for her worthy apothecary; who, on
his coming to me, approving of my proposal of calling in Dr. H., I bid
the woman acquaint her with the designed visit.

It seems she was at first displeased; yet withdrew her objection: but,
after a pause, asked them, What she should do?  She had effects of value,
some of which she intended, as soon as she could, to turn into money,
but, till then, had not a single guinea to give the doctor for his fee.

Mrs. Lovick said, she had five guineas by her; they were at her service.

She would accept of three, she said, if she would take that (pulling a
diamond ring from her finger) till she repaid her; but on no other terms.

Having been told I was below with Mr. Goddard, she desired to speak one
word with me, before she saw the Doctor.

She was sitting in an elbow-chair, leaning her head on a pillow; Mrs.
Smith and the widow on each side her chair; her nurse, with a phial of
hartshorn, behind her; in her own hand her salts.

Raising her head at my entrance, she inquired if the Doctor knew Mr.
Lovelace.

I told her no; and that I believed you never saw him in your life.

Was the Doctor my friend?

He was; and a very worthy and skilful man.  I named him for his eminence
in his profession: and Mr. Goddard said he knew not a better physician.

I have but one condition to make before I see the gentleman; that he
refuse not his fees from me.  If I am poor, Sir, I am proud.  I will not
be under obligation, you may believe, Sir, I will not.  I suffer this
visit, because I would not appear ungrateful to the few friends I have
left, nor obstinate to such of my relations, as may some time hence, for
their private satisfaction, inquire after my behaviour in my sick hours.
So, Sir, you know the condition.  And don't let me be vexed.  'I am very
ill! and cannot debate the matter.'

Seeing her so determined, I told her, if it must be so, it should.

Then, Sir, the gentleman may come.  But I shall not be able to answer
many questions.  Nurse, you can tell him at the window there what a night
I have had, and how I have been for two days past.  And Mr. Goddard, if
he be here, can let him know what I have taken.  Pray let me be as little
questioned as possible.

The Doctor paid his respects to her with the gentlemanly address for
which he is noted: and she cast up her sweet eyes to him with that
benignity which accompanies her every graceful look.

I would have retired: but she forbid it.

He took her hand, the lily not of so beautiful a white: Indeed, Madam,
you are very low, said he: but give me leave to say, that you can do more
for yourself than all the faculty can do for you.

He then withdrew to the window.  And, after a short conference with the
women, he turned to me, and to Mr. Goddard, at the other window: We can
do nothing here, (speaking low,) but by cordials and nourishment.  What
friends has the lady?  She seems to be a person of condition; and, ill as
she is, a very fine woman.----A single lady, I presume?

I whisperingly told him she was.  That there were extraordinary
circumstances in her case; as I would have apprized him, had I met with
him yesterday: that her friends were very cruel to her; but that she
could not hear them named without reproaching herself; though they were
much more to blame than she.

I knew I was right, said the Doctor.  A love-case, Mr. Goddard! a
love-case, Mr. Belford! there is one person in the world who can do her
more service than all the faculty.

Mr. Goddard said he had apprehended her disorder was in her mind; and had
treated her accordingly: and then told the Doctor what he had done: which
he approving of, again taking her charming hand, said, My good young
lady, you will require very little of our assistance.  You must, in a
great measure, be your own assistance.  You must, in a great measure, be
your own doctress.  Come, dear Madam, [forgive me the familiar
tenderness; your aspect commands love as well as reverence; and a father
of children, some of them older than yourself, may be excused for his
familiar address,] cheer up your spirits.  Resolve to do all in your
power to be well; and you'll soon grow better.

You are very kind, Sir, said she.  I will take whatever you direct.  My
spirits have been hurried.  I shall be better, I believe, before I am
worse.  The care of my good friends here, looking at the women, shall not
meet with an ungrateful return.

The Doctor wrote.  He would fain have declined his fee.  As her malady,
he said, was rather to be relieved by the soothings of a friend, than by
the prescriptions of a physician, he should think himself greatly
honoured to be admitted rather to advise her in the one character, than
to prescribe to her in the other.

She answered, That she should be always glad to see so humane a man: that
his visits would keep her in charity with his sex: but that, where [sic]
she able to forget that he was her physician, she might be apt to abate
of the confidence in his skill, which might be necessary to effect the
amendment that was the end of his visits.

And when he urged her still further, which he did in a very polite
manner, and as passing by the door two or three times a day, she said she
should always have pleasure in considering him in the kind light he
offered himself to her: that that might be very generous in one person to
offer, which would be as ungenerous in another to accept: that indeed she
was not at present high in circumstance; and he saw by the tender, (which
he must accept of,) that she had greater respect to her own convenience
than to his merit, or than to the pleasure she should take in his visits.

We all withdrew together; and the Doctor and Mr. Goddard having a great
curiosity to know something more of her story, at the motion of the
latter we went into a neighbouring coffee-house, and I gave them, in
confidence, a brief relation of it; making all as light for you as I
could; and yet you'll suppose, that, in order to do but common justice
to the lady's character, heavy must be that light.


THREE O'CLOCK, AFTERNOON.

I just now called again at Smith's; and am told she is somewhat better;
which she attributed to the soothings of her Doctor.  She expressed
herself highly pleased with both gentlemen; and said that their behaviour
to her was perfectly paternal.----

Paternal, poor lady!----never having been, till very lately, from under
her parents' wings, and now abandoned by all her friends, she is for
finding out something paternal and maternal in every one, (the latter
qualities in Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith,) to supply to herself the father
and mother her dutiful heart pants after.

Mrs. Smith told me, that, after we were gone, she gave the keys of her
trunk and drawers to her and the widow Lovick, and desired them to take
an inventory of them; which they did in her presence.

They also informed me, that she had requested them to find her a
purchaser for two rich dressed suits; one never worn, the other not above
once or twice.

This shocked me exceedingly--perhaps it may thee a little!!!--Her reason
for so doing, she told them, was, that she should never live to wear
them: that her sister, and other relations, were above wearing them: that
her mother would not endure in her sight any thing that was her's: that
she wanted the money: that she would not be obliged to any body, when she
had effects by her for which she had no occasion: and yet, said she, I
expect not that they will fetch a price answerable to their value.

They were both very much concerned, as they owned; and asked my advice
upon it: and the richness of her apparel having given them a still higher
notion of her rank than they had before, they supposed she must be of
quality; and again wanted to know her story.

I told them, that she was indeed a woman of family and fortune: I still
gave them room to suppose her married: but left it to her to tell them
all in her own time and manner: all I would say was, that she had been
very vilely treated; deserved it not; and was all innocence and purity.

You may suppose that they both expressed their astonishment, that there
could be a man in the world who could ill treat so fine a creature.

As to the disposing of the two suits of apparel, I told Mrs. Smith that
she should pretend that, upon inquiry, she had found a friend who would
purchase the richest of them; but (that she might not mistrust) would
stand upon a good bargain.  And having twenty guineas about me, I left
them with her, in part of payment; and bid her pretend to get her to part
with it for as little more as she could induce her to take.

I am setting out for Edgeware with poor Belton--more of whom in my next.
I shall return to-morrow; and leave this in readiness for your messenger,
if he call in my absence.

ADIEU.



LETTER XXIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTER XXI. OF THIS VOLUME.]
M. HALL, WED. NIGHT, JULY 19.


You might well apprehend that I should think you were playing me booty in
communicating my letter to the lady.

You ask, Who would think you might not read to her the least
exceptionable parts of a letter written in my own defence?--I'll tell you
who--the man who, in the same letter that he asks this question, tells
the friend whom he exposes to her resentment, 'That there is such an air
of levity runs through his most serious letters, that those of this are
least fit to be seen which ought to be most to his credit:' And now what
thinkest thou of thyself-condemned folly?  Be, however, I charge thee,
more circumspect for the future, that so this clumsy error may stand
singly by itself.

'It is painful to her to think of me!' 'Libertine froth!' 'So pernicious
and so despicable a plotter!' 'A man whose friendship is no credit to any
body!' 'Hardened wretch!' 'The devil's counterpart!' 'A wicked, wicked
man!'--But did she, could she, dared she, to say, or imply all this?--and
say it to a man whom she praises for humanity, and prefers to myself for
that virtue; when all the humanity he shows, and she knows it too, is by
my direction--so robs me of the credit of my own works; admirably
entitled, all this shows her, to thy refinement upon the words resentment
and revenge.  But thou wert always aiming and blundering at some thing
thou never couldst make out.

The praise thou givest to her ingenuousness, is another of thy peculiars.
I think not as thou dost, of her tell-tale recapitulations and
exclamations:--what end can they answer?--only that thou hast a holy love
for her, [the devil fetch thee for thy oddity!] or it is extremely
provoking to suppose one sees such a charming creature stand upright
before a libertine, and talk of the sin against her, that cannot be
forgiven!--I wish, at my heart, that these chaste ladies would have a
little modesty in their anger!--It would sound very strange, if I Robert
Lovelace should pretend to have more true delicacy, in a point that
requires the utmost, than Miss Clarissa Harlowe.

I think I will put it into the head of her nurse Norton, and her Miss
Howe, by some one of my agents, to chide the dear novice for her
proclamations.

But to be serious: let me tell thee, that, severe as she is, and saucy,
in asking so contemptuously, 'What a man is your friend, Sir, to set
himself to punish guilty people!'  I will never forgive the cursed woman,
who could commit this last horrid violence on so excellent a creature.

The barbarous insults of the two nymphs, in their visits to her; the
choice of the most execrable den that could be found out, in order, no
doubt, to induce her to go back to theirs; and the still more execrable
attempt, to propose to her a man who would pay the debt; a snare, I make
no question, laid for her despairing and resenting heart by that devilish
Sally, (thinking her, no doubt, a woman,) in order to ruin her with me;
and to provoke me, in a fury, to give her up to their remorseless
cruelty; are outrages, that, to express myself in her style, I never can,
never will forgive.

But as to thy opinion, and the two women's at Smith's, that her heart is
broken! that is the true women's language: I wonder how thou camest into
it: thou who hast seen and heard of so many female deaths and revivals.

I'll tell thee what makes against this notion of theirs.

Her time of life, and charming constitution: the good she ever delighted
to do, and fancified she was born to do; and which she may still continue
to do, to as high a degree as ever; nay, higher: since I am no sordid
varlet, thou knowest: her religious turn: a turn that will always teach
her to bear inevitable evils with patience: the contemplation upon her
last noble triumph over me, and over the whole crew; and upon her
succeeding escape from us all: her will unviolated: and the inward pride
of having not deserved the treatment she has met with.

How is it possible to imagine, that a woman, who has all these
consolations to reflect upon, will die of a broken heart?

On the contrary, I make no doubt, but that, as she recovers from the
dejection into which this last scurvy villany (which none but wretches
of her own sex could have been guilty of) has thrown her, returning love
will re-enter her time-pacified mind: her thoughts will then turn once
more on the conjugal pivot: of course she will have livelier notions in
her head; and these will make her perform all her circumvolutions with
ease and pleasure; though not with so high a degree of either, as if the
dear proud rogue could have exalted herself above the rest of her sex, as
she turned round.

Thou askest, on reciting the bitter invectives that the lady made against
thy poor friend, (standing before her, I suppose, with thy fingers in thy
mouth,) What couldst thou say FOR me?

Have I not, in my former letters, suggested an hundred things, which a
friend, in earnest to vindicate or excuse a friend, might say on such an
occasion?

But now to current topics, and the present state of matters here.--It is
true, as my servant told thee, that Miss Howe had engaged, before this
cursed woman's officiousness, to use her interest with her friend in my
behalf: and yet she told my cousins, in the visit they made her, that it
was her opinion that she would never forgive me.  I send to thee enclosed
copies of all that passed on this occasion between my cousins Montague,
Miss Howe, myself, Lady Betty, Lady Sarah, and Lord M.

I long to know what Miss Howe wrote to her friend, in order to induce her
to marry the despicable plotter; the man whose friendship is no credit to
any body; the wicked, wicked man.  Thou hadst the two letters in thy
hand.  Had they been in mine, the seal would have yielded to the touch of
my warm finger, (perhaps without the help of the post-office bullet;) and
the folds, as other placations have done, opened of themselves to oblige
my curiosity.  A wicked omission, Jack, not to contrive to send them down
to me by man and horse!  It might have passed, that the messenger who
brought the second letter, took them both back.  I could have returned
them by another, when copied, as from Miss Howe, and nobody but myself
and thee the wiser.

That's a charming girl! her spirit, her delightful spirit!--not to be
married to it--how I wish to get that lively bird into my cage! how would
I make her flutter and fly about!--till she left a feather upon every
wire!

Had I begun there, I am confident, as I have heretofore said,* that I
should not have had half the difficulty with her as I have had with her
charming friend.  For these passionate girls have high pulses, and a
clever fellow may make what sport he pleases with their unevenness--now
too high, now too low, you need only to provoke and appease them by
turns; to bear with them, and to forbear to tease and ask pardon; and
sometimes to give yourself the merit of a sufferer from them; then
catching them in the moment of concession, conscious of their ill usage
of you, they are all your own.


* See Vol. VI. Letter VII.


But these sedate, contemplative girls, never out of temper but with
reason; when that reason is given them, hardly ever pardon, or afford you
another opportunity to offend.

It was in part the apprehension that this would be so with my dear Miss
Harlowe, that made me carry her to a place where I believed she would be
unable to escape me, although I were not to succeed in my first attempts.
Else widow Sorlings's would have been as well for me as widow Sinclair's.
For early I saw that there was no credulity in her to graft upon: no
pretending to whine myself into her confidence.  She was proof against
amorous persuasion.  She had reason in her love.  Her penetration and
good sense made her hate all compliments that had not truth and nature in
them.  What could I have done with her in any other place? and yet how
long, even there, was I kept in awe, in spite of natural incitement, and
unnatural instigations, (as I now think them,) by the mere force of that
native dignity, and obvious purity of mind and manners, which fill every
one with reverence, if not with holy love, as thou callest it,* the
moment he sees her!--Else, thinkest thou not, it was easy for me to be a
fine gentleman, and a delicate lover, or, at least a specious and
flattering one?


* See Letter XXI. of this volume.


Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, finding the treaty, upon the success of which
they  have set their foolish hearts, likely to run into length, are about
departing to their own seats; having taken from me the best security the
nature of the case will admit of, that is to say, my word, to marry the
lady, if she will have me.

And after all, (methinks thou asked,) art thou still resolved to repair,
if reparation be put into thy power?

Why, Jack, I must needs own that my heart has now-and-then some
retrograde motions upon thinking seriously of the irrevocable ceremony.
We do not easily give up the desire of our hearts, and what we imagine
essential to our happiness, let the expectation or hope of compassing it
be ever so unreasonable or absurd in the opinion of others.  Recurrings
there will be; hankerings that will, on every but-remotely-favourable
incident, (however before discouraged and beaten back by ill success,)
pop up, and abate the satisfaction we should otherwise take in
contrariant overtures.

'Tis ungentlemanly, Jack, man to man, to lie.----But matrimony I do not
heartily love--although with a CLARISSA--yet I am in earnest to marry
her.

But I am often thinking that if now this dear creature, suffering time,
and my penitence, my relations' prayers, and Miss Howe's mediation to
soften her resentments, (her revenge thou hast prettily* distinguished
away,) and to recall repulsed inclination, should consent to meet me at
the altar--How vain will she then make all thy eloquent periods of
execration!--How many charming interjections of her own will she spoil!
And what a couple of old patriarchs shall we become, going in the
mill-horse round; getting sons and daughters; providing nurses for them
first, governors and governesses next; teaching them lessons their
fathers never practised, nor which their mother, as her parents will say,
was much the better for!  And at last, perhaps, when life shall be turned
into the dully sober stillness, and I become desirous to forget all my
past rogueries, what comfortable reflections will it afford to find them
all revived, with equal, or probably greater trouble and expense, in the
persons and manners of so many young Lovelaces of the boys; and to have
the girls run away with varlets, perhaps not half so ingenious as myself;
clumsy fellows, as it might happen, who could not afford the baggages one
excuse for their weakness, besides those disgraceful ones of sex and
nature!--O Belford! who can bear to think of these things!----Who, at my
time of life especially, and with such a bias for mischief!


* See Letter XVIII. of this volume.


Of this I am absolutely convinced, that if a man ever intends to marry,
and to enjoy in peace his own reflections, and not be afraid
retribution, or of the consequences of his own example, he should never
be a rake.

This looks like conscience; don't it, Belford?

But, being in earnest still, as I have said, all I have to do in my
present uncertainty, is, to brighten up my faculties, by filing off the
rust they have contracted by the town smoke, a long imprisonment in my
close attendance to so little purpose on my fair perverse; and to brace
up, if I can, the relaxed fibres of my mind, which have been twitched and
convulsed like the nerves of some tottering paralytic, by means of the
tumults she has excited in it; that so I may be able to present to her a
husband as worthy as I can be of her acceptance; or, if she reject me, be
in a capacity to resume my usual gaiety of heart, and show others of the
misleading sex, that I am not discouraged, by the difficulties I have met
with from this sweet individual of it, from endeavouring to make myself
as acceptable to them as before.

In this latter case, one tour to France and Italy, I dare say, will do
the business.  Miss Harlowe will by that time have forgotten all she has
suffered from her ungrateful Lovelace: though it will be impossible that
her Lovelace should ever forget a woman, whose equal he despairs to meet
with, were he to travel from one end of the world to the other.

If thou continuest paying off the heavy debts my long letters, for so
many weeks together, have made thee groan under, I will endeavour to
restrain myself in the desires I have, (importunate as they are,) of
going to town, to throw myself at the feet of my soul's beloved.  Policy
and honesty, both join to strengthen the restraint my own promise and thy
engagement have laid me under on this head.  I would not afresh provoke:
on the contrary, would give time for her resentments to subside, that so
all that follows may be her own act and deed.


***


Hickman, [I have a mortal aversion to that fellow!] has, by a line which
I have just now received, requested an interview with me on Friday at Mr.
Dormer's, as at a common friend's.  Does the business he wants to meet me
upon require that it should be at a common friend's?--A challenge
implied: Is it not, Belford?--I shall not be civil to him, I doubt.  He
has been an intermeddler?--Then I envy him on Miss Howe's account: for if
I have a right notion of this Hickman, it is impossible that that virago
can ever love him.

Every one knows that the mother, (saucy as the daughter sometimes is,)
crams him down her throat.  Her mother is one of the most
violent-spirited women in England.  Her late husband could not stand in
the matrimonial contention of Who should? but tipt off the perch in it,
neither knowing how to yield, nor knowing how to conquer.

A charming encouragement for a man of intrigue, when he has reason to
believe that the woman he has a view upon has no love for her husband!
What good principles must that wife have, who is kept in against
temptation by a sense of her duty, and plighted faith, where affection
has no hold of her!

Pr'ythee let's know, very particularly, how it fares with poor Belton.
'Tis an honest fellow.  Something more than his Thomasine seems to stick
with him.

Thou hast not been preaching to him conscience and reformation, hast
thou?--Thou shouldest not take liberties with him of this sort, unless
thou thoughtest him absolutely irrecoverable.  A man in ill health, and
crop-sick, cannot play with these solemn things as thou canst, and be
neither better nor worse for them.--Repentance, Jack, I have a notion,
should be set about while a man is in health and spirits.  What's a man
fit for, [not to begin a new work, surely!] when he is not himself, nor
master of his faculties?--Hence, as I apprehend, it is that a death-bed
repentance is supposed to be such a precarious and ineffectual thing.

As to myself, I hope I have a great deal of time before me; since I
intend one day to be a reformed man.  I have very serious reflections
now-and-then.  Yet am I half afraid of the truth of what my charmer once
told me, that a man cannot repent when he will.--Not to hold it, I
suppose she meant!  By fits and starts I have repented a thousand times.

Casting my eye over the two preceding paragraphs, I fancy there is
something like contradiction in them.  But I will not reconsider them.
The subject is a very serious one.  I don't at present quite understand
it.  But now for one more airy.

Tourville, Mowbray, and myself, pass away our time as pleasantly as
possibly we can without thee.  I wish we don't add to Lord M.'s gouty
days by the joy we give him.

This is one advantage, as I believe I have elsewhere observed, that we
male-delinquents in love-matters have of the other sex:--for while they,
poor things! sit sighing in holes and corners, or run to woods and groves
to bemoan themselves on their baffled hopes, we can rant and roar, hunt
and hawk; and, by new loves, banish from our hearts all remembrance of
the old ones.

Merrily, however, as we pass our time, my reflections upon the injuries
done to this noble creature bring a qualm upon my heart very often.  But
I know she will permit me to make her amends, after she has plagued me
heartily; and that's my consolation.

An honest fellow still--clap thy wings, and crow, Jack!----



LETTER XXIV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY MORN. JUNE* 20.


* Text error: should be JULY.


What, my dearest creature, have been your sufferings!--What must have
been your anguish on so disgraceful an insult, committed in the open
streets, and in the broad day!

No end, I think, of the undeserved calamities of a dear soul, who had
been so unhappily driven and betrayed into the hands of a vile libertine!
--How was I shocked at the receiving of your letter written by another
hand, and only dictated by you!--You must be very ill.  Nor is it to be
wondered at.  But I hope it is rather from hurry, and surprise, and
lowness, which may be overcome, than from a grief given way to, which may
be attended with effects I cannot bear to think of.

But whatever you do, my dear, you must not despond!  Indeed you must not
despond!  Hitherto you have been in no fault: but despair would be all
your own: and the worst fault you can be guilty of.

I cannot bear to look upon another hand instead of your's.  My dear
creature, send me a few lines, though ever so few, in your own hand, if
possible.--For they will revive my heart; especially if they can acquaint
me of your amended health.

I expect your answer to my letter of the 13th.  We all expect it with
impatience.

His relations are persons of so much honour--they are so very earnest to
rank you among them--the wretch is so very penitent: every one of his
family says he is--your own are so implacable--your last distress, though
the consequence of his former villany, yet neither brought on by his
direction nor with his knowledge; and so much resented by him--that my
mother is absolutely of opinion that you should be his--especially if,
yielding to my wishes, as expressed in my letter, and those of all his
friends, you would have complied, had it not been for this horrid arrest.

I will enclose the copy of the letter I wrote to Miss Montague last
Tuesday, on hearing that nobody knew what was become of you; and the
answer to it, underwritten and signed by Lord M., Lady Sarah Sadleir, and
Lady Betty Lawrance, as well as by the young Ladies; and also by the
wretch himself.

I own, that I like not the turn of what he has written to me; and, before
I will further interest myself in his favour, I have determined to inform
myself, by a friend, from his own mouth, of his sincerity, and whether
his whole inclination be, in his request to me, exclusive of the wishes
of his relations.  Yet my heart rises against him, on the supposition
that there is the shadow of a reason for such a question, the woman Miss
Clarissa Harlowe.  But I think, with my mother, that marriage is now the
only means left to make your future life tolerably easy--happy there is
no saying.--His disgraces, in that case, in the eye of the world itself,
will be more than your's: and, to those who know you, glorious will be
your triumph.

I am obliged to accompany my mother soon to the Isle of Wight.  My aunt
Harman is in a declining way, and insists upon seeing us both--and Mr.
Hickman too, I think.

His sister, of whom we had heard so much, with her lord, were brought
t'other day to visit us.  She strangely likes me, or says she does.

I can't say but that I think she answers the excellent character we heard
of her.

It would be death to me to set out for the little island, and not see you
first: and yet my mother (fond of exerting an authority that she herself,
by that exertion, often brings into question) insists, that my next visit
to you must be a congratulatory one as Mrs. Lovelace.

When I know what will be the result of the questions to be put in my name
to that wretch, and what is your mind on my letter of the 13th, I shall
tell you more of mine.

The bearer promises to make so much dispatch as to attend you this very
afternoon.  May he return with good tidings to

Your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER XXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
THURSDAY AFTERNOON.


You pain me, Miss Howe, by the ardour of your noble friendship.  I will
be brief, because I am not well; yet a good deal better than I was; and
because I am preparing an answer to your's of the 13th.  But, before
hand, I must tell you, my dear, I will not have that man--don't be angry
with me.  But indeed I won't.  So let him be asked no questions about me,
I beseech you.

I do not despond, my dear.  I hope I may say, I will not despond.  Is not
my condition greatly mended?  I thank Heaven it is!

I am no prisoner now in a vile house.  I am not now in the power of that
man's devices.  I am not now obliged to hide myself in corners for fear
of him.  One of his intimate companions is become my warm friend, and
engages to keep him from me, and that by his own consent.  I am among
honest people.  I have all my clothes and effects restored to me.  The
wretch himself bears testimony to my honour.

Indeed I am very weak and ill: but I have an excellent physician, Dr. H.
and as worthy an apothecary, Mr. Goddard.--Their treatment of me, my
dear, is perfectly paternal!--My mind too, I can find, begins to
strengthen: and methinks, at times, I find myself superior to my
calamities.

I shall have sinkings sometimes.  I must expect such.  And my father's
maledict----But you will chide me for introducing that, now I am
enumerating my comforts.

But I charge you, my dear, that you do not suffer my calamities to sit
too heavily upon your own mind.  If you do, that will be to new-point
some of those arrows that have been blunted and lost their sharpness.

If you would contribute to my happiness, give way, my dear, to your own;
and to the cheerful prospects before you!

You will think very meanly of your Clarissa, if you do not believe, that
the greatest pleasure she can receive in this life is in your prosperity
and welfare.  Think not of me, my only friend, but as we were in times
past: and suppose me gone a great, great way off!--A long journey!----How
often are the dearest of friends, at their country's call, thus parted--
with a certainty for years--with a probability for ever.

Love me still, however. But let it be with a weaning love.  I am not what
I was, when we were inseparable lovers, as I may say.--Our views must now
be different--Resolve, my dear, to make a worthy man happy, because a
worthy man make you so.--And so, my dearest love, for the present adieu!
--adieu, my dearest love!--but I shall soon write again, I hope!



LETTER XXVI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTER XXIII. OF THIS VOLUME.]
THURDAY, JULY 20.


I read that part of your conclusion to poor Belton, where you inquire
after him, and mention how merrily you and the reset pass your time at
M. Hall.  He fetched a deep sigh: You are all very happy! were his words.
--I am sorry they were his words; for, poor fellow, he is going very
fast.  Change of air, he hopes, will mend him, joined to the cheerful
company I have left him in.  But nothing, I dare say, will.

A consuming malady, and a consuming mistress, to an indulgent keeper, are
dreadful things to struggle with both together: violence must be used to
get rid of the latter; and yet he has not spirit enough left him to exert
himself.  His house is Thomasine's house; not his.  He has not been
within his doors for a fortnight past.  Vagabonding about from inn to
inn; entering each for a bait only; and staying two or three days without
power to remove; and hardly knowing which to go to next.  His malady is
within him; and he cannot run away from it.

Her boys (once he thought them his) are sturdy enough to shoulder him in
his own house as they pass by him.  Siding with the mother, they in a
manner expel him; and, in his absence, riot away on the remnant of his
broken fortunes.  As to their mother, (who was once so tender, so
submissive, so studious to oblige, that we all pronounced him happy, and
his course of life the eligible,) she is now so termagant, so insolent,
that he cannot contend with her, without doing infinite prejudice to his
health.  A broken-spirited defensive, hardly a defensive, therefore,
reduced to: and this to a heart, for so many years waging offensive war,
(not valuing whom the opponent,) what a reduction! now comparing himself
to the superannuated lion in the fable, kicked in the jaws, and laid
sprawling, by the spurning heel of an ignoble ass!

I have undertaken his cause.  He has given me leave, yet not without
reluctance, to put him into possession of his own house; and to place in
it for him his unhappy sister, whom he has hitherto slighted, because
unhappy.  It is hard, he told me, (and wept, poor fellow, when he said
it,) that he cannot be permitted to die quietly in his own house!--The
fruits of blessed keeping these!----

Though but lately apprized of her infidelity, it now comes out to have
been of so long continuance, that he has no room to believe the boys to
be his: yet how fond did he use to be of them!

To what, Lovelace, shall we attribute the tenderness which a reputed
father frequently shows to the children of another man?--What is that, I
pray thee, which we call nature, and natural affection?  And what has man
to boast of as to sagacity and penetration, when he is as easily brought
to cover and rear, and even to love, and often to prefer, the product of
another's guilt with his wife or mistress, as a hen or a goose the eggs,
and even young, of others of their kind?

Nay, let me ask, if instinct, as it is called, in the animal creation,
does not enable them to distinguish their own, much more easily than we,
with our boasted reason and sagacity, in this nice particular, can do?

If some men, who have wives but of doubtful virtue, considered this
matter duly, I believe their inordinate ardour after gain would be a good
deal cooled, when they could not be certain (though their mates could)
for whose children they were elbowing, bustling, griping, and perhaps
cheating, those with whom they have concerns, whether friends,
neighbours, or more certain next-of-kin, by the mother's side however.

But I will not push this notion so far as it might be carried; because,
if propagated, it might be of unsocial or unnatural consequence; since
women of virtue would perhaps be more liable to suffer by the mistrusts
and caprices or bad-hearted and foolish-headed husbands, than those who
can screen themselves from detection by arts and hypocrisy, to which a
woman of virtue cannot have recourse.  And yet, were this notion duly and
generally considered, it might be attended with no bad effects; as good
education, good inclinations, and established virtue, would be the
principally-sought-after qualities; and not money, when a man (not
biased by mere personal attractions) was looking round him for a partner
in his fortunes, and for a mother of his future children, which are to be
the heirs of his possessions, and to enjoy the fruits of his industry.

But to return to poor Belton.

If I have occasion for your assistance, and that of our compeers, in
re-instating the poor fellow, I will give you notice.  Mean time, I have
just now been told that Thomasine declares she will not stir; for, it
seems, she suspects that measures will be fallen upon to make her quit.
She is Mrs. Belton, she says, and will prove her marriage.

If she would give herself these airs in his life-time, what would she
attempt to do after his death?

Her boy threatens any body who shall presume to insult their mother.
Their father (as they call poor Belton) they speak of as an unnatural
one.  And their probably true father is for ever there, hostilely there,
passing for her cousin, as usual: now her protecting cousin.

Hardly ever, I dare say, was there a keeper that did not make
keeperess; who lavished away on her kept-fellow what she obtained from
the extravagant folly of him who kept her.

I will do without you, if I can.  The case will be only, as I conceive,
that like of the ancient Sarmatians, their wives then in possession of
their slaves.  So that they had to contend not only with those wives,
conscious of their infidelity, and with their slaves, but with the
children of those slaves, grown up to manhood, resolute to defend their
mothers and their long-manumitted fathers.  But the noble Sarmatians,
scorning to attack their slaves with equal weapons, only provided
themselves with the same sort of whips with which they used formerly to
chastise them.  And attacking them with them, the miscreants fled before
them.--In memory of which, to this day, the device on the coin in
Novogrod, in Russia, a city of the antient Sarmatia, is a man on
horseback, with a whip in his hand.

The poor fellow takes it ill, that you did not press him more than you
did to be of your party at M. Hall.  It is owing to Mowbray, he is sure,
that he had so very slight an invitation from one whose invitations used
to be so warm.

Mowbray's speech to him, he says, he never will forgive: 'Why, Tom,' said
the brutal fellow, with a curse, 'thou droopest like a pip or
roup-cloaking chicken.  Thou shouldst grow perter, or submit to a
solitary quarantine, if thou wouldst not infect the whole brood.'

For my own part, only that this poor fellow is in distress, as well in
his affairs as in his mind, or I should be sick of you all.  Such is the
relish I have of the conversation, and such my admiration of the
deportment and sentiments of this divine lady, that I would forego a
month, even of thy company, to be admitted into her's but for one hour:
and I am highly in conceit with myself, greatly as I used to value thine,
for being able, spontaneously as I may say, to make this preference.

It is, after all, a devilish life we have lived.  And to consider how it
all ends in a very few years--to see to what a state of ill health this
poor fellow is so soon reduced--and then to observe how every one of ye
run away from the unhappy being, as rats from a falling house, is fine
comfort to help a man to look back upon companions ill-chosen, and a life
mis-spent!

It will be your turns by-and-by, every man of ye, if the justice of your
country interpose not.

Thou art the only rake we have herded with, if thou wilt not except
thyself, who hast preserved entire thy health and thy fortunes.

Mowbray indeed is indebted to a robust constitution that he has not yet
suffered in his health; but his estate is dwindled away year by year.

Three-fourths of Tourville's very considerable fortunes are already
dissipated; and the remaining fourth will probably soon go after the
other three.

Poor Belton! we see how it is with him!--His own felicity is, that he
will hardly live to want.

Thou art too proud, and too prudent, ever to be destitute; and, to do
thee justice, hath a spirit to assist such of thy friends as may be
reduced; and wilt, if thou shouldest then be living.  But I think thou
must, much sooner than thou imaginest, be called to thy account--knocked
on the head perhaps by the friends of those whom thou hast injured; for
if thou escapest this fate from the Harlowe family, thou wilt go on
tempting danger and vengeance, till thou meetest with vengeance; and
this, whether thou marriest, or not: for the nuptial life will not, I
doubt, till age join with it, cure thee of that spirit for intrigue which
is continually running away with thee, in spite of thy better sense, and
transitory resolutions.

Well, then, I will suppose thee laid down quietly among thy worthier
ancestors.

And now let me look forward to the ends of Tourville and Mowbray, [Belton
will be crumbled into dust before thee, perhaps,] supposing thy early
exit has saved thee from gallows intervention.

Reduced, probably, by riotous waste to consequential want, behold them
refuged in some obscene hole or garret; obliged to the careless care of
some dirty old woman, whom nothing but her poverty prevails upon to
attend to perform the last offices for men, who have made such shocking
ravage among the young ones.

Then how miserably will they whine through squeaking organs; their big
voices turned into puling pity-begging lamentations! their now-offensive
paws, how helpless then!--their now-erect necks then denying support to
their aching heads; those globes of mischief dropping upon their quaking
shoulders.  Then what wry faces will they make! their hearts, and their
heads, reproaching each other!--distended their parched mouths!--sunk
their unmuscled cheeks!--dropt their under jaws!--each grunting like the
swine he had resembled in his life!  Oh! what a vile wretch have I been!
Oh! that I had my life to come over again!--Confessing to the poor old
woman, who cannot shrive them!  Imaginary ghosts of deflowered virgins,
and polluted matrons, flitting before their glassy eyes!  And old Satan,
to their apprehensions, grinning behind a looking-glass held up before
them, to frighten them with the horror visible in their own countenances!

For my own part, if I can get some good family to credit me with a sister
or daughter, as I have now an increased fortune, which will enable me to
propose handsome settlements, I will desert ye all; marry, and live a
life of reason, rather than a life of a brute, for the time to come.



LETTER XXVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT.


I was forced to take back my twenty guineas.  How the women managed it I
can't tell, (I suppose they too readily found a purchaser for the rich
suit;) but she mistrusted, that I was the advancer of the money; and
would not let the clothes go.  But Mrs. Lovick has actually sold, for
fifteen guineas, some rich lace worth three times the sum; out of which
she repaid her the money she borrowed for fees to the doctor, in an
illness occasioned by the barbarity of the most savage of men.  Thou
knowest his name!

The Doctor called on her in the morning it seems, and had a short debate
with her about fees.  She insisted that he should take one every time he
came, write or not write; mistrusting that he only gave verbal directions
to Mrs. Lovick, or the nurse, to avoid taking any.

He said that it would be impossible for him, had he not been a physician,
to forbear inquiries after the health and welfare of so excellent a
person.  He had not the thought of paying her a compliment in declining
the offered fee: but he knew her case could not so suddenly vary as to
demand his daily visits.  She must permit him, therefore, to inquire of
the women below after her health; and he must not think of coming up, if
he were to be pecuniarily rewarded for the satisfaction he was so
desirous to give himself.

It ended in a compromise for a fee each other time; which she unwillingly
submitted to; telling him, that though she was at present desolate and in
disgrace, yet her circumstances were, of right, high; and no expenses
could rise so as to be scrupled, whether she lived or died.  But she
submitted, she added, to the compromise, in hopes to see him as often as
he had opportunity; for she really looked upon him, and Mr. Goddard, from
their kind and tender treatment of her, with a regard next to filial.

I hope thou wilt make thyself acquainted with this worthy Doctor when
thou comest to town; and give him thy thanks, for putting her into
conceit with the sex that thou hast given her so much reason to execrate.

Farewell.


LETTER XXVIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, FRIDAY, JULY 21.


Just returned from an interview with this Hickman: a precise fop of a
fellow, as starched as his ruffles.

Thou knowest I love him not, Jack; and whom we love not we cannot allow a
merit to! perhaps not the merit they should be granted.  However, I am in
earnest, when I say, that he seems to me to be so set, so prim, so
affected, so mincing, yet so clouterly in his person, that I dare engage
for thy opinion, if thou dost justice to him, and to thyself, that thou
never beheldest such another, except in a pier-glass.

I'll tell thee how I play'd him off.

He came in his own chariot to Dormer's; and we took a turn in the garden,
at his request.  He was devilish ceremonious, and made a bushel of
apologies for the freedom he was going to take: and, after half a hundred
hums and haws, told me, that he came--that he came--to wait on me--at the
request of dear Miss Howe, on the account--on the account--of Miss
Harlowe.

Well, Sir, speak on, said I: but give me leave to say, that if your book
be as long as your preface, it will take up a week to read it.

This was pretty rough, thou'lt say: but there's nothing like balking
these formalities at first.  When they are put out of their road, they
are filled with doubts of themselves, and can never get into it again: so
that an honest fellow, impertinently attacked, as I was, has all the game
in his own hand quite through the conference.

He stroked his chin, and hardly knew what to say.  At last, after
parenthesis within parenthesis, apologizing for apologies, in imitation,
I suppose, of Swift's digression in praise of digressions--I presume--I
presume, Sir, you were privy to the visit made to Miss Howe by the young
Ladies your cousins, in the name of Lord M., and Lady Sarah Sadleir, and
Lady Betty Lawrance.

I was, Sir: and Miss Howe had a letter afterwards, signed by his Lordship
and by those Ladies, and underwritten by myself.  Have you seen it, Sir?

I can't say but I have.  It is the principal cause of this visit: for
Miss Howe thinks your part of it is written with such an air of levity--
pardon me, Sir--that she knows not whether you are in earnest or not, in
your address to her for her interest to her friend.*


* See Mr. Lovelace's billet to Miss Howe, Letter XIV. of this volume.


Will Miss Howe permit me to explain myself in person to her, Mr. Hickman?

O Sir, by no means.  Miss Howe, I am sure, would not give you that
trouble.

I should not think it a trouble.  I will most readily attend you, Sir, to
Miss Howe, and satisfy her in all her scruples.  Come, Sir, I will wait
upon you now.  You have a chariot.  Are alone.  We can talk as we ride.

He hesitated, wriggled, winced, stroked his ruffles, set his wig, and
pulled his neckcloth, which was long enough for a bib.--I am not going
directly back to Miss Howe, Sir.  It will be as well if you will be so
good as to satisfy Miss Howe by me.

What is it she scruples, Mr. Hickman?

Why, Sir, Miss Howe observes, that in your part of the letter, you say--
but let me see, Sir--I have a copy of what you wrote, [pulling it out,]
will you give me leave, Sir?--Thus you begin--Dear Miss Howe--

No offence, I hope, Mr. Hickman?

None in the least, Sir!--None at all, Sir!--Taking aim, as it were, to
read.

Do you use spectacles, Mr. Hickman?

Spectacles, Sir!  His whole broad face lifted up at me: Spectacles!--What
makes you ask me such a question? such a young man as I use spectacles,
Sir!--

They do in Spain, Mr. Hickman: young as well as old, to save their eyes.
--Have you ever read Prior's Alma, Mr. Hickman?

I have, Sir--custom is every thing in nations, as well as with
individuals: I know the meaning of your question--but 'tis not the
English custom.--

Was you ever in Spain, Mr. Hickman?

No, Sir: I have been in Holland.

In Holland, Sir?--Never to France or Italy?--I was resolved to travel
with him into the land of puzzledom.

No, Sir, I cannot say I have, as yet.

That's a wonder, Sir, when on the continent!

I went on a particular affair: I was obliged to return soon.

Well, Sir; you was going to read--pray be pleased to proceed.

Again he took aim, as if his eyes were older than the rest of him; and
read, After what is written above, and signed by names and characters of
such unquestionable honour--to be sure, (taking off his eye,) nobody
questions the honour of Lord M. nor that of the good Ladies who signed
the letter.

I hope, Mr. Hickman, nobody questions mine neither?

If you please, Sir, I will read on.--I might have been excused signing a
name, almost as hateful to myself [you are pleased to say]--as I KNOW it
is to YOU--

Well, Mr. Hickman, I must interrupt you at this place.  In what I wrote
to Miss Howe, I distinguished the word KNOW.  I had a reason for it.
Miss Howe has been very free with my character.  I have never done her
any harm.  I take it very ill of her.  And I hope, Sir, you come in her
name to make excuses for it.

Miss Howe, Sir, is a very polite young lady.  She is not accustomed to
treat any man's character unbecomingly.

Then I have the more reason to take it amiss, Mr. Hickman.

Why, Sir, you know the friendship--

No friendship should warrant such freedoms as Miss Howe has taken with my
character.

(I believed he began to wish he had not come near me.  He seemed quite
disconcerted.)

Have you not heard Miss Howe treat my name with great--

Sir, I come not to offend or affront you: but you know what a love there
is between Miss Howe and Miss Harlowe.--I doubt, Sir, you have not
treated Miss Harlowe as so fine a young lady deserved to be treated.  And
if love for her friend has made Miss Howe take freedoms, as you call
them, a mind not ungenerous, on such an occasion, will rather be sorry
for having given the cause, than--

I know your consequence, Sir!--but I'd rather have this reproof from a
lady than from a gentleman.  I have a great desire to wait upon Miss
Howe.  I am persuaded we should soon come to a good understanding.
Generous minds are always of kin.  I know we should agree in every thing.
Pray, Mr. Hickman, be so kind as to introduce me to Miss Howe.

Sir--I can signify your desire, if you please, to Miss Howe.

Do so.  Be pleased to read on, Mr. Hickman.

He did very formally, as if I remembered not what I had written; and when
he came to the passage about the halter, the parson, and the hangman,
reading it, Why, Sir, says he, does not this look like a jest?--Miss Howe
thinks it does.  It is not in the lady's power, you know, Sir, to doom
you to the gallows.

Then, if it were, Mr. Hickman, you think she would?

You say here to Miss Howe, proceeded he, that Miss Harlowe is the most
injured of her sex.  I know, from Miss Howe, that she highly resents the
injuries you own: insomuch that Miss Howe doubts that she shall never
prevail upon her to overlook them: and as your family are all desirous
you should repair her wrongs, and likewise desire Miss Howe's
interposition with her friend; Miss Howe fears, from this part of your
letter, that you are too much in jest; and that your offer to do her
justice is rather in compliment to your friends' entreaties, than
proceeding form your own inclinations: and she desires to know your true
sentiments on this occasion, before she interposes further.

Do you think, Mr. Hickman, that, if I am capable of deceiving my own
relations, I have so much obligation to Miss Howe, who has always treated
me with great freedom, as to acknowledge to her what I don't to them?

Sir, I beg pardon: but Miss Howe thinks that, as you have written to her,
she may ask you, by me, for an explanation of what you have written.

You see, Mr. Hickman, something of me.--Do you think I am in jest, or in
earnest?

I see, Sir, you are a gay gentleman, of fine spirits, and all that.  All
I beg in Miss Howe's name is, to know if you really and bona fide join
with your friends in desiring her to use her interest to reconcile you to
Miss Harlowe?

I should be extremely glad to be reconciled to Miss Harlowe; and should
owe great obligations to Miss Howe, if she could bring about so happy an
event.

Well, Sir, and you have no objections to marriage, I presume, as the
condition of that reconciliation?

I never liked matrimony in my life.  I must be plain with you, Mr.
Hickman.

I am sorry for it: I think it a very happy state.

I hope you will find it so, Mr. Hickman.

I doubt not but I shall, Sir.  And I dare say, so would you, if you were
to have Miss Harlowe.

If I could be happy in it with any body, it would be with Miss Harlowe.

I am surprised, Sir!----Then, after all, you don't think of marrying Miss
Harlowe!----After the hard usage----

What hard usage, Mr. Hickman?  I don't doubt but a lady of her niceness
has represented what would appear trifles to any other, in a very strong
light.

If what I have had hinted to me, Sir--excuse me--had been offered to the
lady, she has more than trifles to complain of.

Let me know what you have heard, Mr. Hickman?  I will very truly answer
to the accusations.

Sir, you know best what you have done: you own the lady is the most
injured, as well as the most deserving of her sex.

I do, Sir; and yet I would be glad to know what you have heard: for on
that, perhaps, depends my answer to the questions Miss Howe puts to me by
you.

Why then, Sir, since you ask it, you cannot be displeased if I answer
you:--in the first place, Sir, you will acknowledge, I suppose, that you
promised Miss Harlowe marriage, and all that?

Well, Sir, and I suppose what you have to charge me with is, that I was
desirous to have all that, without marriage?

Cot-so, Sir, I know you are deemed to be a man of wit: but may I not ask
if these things sit not too light upon you?

When a thing is done, and cannot be helped, 'tis right to make the best
of it.  I wish the lady would think so too.

I think, Sir, ladies should not be deceived.  I think a promise to a lady
should be as binding as to any other person, at the least.

I believe you think so, Mr. Hickman: and I believe you are a very honest,
good sort of a man.

I would always keep my word, Sir, whether to man or woman.

You say well.  And far be it from me to persuade you to do otherwise.
But what have you farther heard?

(Thou wilt think, Jack, I must be very desirous to know in what light my
elected spouse had represented things to Miss Howe; and how far Miss Howe
had communicated them to Mr. Hickman.)

Sir, this is no part of my present business.

But, Mr. Hickman, 'tis part of mine.  I hope you would not expect that I
should answer your questions, at the same time that you refused to answer
mine.  What, pray, have you farther heard?

Why then, Sir, if I must say, I am told, that Miss Harlowe was carried to
a very bad house.

Why, indeed, the people did not prove so good as they should be.--What
farther have you heard?

I have heard, Sir, that the lady had strange advantages taken of her,
very unfair ones: but what I cannot say.

And cannot you say?  Cannot you guess?--Then I'll tell you, Sir.  Perhaps
some liberty was taken with her when she was asleep.  Do you think no
lady ever was taken at such an advantage?--You know, Mr. Hickman, that
ladies are very shy of trusting themselves with the modestest of our sex,
when they are disposed to sleep; and why so, if they did not expect that
advantages would be taken of them at such times?

But, Sir, had not the lady something given her to make her sleep?

Ay, Mr. Hickman, that's the question: I want to know if the lady says she
had?

I have not seen all she has written; but, by what I have heard, it is a
very black affair--Excuse me, Sir.

I do excuse you, Mr. Hickman: but, supposing it were so, do you think a
lady was never imposed upon by wine, or so?--Do you not think the most
cautious woman in the world might not be cheated by a stronger liquor for
a smaller, when she was thirsty, after a fatigue in this very warm
weather?  And do you think, if she was thus thrown into a profound sleep,
that she is the only lady that was ever taken at such an advantage?

Even as you make it, Mr. Lovelace, this matter is not a light one.  But I
fear it is a great deal heavier than as you put it.

What reasons have you to fear this, Sir?  What has the lady said?  Pray
let me know.  I have reason to be so earnest.

Why, Sir, Miss Howe herself knows not the whole.  The lady promises to
give her all the particulars at a proper time, if she lives; but has said
enough to make it out to be a very bad affair.

I am glad Miss Harlowe has not yet given all the particulars.  And, since
she has not, you may tell Miss Howe from me, that neither she, nor any
woman in the world can be more virtuous than Miss Harlowe is to this
hour, as to her own mind.  Tell her, that I hope she never will know the
particulars; but that she has been unworthily used: tell her, that though
I know not what she has said, yet I have such an opinion of her veracity,
that I would blindly subscribe to the truth of every tittle of it, though
it make me ever so black.  Tell her, that I have but three things to
blame her for; one, that she won't give me an opportunity of repairing
her wrongs: the second, that she is so ready to acquaint every body with
what she has suffered, that it will put it out of my power to redress
those wrongs, with any tolerable reputation to either of us.  Will this,
Mr. Hickman, answer any part of the intention of this visit?

Why, Sir, this is talking like a man of honour, I own.  But you say there
is a third thing you blame the lady for: May I ask what that is?

I don't know, Sir, whether I ought to tell it you, or not.  Perhaps you
won't believe it, if I do. But though the lady will tell the truth, and
nothing but the truth, yet, perhaps, she will not tell the whole truth.

Pray, Sir--But it mayn't be proper--Yet you give me great curiosity.
Sure there is no misconduct in the lady.  I hope there is not.  I am
sure, if Miss Howe did not believe her to be faultless in every
particular, she would not interest herself so much in her favour as she
does, dearly as she loves her.

I love Miss Harlowe too well, Mr. Hickman, to wish to lessen her in Miss
Howe's opinion; especially as she is abandoned of every other friend.
But, perhaps, it would hardly be credited, if I should tell you.

I should be very sorry, Sir, and so would Miss Howe, if this poor lady's
conduct had laid her under obligation to you for this reserve.--You have
so much the appearance of a gentleman, as well as are so much
distinguished in your family and fortunes, that I hope you are incapable
of loading such a young lady as this, in order to lighten yourself----
Excuse me, Sir.

I do, I do, Mr. Hickman.  You say you came not with any intention to
affront me.  I take freedom, and I give it.  I should be very loth, I
repeat, to say any thing that may weaken Miss Harlowe in the good opinion
of the only friend she thinks she has left.

It may not be proper, said he, for me to know your third article against
this unhappy lady: but I never heard of any body, out of her own
implacable family, that had the least doubt of her honour.  Mrs. Howe,
indeed, once said, after a conference with one of her uncles, that she
feared all was not right on her side.--But else, I never heard--

Oons, Sir, in a fierce tone, and with an erect mien, stopping short upon
him, which made him start back--'tis next to blasphemy to question this
lady's honour.  She is more pure than a vestal; for vestals have often
been warmed by their own fires.  No age, from the first to the present,
ever produced, nor will the future, to the end of the world, I dare aver,
ever produce, a young blooming lady, tried as she has been tried, who has
stood all trials, as she has done.--Let me tell you, Sir, that you never
saw, never knew, never heard of, such another woman as Miss Harlowe.

Sir, Sir, I beg your pardon.  Far be it from me to question the lady.
You have not heard me say a word that could be so construed.  I have the
utmost honour for her.  Miss Howe loves her, as she loves her own soul;
and that she would not do, if she were not sure she were as virtuous as
herself.

As herself, Sir!--I have a high opinion of Miss Howe, Sir--but, I dare
say--

What, Sir, dare you say of Miss Howe!--I hope, Sir, you will not presume
to say any thing to the disparagement of Miss Howe.

Presume, Mr. Hickman!--that is presuming language, let me tell you, Mr.
Hickman!

The occasion for it, Mr. Lovelace, if designed, is presuming, if you
please.--I am not a man ready to take offence, Sir--especially where I am
employed as a mediator.  But no man breathing shall say disparaging
things of Miss Howe, in my hearing, without observation.

Well said, Mr. Hickman.  I dislike not your spirit, on such a supposed
occasion.  But what I was going to say is this.  That there is not, in my
opinion, a woman in the world, who ought to compare herself with Miss
Clarissa Harlowe till she has stood her trials, and has behaved under
them, and after them, as she has done.  You see, Sir, I speak against
myself.  You see I do.  For, libertine as I am thought to be, I never
will attempt to bring down the measures of right and wrong to the
standard of my actions.

Why, Sir, this is very right.  It is very noble, I will say.  But 'tis
pity, that the man who can pronounce so fine a sentence, will not square
his actions accordingly.

That, Mr. Hickman, is another point.  We all err in some things.  I wish
not that Miss Howe should have Miss Harlowe's trials: and I rejoice that
she is in no danger of any such from so good a man.

(Poor Hickman!--he looked as if he knew not whether I meant a compliment
or a reflection!)

But, proceeded I, since I find that I have excited your curiosity, that
you may not go away with a doubt that may be injurious to the most
admirable of women, I am enclined to hint to you what I have in the third
place to blame her for.

Sir, as you please--it may not be proper--

It cannot be very improper, Mr. Hickman--So let me ask you, What would
Miss Howe think, if her friend is the more determined against me, because
she thinks (to revenge to me, I verily believe that!) of encouraging
another lover?

How, Sir!--Sure this cannot be the case!--I can tell you, Sir, if Miss
Howe thought this, she would not approve of it at all: for, little as you
think Miss Howe likes you, Sir, and little as she approves of your
actions by her friend, I know she is of opinion that she ought to have
nobody living but you: and should continue single all her life, if she be
not your's.

Revenge and obstinacy, Mr. Hickman, will make women, the best of them, do
very unaccountable things.  Rather than not put out both eyes of a man
they are offended with, they will give up one of their own.

I don't know what to say to this, Sir: but sure she cannot encourage any
other person's address!--So soon too--Why, Sir, she is, as we are told,
so ill, and so weak----

Not in resentment weak, I'll assure you.  I am well acquainted with all
her movements--and I tell you, believe it, or not, that she refuses me in
view of another lover.

Can it be?

'Tis true, by my soul!--Has she not hinted this to Miss Howe, do you
think?

No, indeed, Sir.  If she had I should not have troubled you at this time
from Miss Howe.

Well then, you see I am right: that though she cannot be guilty of a
falsehood, yet she has not told her friend the whole truth.

What shall a man say to these things!--(looking most stupidly perplexed.)

Say! Say! Mr. Hickman!--Who can account for the workings and ways of a
passionate and offended woman?  Endless would be the histories I could
give you, within my own knowledge, of the dreadful effects of woman's
passionate resentments, and what that sex will do when disappointed.

There was Miss DORRINGTON, [perhaps you know her not,] who run away with
her father's groom, because he would not let her have a half-pay officer,
with whom (her passions all up) she fell in love at first sight, as he
accidentally passed under her window.

There was MISS SAVAGE; she married her mother's coachman, because her
mother refused her a journey to Wales; in apprehension that miss intended
to league herself with a remote cousin of unequal fortunes, of whom she
was not a little fond when he was a visiting-guest at their house for a
week.

There was the young widow SANDERSON, who believing herself slighted by a
younger brother of a noble family, (Sarah Stout like,) took it into her
head to drown herself.

Miss SALLY ANDERSON, [You have heard of her, no doubt?] being checked by
her uncle for encouraging an address beneath her, in spite, threw herself
into the arms of an ugly dog, a shoe-maker's apprentice, running away
with him in a pair of shoes he had just fitted to her feet, though she
never saw the fellow before, and hated him ever after: and, at last, took
laudanum to make her forget for ever her own folly.

But can there be a stronger instance in point than what the unaccountable
resentments of such a lady as Miss Clarissa Harlowe afford us?  Who at
this instant, ill as she is, not only encourages, but, in a manner, makes
court to one of the most odious dogs that ever was seen?  I think Miss
Howe should not be told this--and yet she ought too, in order to dissuade
her from such a preposterous rashness.

O fie!  O strange!  Miss Howe knows nothing of this!  To be sure she
won't look upon her, if this be true!

'Tis true, very true, Mr. Hickman!  True as I am here to tell you so!--
And he is an ugly fellow too; uglier to look at than me.

Than you, Sir!  Why, to be sure, you are one of the handsomest men in
England.

Well, but the wretch she so spitefully prefers to me is a mis-shapen,
meagre varlet; more like a skeleton than a man!  Then he dresses--you
never saw a devil so bedizened!  Hardly a coat to his back, nor a shoe
to his foot.  A bald-pated villain, yet grudges to buy a peruke to his
baldness: for he is as covetous as hell, never satisfied, yet plaguy
rich.

Why, Sir, there is some joke in this, surely.  A man of common parts
knows not how to take such gentleman as you.  But, Sir, if there be any
truth in the story, what is he?  Some Jew or miserly citizen, I suppose,
that may have presumed on the lady's distressful circumstances; and your
lively wit points him out as it pleases.

Why, the rascal has estates in every county in England, and out of
England too.

Some East India governor, I suppose, if there be any thing in it.  The
lady once had thoughts of going abroad.  But I fancy all this time you
are in jest, Sir.  If not, we must surely have heard of him----

Heard of him!  Aye, Sir, we have all heard of him--But none of us care to
be intimate with him--except this lady--and that, as I told you, in spite
of me--his name, in short, is DEATH!--DEATH! Sir, stamping, and speaking
loud, and full in his ears; which made him jump half a yard high.

(Thou never beheldest any man so disconcerted.  He looked as if the
frightful skeleton was before him, and he had not his accounts ready.
When a little recovered, he fribbled with his waistcoat buttons, as if he
had been telling his beads.)

This, Sir, proceeded I, is her wooer!--Nay, she is so forward a girl,
that she wooes him: but I hope it never will be a match.

He had before behaved, and now looked with more spirit than I expected
from him.

I came, Sir, said he, as a mediator of differences.--It behoves me to
keep my temper.  But, Sir, and turned short upon me, as much as I love
peace, and to promote it, I will not be ill-used.

As I had played so much upon him, it would have been wrong to take him at
his more than half-menace: yet I think I owe him a grudge, for his
presuming to address Miss Howe.

You mean no defiance, I presume, Mr. Hickman, any more than I do offence.
On that presumption, I ask your excuse.  But this is my way.  I mean no
harm.  I cannot let sorrow touch my heart.  I cannot be grave six minutes
together, for the blood of me.  I am a descendant of old Chancellor
Moore, I believe; and should not forbear to cut a joke, were I upon the
scaffold.  But you may gather, from what I have said, that I prefer Miss
Harlowe, and that upon the justest grounds, to all the women in the
world: and I wonder that there should be any difficulty to believe, from
what I have signed, and from what I have promised to my relations, and
enabled them to promise for me, that I should be glad to marry that
excellent creature upon her own terms.  I acknowledge to you, Mr.
Hickman, that I have basely injured her.  If she will honour me with her
hand, I declare that is my intention to make her the best of husbands.--
But, nevertheless, I must say that if she goes on appealing her case, and
exposing us both, as she does, it is impossible to think the knot can be
knit with reputation to either.  And although, Mr. Hickman, I have
delivered my apprehensions under so ludicrous a figure, I am afraid that
she will ruin her constitution: and, by seeking Death when she may shun
him, will not be able to avoid him when she would be glad to do so.

This cool and honest speech let down his stiffened muscles into
complacence.  He was my very obedient and faithful humble servant several
times over, as I waited on him to his chariot: and I was his almost as
often.

And so exit Hickman.



LETTER XXIX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTERS XXII. XXVI. XXVII. OF THIS VOLUME.]
FRIDAY NIGHT, JULY 21.


I will throw away a few paragraphs upon the contents of thy last shocking
letters just brought me; and send what I shall write by the fellow who
carries mine on the interview with Hickman.

Reformation, I see, is coming fast upon thee.  Thy uncle's slow death,
and thy attendance upon him through every stage towards it, prepared thee
for it.  But go thou on in thine own way, as I will in mine.  Happiness
consists in being pleased with what we do: and if thou canst find delight
in being sad, it will be as well for thee as if thou wert merry, though
no other person should join to keep thee in countenance.

I am, nevertheless, exceedingly disturbed at the lady's ill health.  It
is entirely owing to the cursed arrest.  She was absolutely triumphant
over me and the whole crew before.  Thou believest me guiltless of that:
so, I hope, does she.--The rest, as I have often said, is a common case;
only a little uncommonly circumstanced; that's all: Why, then, all these
severe things from her, and from thee?

As to selling her clothes, and her laces, and so forth, it has, I own, a
shocking sound to it.  What an implacable as well as unjust set of
wretches are those of her unkindredly kin, who have money of her's in
their hands, as well as large arrears of her own estate; yet with-hold
both, avowedly to distress her!  But may she not have money of that proud
and saucy friend of her's, Miss Howe, more than she wants?--And should
not I be overjoyed, thinkest thou, to serve her?----What then is there in
the parting with her apparel but female perverseness?--And I am not sure,
whether I ought not to be glad, if she does this out of spite to me.--
Some disappointed fair-ones would have hanged, some drowned themselves.
My beloved only revenges herself upon her clothes.  Different ways of
working has passion in different bosoms, as humours or complexion induce.
--Besides, dost think I shall grudge to replace, to three times the
value, what she disposes of?  So, Jack, there is no great matter in this.

Thou seest how sensible she is of the soothings of the polite doctor:
this will enable thee to judge how dreadfully the horrid arrest, and her
gloomy father's curse, must have hurt her.  I have great hope, if she
will but see me, that my behaviour, my contrition, my soothings, may have
some happy effect upon her.

But thou art too ready to give up.  Let me seriously tell thee that, all
excellence as she is, I think the earnest interposition of my relations;
the implored mediation of that little fury Miss Howe; and the commissions
thou actest under from myself; are such instances of condescension and
high value in them, and such contrition in me, that nothing farther can
be done.--So here let the matter rest for the present, till she considers
better of it.

But now a few words upon poor Belton's case.  I own I was at first a
little startled at the disloyalty of his Thomasine.  Her hypocrisy to be
for so many years undetected!--I have very lately had some intimations
given me of her vileness; and had intended to mention them to thee when I
saw thee.  To say the truth, I always suspected her eye: the eye, thou
knowest, is the casement at which the heart generally looks out.  Many
a woman, who will not show herself at the door, has tipt the sly, the
intelligible wink from the windows.

But Tom. had no management at all.  A very careless fellow.  Would never
look into his own affairs.  The estate his uncle left him was his ruin:
wife, or mistress, whoever was, must have had his fortune to sport with.

I have often hinted his weakness of this sort to him; and the danger he
was in of becoming the property of designing people.  But he hated to
take pains.  He would ever run away from his accounts; as now, poor
fellow! he would be glad to do from himself.  Had he not had a woman to
fleece him, his coachman or valet, would have been his prime-minister,
and done it as effectually.

But yet, for many years, I thought she was true to his bed.  At least I
thought the boys were his own.  For though they are muscular, and
big-boned, yet I supposed the healthy mother might have furnished them
with legs and shoulders: for she is not of a delicate frame; and then
Tom., some years ago, looked up, and spoke more like a man, than he has
done of late; squeaking inwardly, poor fellow! for some time past, from
contracted quail-pipes, and wheezing from lungs half spit away.

He complains, thou sayest, that we all run away from him.  Why, after
all, Belford, it is no pleasant thing to see a poor fellow one loves,
dying by inches, yet unable to do him good.  There are friendships which
are only bottle-deep: I should be loth to have it thought that mine for
any of my vassals is such a one.  Yet, with gay hearts, which become
intimate because they were gay, the reason for their first intimacy
ceasing, the friendship will fade: but may not this sort of friendship be
more properly distinguished by the word companionship?

But mine, as I said, is deeper than this: I would still be as ready as
ever I was in my life, to the utmost of my power, to do him service.

As once instance of this my readiness to extricate him from all his
difficulties as to Thomasine, dost thou care to propose to him an
expedient, that is just come into my head?

It is this: I would engage Thomasine and her cubs (if Belton be convinced
they are neither of them his) in a party of pleasure.  She was always
complaisant to me.  It should be in a boat, hired for the purpose, to
sail to Tilbury, to the Isle Shepey, or pleasuring up the Medway; and
'tis but contriving to turn the boat bottom upward.  I can swim like a
fish.  Another boat shall be ready to take up whom I should direct, for
fear of the worst: and then, if Tom. has a mind to be decent, one suit of
mourning will serve for all three: Nay, the hostler-cousin may take his
plunge from the steerage: and who knows but they may be thrown up on the
beach, Thomasine and he, hand in hand?

This, thou'lt say, is no common instance of friendship.

Mean time, do thou prevail on him to come down to us: he never was more
welcome in his life than he shall be now.  If he will not, let him find
me some other service; and I will clap a pair of wings to my shoulders,
and he shall see me come flying in at his windows at the word of command.

Mowbray and Tourville each intend to give thee a letter; and I leave to
those rough varlets to handle thee as thou deservest, for the shocking
picture thou hast drawn of their last ends.  Thy own past guilt has
stared thee full in the face, one may see by it; and made thee, in
consciousness of thy demerits, sketch out these cursed out-lines.  I am
glad thou hast got the old fiend to hold the glass* before thy own face
so soon.  Thou must be in earnest surely, when thou wrotest it, and have
severe conviction upon thee: for what a hardened varlet must he be, who
could draw such a picture as this in sport?


* See Letter XXVI. of this volume.


As for thy resolution of repenting and marrying; I would have thee
consider which thou wilt set about first.  If thou wilt follow my advice,
thou shalt make short work of it: let matrimony take place of the other;
for then thou wilt, very possibly, have repentance come tumbling in fast
upon thee, as a consequence, and so have both in one.



LETTER XXX

MR. BELFORD, TO MR. ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY NOON, JULY 21.


This morning I was admitted, as soon as I sent up my name, into the
presence of the divine lady.  Such I may call her; as what I have to
relate will fully prove.

She had had a tolerable night, and was much better in spirits; though
weak in person; and visibly declining in looks.

Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith were with her; and accused her, in a gentle
manner, of having applied herself too assiduously to her pen for her
strength, having been up ever since five.  She said, she had rested
better than she had done for many nights: she had found her spirits free,
and her mind tolerably easy: and having, as she had reason to think, but
a short time, and much to do in it, she must be a good housewife of her
hours.

She had been writing, she said, a letter to her sister: but had not
pleased herself in it; though she had made two or three essays: but that
the last must go.

By hints I had dropt from time to time, she had reason, she said, to
think that I knew every thing that concerned her and her family; and, if
so, must be acquainted with the heavy curse her father had laid upon her;
which had been dreadfully fulfilled in one part, as to her prospects in
this life, and that in a very short time; which gave her great
apprehensions of the other part.  She had been applying herself to her
sister, to obtain a revocation of it.  I hope my father will revoke it,
said she, or I shall be very miserable--Yet [and she gasped as she spoke,
with apprehension]--I am ready to tremble at what the answer may be; for
my sister is hard-hearted.

I said something reflecting upon her friends; as to what they would
deserve to be thought of, if the unmerited imprecation were not
withdrawn.  Upon which she took me up, and talked in such a dutiful
manner of her parents as must doubly condemn them (if they remain
implacable) for their inhuman treatment of such a daughter.

She said, I must not blame her parents: it was her dear Miss Howe's fault
to do so.  But what an enormity was there in her crime, which could set
the best of parents (they had been to her, till she disobliged them) in a
bad light, for resenting the rashness of a child from whose education
they had reason to expect better fruits!  There were some hard
circumstances in her case, it was true: but my friend could tell me, that
no one person, throughout the whole fatal transaction, had acted out of
character, but herself.  She submitted therefore to the penalty she had
incurred.  If they had any fault, it was only that they would not inform
themselves of such circumstances, which would alleviate a little her
misdeed; and that supposing her a more guilty creature than she was, they
punished her without a hearing.

Lord!--I was going to curse thee, Lovelace!  How every instance of
excellence, in this all excelling creature, condemns thee;--thou wilt
have reason to think thyself of all men the most accursed, if she die!

I then besought her, while she was capable of such glorious instances of
generosity, and forgiveness, to extend her goodness to a man, whose heart
bled in every vein of it for the injuries he had done her; and who would
make it the study of his whole life to repair them.

The women would have withdrawn when the subject became so particular.
But she would not permit them to go.  She told me, that if after this
time I was for entering with so much earnestness into a subject so very
disagreeable to her, my visits must not be repeated.  Nor was there
occasion, she said, for my friendly offices in your favour; since she
had begun to write her whole mind upon that subject to Miss Howe, in
answer to letters from her, in which Miss Howe urged the same arguments,
in compliment to the wishes of your noble and worthy relations.

Mean time, you may let him know, said she, that I reject him with my
whole heart:--yet, that although I say this with such a determination as
shall leave no room for doubt, I say it not however with passion.  On the
contrary, tell him, that I am trying to bring my mind into such a frame
as to be able to pity him; [poor perjured wretch! what has he not to
answer for!] and that I shall not think myself qualified for the state I
am aspiring to, if, after a few struggles more, I cannot forgive him too:
and I hope, clasping her hands together, uplifted as were her eyes, my
dear earthly father will set me the example my heavenly one has already
set us all; and, by forgiving his fallen daughter, teach her to forgive
the man, who then, I hope, will not have destroyed my eternal prospects,
as he has my temporal!

Stop here, thou wretch!--but I need not bid thee!----for I can go no
farther!



LETTER XXXI

MR. BELFORD
[IN CONTINUATION.]


You will imagine how affecting her noble speech and behaviour were to me,
at the time when the bare recollecting and transcribing them obliged me
to drop my pen.  The women had tears in their eyes.  I was silent for a
few moments.--At last, Matchless excellence!  Inimitable goodness! I
called her, with a voice so accented, that I was half-ashamed of myself,
as it was before the women--but who could stand such sublime generosity
of soul in so young a creature, her loveliness giving grace to all she
said?  Methinks, said I, [and I really, in a manner, involuntarily bent
my knee,] I have before me an angel indeed.  I can hardly forbear
prostration, and to beg your influence to draw me after you to the world
you are aspiring to!--Yet--but what shall I say--Only, dearest
excellence, make me, in some small instances, serviceable to you, that I
may (if I survive you) have the glory to think I was able to contribute
to your satisfaction, while among us.

Here I stopt.  She was silent.  I proceeded--Have you no commission to
employ me in; deserted as you are by all your friends; among strangers,
though I doubt not, worthy people?  Cannot I be serviceable by message,
by letter-writing, by attending personally, with either message or
letter, your father, your uncles, your brother, your sister, Miss Howe,
Lord M., or the Ladies his sisters?--any office to be employed to serve
you, absolutely independent of my friend's wishes, or of my own wishes
to oblige him?--Think, Madam, if I cannot?

I thank you, Sir: very heartily I thank you: but in nothing that I can at
present think of, or at least resolve upon, can you do me service.  I
will see what return the letter I have written will bring me.--Till then
----

My life and my fortune, interrupted I, are devoted to your service.
Permit me to observe, that here you are, without one natural friend; and
(so much do I know of your unhappy case) that you must be in a manner
destitute of the means to make friends----

She was going to interrupt me, with a prohibitory kind of earnestness in
her manner.

I beg leave to proceed, Madam: I have cast about twenty ways how to
mention this before, but never dared till now.  Suffer me now, that I
have broken the ice, to tender myself--as your banker only.--I know you
will not be obliged: you need not.  You have sufficient of your own, if
it were in your hands; and from that, whether you live or die, will I
consent to be reimbursed.  I do assure you, that the unhappy man shall
never know either my offer, or your acceptance--Only permit me this small
----

And down behind her chair dropt a bank note of 100L. which I had brought
with me, intending some how or other to leave it behind me: nor shouldst
thou ever have known it, had she favoured me with the acceptance of it;
as I told her.

You give me great pain, Mr. Belford, said she, by these instances of your
humanity.  And yet, considering the company I have seen you in, I am not
sorry to find you capable of such.  Methinks I am glad, for the sake of
human nature, that there could be but one such man in the world, as he
you and I know.  But as to your kind offer, whatever it be, if you take
it not up, you will greatly disturb me.  I have no need of your kindness.
I have effects enough, which I never can want, to supply my present
occasion: and, if needful, can have recourse to Miss Howe.  I have
promised that I would--So, pray, Sir, urge not upon me this favour.--Take
it up yourself.--If you mean me peace and ease of mind, urge not this
favour.--And she spoke with impatience.

I beg, Madam, but one word----

Not one, Sir, till you have taken back what you have let fall.  I doubt
not either the honour, or the kindness, of your offer; but you must not
say one word more on this subject.  I cannot bear it.

She was stooping, but with pain.  I therefore prevented her; and besought
her to forgive me for a tender, which, I saw, had been more discomposing
to her than I had hoped (from the purity of my intentions) it would be.
But I could not bear to think that such a mind as her's should be
distressed: since the want of the conveniencies she was used to abound in
might affect and disturb her in the divine course she was in.

You are very kind to me, Sir, said she, and very favourable in your
opinion of me.  But I hope that I cannot now be easily put out of my
present course.  My declining health will more and more confirm me in it.
Those who arrested and confined me, no doubt, thought they had fallen
upon the most ready method to distress me so as to bring me into all
their measures.  But I presume to hope that I have a mind that cannot be
debased, in essential instances, by temporal calamities.

Little do those poor wretches know of the force of innate principles,
(forgive my own implied vanity, was her word,) who imagine, that a
prison, or penury, can bring a right-turned mind to be guilty of a wilful
baseness, in order to avoid such short-lived evils.

She then turned from me towards the window, with a dignity suitable to her
words; and such as showed her to be more of soul than of body at that
instant.

What magnanimity!--No wonder a virtue so solidly founded could baffle all
thy arts: and that it forced thee (in order to carry thy accursed point)
to have recourse to those unnatural ones, which robbed her of her
charming senses.

The women were extremely affected, Mrs. Lovick especially; who said,
whisperingly to Mrs. Smith, We have an angel, not a woman, with us, Mrs.
Smith!

I repeated my offers to write to any of her friends; and told her, that,
having taken the liberty to acquaint Dr. H. with the cruel displeasure of
her relations, as what I presumed lay nearest to her heart, he had
proposed to write himself, to acquaint her friends how ill she was, if
she would not take it amiss.

It was kind in the Doctor, she said: but begged, that no step of that
sort might be taken without her knowledge or consent.  She would wait to
see what effects her letter to her sister would have.  All she had to
hope for was, that her father would revoke his malediction, previous to
the last blessing she should then implore.  For the rest, her friends
would think she could not suffer too much; and she was content to suffer:
for now nothing could happen that could make her wish to live.

Mrs. Smith went down; and, soon returning, asked, if the lady and I would
not dine with her that day; for it was her wedding-day.  She had engaged
Mrs. Lovick she said; and should have nobody else, if we would do her
that favour.

The charming creature sighed, and shook her head.--Wedding-day, repeated
she!--I wish you, Mrs. Smith, many happy wedding-days!--But you will
excuse me.

Mr. Smith came up with the same request.  They both applied to me.

On condition the lady would, I should make no scruple; and would suspend
an engagement: which I actually had.

She then desired they would all sit down.  You have several times, Mrs.
Lovick and Mrs. Smith, hinted your wishes, that I would give you some
little history of myself: now, if you are at leisure, that this
gentleman, who, I have reason to believe, knows it all, is present, and
can tell you if I give it justly, or not, I will oblige your curiosity.

They all eagerly, the man Smith too, sat down; and she began an account
of herself, which I will endeavour to repeat, as nearly in her own words
as I possibly can: for I know you will think it of importance to be
apprized of her manner of relating your barbarity to her, as well as what
her sentiments are of it; and what room there is for the hopes your
friends have in your favour for her.

'At first when I took these lodgings, said she, I thought of staying but
a short time in them; and so Mrs. Smith, I told you: I therefore avoided
giving any other account of myself than that I was a very unhappy young
creature, seduced from good, and escaped from very vile wretches.

'This account I thought myself obliged to give, that you might the less
wonder at seeing a young creature rushing through your shop, into your
back apartment, all trembling and out of breath; an ordinary garb over my
own; craving lodging and protection; only giving my bare word, that you
should be handsomely paid: all my effects contained in a
pocket-handkerchief.

'My sudden absence, for three days and nights together when arrested,
must still further surprise you: and although this gentleman, who,
perhaps, knows more of the darker part of my story, than I do myself, has
informed you (as you, Mrs. Lovick, tell me) that I am only an unhappy,
not a guilty creature; yet I think it incumbent upon me not to suffer
honest minds to be in doubt about my character.

'You must know, then, that I have been, in one instance (I had like to
have said but in one instance; but that was a capital one) an undutiful
child to the most indulgent of parents: for what some people call cruelty
in them, is owing but to the excess of their love, and to their
disappointment, having had reason to expect better from me.

'I was visited (at first, with my friends connivance) by a man of birth
and fortune, but of worse principles, as it proved, than I believed any
man could have.  My brother, a very headstrong young man, was absent at
that time; and, when he returned, (from an old grudge, and knowing the
gentleman, it is plain, better than I knew him) entirely disapproved of
his visits: and, having a great sway in our family, brought other
gentlemen to address me: and at last (several having been rejected) he
introduced one extremely disagreeable: in every indifferent person's eyes
disagreeable.  I could not love him.  They all joined to compel me to
have him; a rencounter between the gentleman my friends were set against,
and my brother, having confirmed them all his enemies.

'To be short; I was confined, and treated so very hardly, that, in a rash
fit, I appointed to go off with the man they hated.  A wicked intention,
you'll say! but I was greatly provoked.  Nevertheless, I repented, and
resolved not to go off with him: yet I did not mistrust his honour to me
neither; nor his love; because nobody thought me unworthy of the latter,
and my fortune was not to be despised.  But foolishly (wickedly and
contrivingly, as my friends still think, with a design, as they imagine,
to abandon them) giving him a private meeting, I was tricked away; poorly
enough tricked away, I must needs say; though others who had been first
guilty of so rash a step as the meeting of him was, might have been so
deceived and surprised as well as I.

'After remaining some time at a farm-house in the country, and behaving
to me all the time with honour, he brought me to handsome lodgings in
town till still better provision could be made for me.  But they proved
to be (as he indeed knew and designed) at a vile, a very vile creature's;
though it was long before I found her to be so; for I knew nothing of the
town, or its ways.

'There is no repeating what followed: such unprecedented vile arts!--For
I gave him no opportunity to take me at any disreputable advantage.'--

And here (half covering her sweet face, with her handkerchief put to her
tearful eyes) she stopt.

Hastily, as if she would fly from the hateful remembrance, she resumed:--
'I made escape afterward from the abominable house in his absence, and
came to your's: and this gentleman has almost prevailed on me to think,
that the ungrateful man did not connive at the vile arrest: which was
made, no doubt, in order to get me once more to those wicked lodgings:
for nothing do I owe them, except I were to pay them'--[she sighed, and
again wiped her charming eyes--adding in a softer, lower voice]--'for
being ruined.'

Indeed, Madam, said I, guilty, abominably guilty, as he is in all the
rest, he is innocent of this last wicked outrage.

'Well, and so I wish him to be.  That evil, heavy as it was, is one of
the slightest evils I have suffered.  But hence you'll observe, Mrs.
Lovick, (for you seemed this morning curious to know if I were not a
wife,) that I never was married.--You, Mr. Belford, no doubt, knew before
that I am no wife: and now I never will be one.  Yet, I bless God, that
I am not a guilty creature!

'As to my parentage, I am of no mean family; I have in my own right, by
the intended favour of my grandfather, a fortune not contemptible:
independent of my father; if I had pleased; but I never will please.

'My father is very rich.  I went by another name when I came to you
first: but that was to avoid being discovered to the perfidious man: who
now engages, by this gentleman, not to molest me.

'My real name you now know to be Harlowe: Clarissa Harlowe.  I am not yet
twenty years of age.

'I have an excellent mother, as well as father; a woman of family, and
fine sense--worthy of a better child!--they both doated upon me.

'I have two good uncles: men of great fortune; jealous of the honour of
their family; which I have wounded.

'I was the joy of their hearts; and, with theirs and my father's, I had
three houses to call my own; for they used to have me with them by turns,
and almost kindly to quarrel for me; so that I was two months in the year
with the one; two months with the other; six months at my father's; and
two at the houses of others of my dear friends, who thought themselves
happy in me: and whenever I was at any one's, I was crowded upon with
letters by all the rest, who longed for my return to them.

'In short, I was beloved by every body.  The poor--I used to make glad
their hearts: I never shut my hand to any distress, wherever I was--but
now I am poor myself!

'So Mrs. Smith, so Mrs. Lovick, I am not married.  It is but just to tell
you so.  And I am now, as I ought to be, in a state of humiliation and
penitence for the rash step which has been followed by so much evil.
God, I hope, will forgive me, as I am endeavouring to bring my mind to
forgive all the world, even the man who has ungratefully, and by dreadful
perjuries, [poor wretch! he thought all his wickedness to be wit!]
reduced to this a young creature, who had his happiness in her view, and
in her wish, even beyond this life; and who was believed to be of rank,
and fortune, and expectations, considerable enough to make it the
interest of any gentleman in England to be faithful to his vows to her.
But I cannot expect that my parents will forgive me: my refuge must be
death; the most painful kind of which I would suffer, rather than be the
wife of one who could act by me, as the man has acted, upon whose birth,
education, and honour, I had so much reason to found better expectations.

'I see, continued she, that I, who once was every one's delight, am now
the cause of grief to every one--you, that are strangers to me, are moved
for me! 'tis kind!--but 'tis time to stop.  Your compassionate hearts,
Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick, are too much touched,' [For the women sobbed,
and the man was also affected.]  'It is barbarous in me, with my woes,
thus to sadden your wedding-day.'  Then turning to Mr. and Mrs. Smith--
'May you see many happy ones, honest, good couple!--how agreeable is it
to see you both join so kindly to celebrate it, after many years are gone
over you!--I once--but no more!--All my prospects of felicity, as to this
life, are at an end.  My hopes, like opening buds or blossoms in an
over-forward spring, have been nipt by a severe frost!--blighted by an
eastern wind!--but I can but once die; and if life be spared me, but till
I am discharged from a heavy malediction, which my father in his wrath
laid upon me, and which is fulfilled literally in every article relating
to this world; that, and a last blessing, are all I have to wish for; and
death will be welcomer to me, than rest to the most wearied traveller
that ever reached his journey's end.'

And then she sunk her head against the back of her chair, and, hiding her
face with her handkerchief, endeavoured to conceal her tears from us.

Not a soul of us could speak a word.  Thy presence, perhaps, thou
hardened wretch, might have made us ashamed of a weakness which perhaps
thou wilt deride me in particular for, when thou readest this!----

She retired to her chamber soon after, and was forced, it seems, to lie
down.  We all went down together; and, for an hour and a half, dwelt upon
her praises; Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick repeatedly expressing their
astonishment, that there could be a man in the world, capable of
offending, much more of wilfully injuring such a lady; and repeating,
that they had an angel in their house.--I thought they had; and that
as assuredly as there is a devil under the roof of good Lord M.

I hate thee heartily!--by my faith I do!--every hour I hate thee more
than the former!----

J. BELFORD.



LETTER XXXII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, JULY 22.


What dost hate me for, Belford!--and why more and more! have I been
guilty of any offence thou knewest not before?--If pathos can move such a
heart as thine, can it alter facts!--Did I not always do this
incomparable creature as much justice as thou canst do her for the heart
of thee, or as she can do herself?----What nonsense then thy hatred, thy
augmented hatred, when I still persist to marry her, pursuant to word
given to thee, and to faith plighted to all my relations?  But hate, if
thou wilt, so thou dost but write.  Thou canst not hate me so much as I
do myself: and yet I know if thou really hatedst me, thou wouldst not
venture to tell me so.

Well, but after all, what need of her history to these women?  She will
certainly repent, some time hence, that she has thus needless exposed us
both.

Sickness palls every appetite, and makes us hate what we loved: but
renewed health changes the scene; disposes us to be pleased with
ourselves; and then we are in a way to be pleased with every one else.
Every hope, then, rises upon us: every hour presents itself to us on
dancing feet: and what Mr. Addison says of liberty, may, with still
greater propriety, be said of health, for what is liberty itself without
health?

      It makes the gloomy face of nature gay;
      Gives beauty to the sun, and pleasure to the day.

And I rejoice that she is already so much better, as to hold with
strangers such a long and interesting conversation.

Strange, confoundedly strange, and as perverse [that is to say, womanly]
as strange, that she should refuse, and sooner choose to die [O the
obscene word! and yet how free does thy pen make with it to me!] than be
mine, who offended her by acting in character, while her parents acted
shamefully out of theirs, and when I am now willing to act out of my own
to oblige her; yet I am not to be forgiven; they to be faultless with
her!--and marriage the only medium to repair all breaches, and to salve
her own honour!--Surely thou must see the inconsistence of her forgiving
unforgiveness, as I may call it!--yet, heavy varlet as thou art, thou
wantest to be drawn up after her!  And what a figure dost thou make with
thy speeches, stiff as Hickman's ruffles, with thy aspirations and
protestations!--unused, thy weak head, to bear the sublimities that fall,
even in common conversation, from the lips of this ever-charming
creature!

But the prettiest whim of all was, to drop the bank note behind her
chair, instead of presenting it on thy knees to her hand!--To make such a
woman as this doubly stoop--by the acceptance, and to take it from the
ground!--What an ungrateful benefit-conferrer art thou!--How awkward, to
take in into thy head, that the best way of making a present to a lady
was to throw the present behind her chair!

I am very desirous to see what she has written to her sister; what she is
about to write to Miss Howe; and what return she will have from the
Harlowe-Arabella.  Canst thou not form some scheme to come at the copies
of these letters, or the substance of them at least, and of that of her
other correspondencies?  Mrs. Lovick, thou seemest to say, is a pious
woman.  The lady, having given such a particular history of herself, will
acquaint her with every thing.  And art thou not about to reform!--Won't
this consent of minds between thee and the widow, [what age is she, Jack?
the devil never trumpt up a friendship between a man and a woman, of any
thing like years, which did not end in matrimony, or in the ruin of their
morals!]  Won't it strike out an intimacy between ye, that may enable
thee to gratify me in this particular?  A proselyte, I can tell thee, has
great influence upon your good people: such a one is a saint of their own
creation: and they will water, and cultivate, and cherish him, as a plant
of their own raising: and this from a pride truly spiritual!

One of my lovers in Paris was a devotee.  She took great pains to convert
me.  I gave way to her kind endeavours for the good of my soul.  She
thought it a point gained to make me profess some religion.  The catholic
has its conveniencies.  I permitted her to bring a father to me.  My
reformation went on swimmingly.  The father had hopes of me: he applauded
her zeal: so did I.  And how dost thou think it ended?--Not a girl in
England, reading thus far, but would guess!--In a word, very happily: for
she not only brought me a father, but made me one: and then, being
satisfied with each other's conversation, we took different routes: she
into Navarre; I into Italy: both well inclined to propagate the good
lessons in which we had so well instructed each other.

But to return.  One consolation arises to me, from the pretty regrets
which this admirable creature seems to have in indulging reflections on
the people's wedding-day.--I ONCE!--thou makest her break off with
saying.

She once!  What--O Belford! why didst thou not urge her to explain what
she once hoped?

What once a woman hopes, in love matters, she always hopes, while there
is room for hope: And are we not both single?  Can she be any man's but
mine?  Will I be any woman's but her's?

I never will!  I never can!--and I tell thee, that I am every day, every
hour, more and more in love with her: and, at this instant, have a more
vehement passion for her than ever I had in my life!--and that with views
absolutely honourable, in her own sense of the word: nor have I varied,
so much as in wish, for this week past; firmly fixed, and wrought into my
very nature, as the life of honour, or of generous confidence in me, was,
in preference to the life of doubt and distrust.  That must be a life of
doubt and distrust, surely, where the woman confides nothing, and ties up
a man for his good behaviour for life, taking church-and-state sanctions
in aid of the obligation she imposes upon him.

I shall go on Monday to a kind of ball, to which Colonel Ambrose has
invited me.  It is given on a family account.  I care not on what: for
all that delights me in the thing is, that Mrs. and Miss Howe are to be
there;--Hickman, of course; for the old lady will not stir abroad without
him.  The Colonel is in hopes that Miss Arabella Harlowe will be there
likewise; for all the men and women of fashion round him are invited.

I fell in by accident with the Colonel, who I believe, hardly thought I
would accept of the invitation.  But he knows me not, if he thinks I am
ashamed to appear at any place, where women dare show their faces.  Yet
he hinted to me that my name was up, on Miss Harlowe's account.  But, to
allude to one of Lord M.'s phrases, if it be, I will not lie a bed when
any thing joyous is going forward.

As I shall go in my Lord's chariot, I would have had one of my cousins
Montague to go with me: but they both refused: and I shall not choose to
take either of thy brethren.  It would look as if I thought I wanted a
bodyguard: besides, one of them is too rough, the other too smooth, and
too great a fop for some of the staid company that will be there; and for
me in particular.  Men are known by their companions; and a fop [as
Tourville, for example] takes great pains to hang out a sign by his dress
of what he has in his shop.  Thou, indeed, art an exception; dressing
like a coxcomb, yet a very clever fellow.  Nevertheless so clumsy a beau,
that thou seemest to me to owe thyself a double spite, making thy
ungracefulness appear the more ungraceful, by thy remarkable tawdriness,
when thou art out of mourning.

I remember, when I first saw thee, my mind laboured with a strong puzzle,
whether I should put thee down for a great fool, or a smatterer in wit.
Something I saw was wrong in thee, by thy dress.  If this fellow, thought
I, delights not so much in ridicule, that he will not spare himself, he
must be plaguy silly to take so much pains to make his ugliness more
conspicuous than it would otherwise be.

Plain dress, for an ordinary man or woman, implies at least modesty, and
always procures a kind quarter from the censorious.  Who will ridicule a
personal imperfection in one that seems conscious, that it is an
imperfection?  Who ever said an anchoret was poor?  But who would spare
so very absurd a wrong-head, as should bestow tinsel to make his
deformity the more conspicuous?

But, although I put on these lively airs, I am sick at my soul!--My whole
heart is with my charmer! with what indifference shall I look upon all
the assembly at the Colonel's, my beloved in my ideal eye, and engrossing
my whole heart?



LETTER XXXIII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS ARABELLA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 20.


MISS HARLOWE,

I cannot help acquainting you (however it may be received, coming from
me) that your poor sister is dangerously ill, at the house of one Smith,
who keeps a glover's and perfume shop, in King-street, Covent-garden.
She knows not that I write.  Some violent words, in the nature of an
imprecation, from her father, afflict her greatly in her weak state.  I
presume not to direct you what to do in this case.  You are her sister.
I therefore could not help writing to you, not only for her sake, but for
your own.  I am, Madam,

Your humble servant,
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER XXXIV

MISS ARABELLA HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER.]
THURSDAY, JULY 20.


MISS HOWE,

I have your's of this morning.  All that has happened to the unhappy body
you mentioned, is what we foretold and expected.  Let him, for whose sake
she abandoned us, be her comfort.  We are told he has remorse, and would
marry her.  We don't believe it, indeed.  She may be very ill.  Her
disappointment may make her so, or ought.  Yet is she the only one I know
who is disappointed.

I cannot say, Miss, that the notification from you is the more welcome,
for the liberties you have been pleased to take with our whole family for
resenting a conduct, that it is a shame any young lady should justify.
Excuse this freedom, occasioned by greater.  I am, Miss,

Your humble servant,
ARABELLA HARLOWE.



LETTER XXXV

MISS HOWE
[IN REPLY.]
FRIDAY, JULY 21.


MISS ARABELLA HARLOWE,

If you had half as much sense as you have ill-nature, you would
(notwithstanding the exuberance of the latter) have been able to
distinguish between a kind intention to you all (that you might have the
less to reproach yourselves with, if a deplorable case should happen) and
an officiousness I owed you not, by reason of freedoms at least
reciprocal.  I will not, for the unhappy body's sake, as you call a
sister you have helped to make so, say all that I could say.  If what I
fear happen, you shall hear (whether desired or not) all the mind of

ANNA HOWE.



LETTER XXXVI

MISS ARABELLA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 21.


MISS ANNA HOWE,

Your pert letter I have received.  You, that spare nobody, I cannot
expect should spare me.  You are very happy in a prudent and watchful
mother.--But else mine cannot be exceeded in prudence; but we had all too
good an opinion of somebody, to think watchfulness needful.  There may
possibly be some reason why you are so much attached to her in an error
of this flagrant nature.

I help to make a sister unhappy!--It is false, Miss!--It is all her own
doings!--except, indeed, what she may owe to somebody's advice--you know
who can best answer for that.

Let us know your mind as soon as you please: as we shall know it to be
your mind, we shall judge what attention to give it.  That's all, from,
&c.

AR. H.


LETTER XXXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS ARABELLA HARLOWE
SAT. JULY 22.


It may be the misfortune of some people to engage every body's notice:
others may be the happier, though they may be the more envious, for
nobody's thinking them worthy of any.  But one would be glad people had
the sense to be thankful for that want of consequence, which subject them
not to hazards they would heartily have been able to manage under.

I own to you, that had it not been for the prudent advice of that
admirable somebody (whose principal fault is the superiority of her
talents, and whose misfortune to be brother'd and sister'd by a couple of
creatures, who are not able to comprehend her excellencies) I might at
one time have been plunged into difficulties.  But pert as the
superlatively pert may think me, I thought not myself wiser, because I
was older; nor for that poor reason qualified to prescribe to, much less
to maltreat, a genius so superior.

I repeat it with gratitude, that the dear creature's advice was of very
great service to me--and this before my mother's watchfulness became
necessary.  But how it would have fared with me, I cannot say, had I had
a brother or sister, who had deemed it their interest, as well as a
gratification of their sordid envy, to misrepresent me.

Your admirable sister, in effect, saved you, Miss, as well as me--with
this difference--you, against your will--me with mine: and but for your
own brother, and his own sister, would not have been lost herself.

Would to Heaven both sisters had been obliged with their own wills!--the
most admirable of her sex would never then have been out of her father's
house!--you, Miss--I don't know what had become of you.--But, let what
would have happened, you would have met with the humanity you have not
shown, whether you had deserved it or not:--nor, at the worst, lost
either a kind sister, or a pitying friend, in the most excellent of
sisters.

But why run I into length to such a poor thing? why push I so weak an
adversary? whose first letter is all low malice, and whose next is made
up of falsehood and inconsistence, as well as spite and ill-manners! yet
I was willing to give you a part of my mind.  Call for more of it; it
shall be at your service: from one, who, though she thanks God she is not
your sister, is not your enemy: but that she is not the latter, is
withheld but by two considerations; one that you bear, though unworthily,
a relation to a sister so excellent; the other, that you are not of
consequence enough to engage any thing but the pity and contempt of

A.H.



LETTER XXXVIII

MRS. HARLOWE, TO MRS. HOWE
SAT. JULY 22.


DEAR MADAM,

I send you, enclosed, copies of five letters that have passed between
Miss Howe and my Arabella.  You are a person of so much prudence and good
sense, and (being a mother yourself) can so well enter into the
distresses of all our family, upon the rashness and ingratitude of a
child we once doated upon, that, I dare say, you will not countenance the
strange freedoms your daughter has taken with us all.  These are not the
only ones we have to complain of; but we were silent on the others, as
they did not, as these have done, spread themselves out upon paper.  We
only beg, that we may not be reflected upon by a young lady who knows not
what we have suffered, and do suffer by the rashness of a naughty
creature who has brought ruin upon herself, and disgrace upon a family
which she had robbed of all comfort.  I offer not to prescribe to your
known wisdom in this case; but leave it to you to do as you think most
proper.  I am, Madam,

Your most humble servant,
CHARL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XXXIX

MRS. HOWE
[IN ANSWER.]
SAT. JULY 22.


DEAR MADAM,

I am highly offended with my daughter's letters to Miss Harlowe.  I knew
nothing at all of her having taken such a liberty.  These young creatures
have such romantic notions, some of live, some of friendship, that there
is no governing them in either.  Nothing but time, and dear experience,
will convince them of their absurdities in both.  I have chidden Miss
Howe very severely.  I had before so just a notion of what your whole
family's distress must be, that, as I told your brother, Mr. Antony
Harlowe, I had often forbid her corresponding with the poor fallen angel
--for surely never did young lady more resemble what we imagine of
angels, both in person and mind.  But, tired out with her headstrong
ways, [I am sorry to say this of my own child,] I was forced to give way
to it again.  And, indeed, so sturdy was she in her will, that I was
afraid it would end in a fit of sickness, as too often it did in fits of
sullens.

None but parents know the trouble that children give.  They are happiest,
I have often thought, who have none.  And these women-grown girls, bless
my heart! how ungovernable!

I believe, however, you will have no more such letters from my Nancy.  I
have been forced to use compulsion with her upon Miss Clary's illness,
[and it seems she is very bad,] or she would have run away to London, to
attend upon her: and this she calls doing the duty of a friend;
forgetting that she sacrifices to her romantic friendship her duty to her
fond indulgent mother.

There are a thousand excellencies in the poor sufferer, notwithstanding
her fault: and, if the hints she has given to my daughter be true, she
has been most grievously abused.  But I think your forgiveness and her
father's forgiveness of her ought to be all at your own choice; and
nobody should intermeddle in that, for the sake of due authority in
parents: and besides, as Miss Harlowe writes, it was what every body
expected, though Miss Clary would not believe it till she smarted for her
credulity.  And, fir these reasons, I offer not to plead any thing in
alleviation of her fault, which is aggravated by her admirable sense, and
a judgment above her years.

I am, Madam, with compliments to good Mr. Harlowe, and all your afflicted
family,

Your most humble servant,
ANNABELLA HOWE.


I shall set out for the Isle of Wight in a few days, with my daughter.  I
      will hasten our setting out, on purpose to break her mind from her
      friend's distresses; which afflict us as much, nearly, as Miss
      Clary's rashness has done you.



LETTER XL

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. JULY 22.


MY DEAREST FRIEND,

We are busy in preparing for our little journey and voyage: but I will be
ill, I will be very ill, if I cannot hear you are better before I go.

Rogers greatly afflicted me, by telling me the bad way you are in.  But
now you have been able to hold a pen, and as your sense is strong and
clear, I hope that the amusement you will receive from writing will make
you better.

I dispatch this by an extraordinary way, that it may reach you time
enough to move you to consider well before you absolutely decide upon the
contents of mine of the 13th, on the subject of the two Misses Montague's
visit to me; since, according to what you write, must I answer them.

In your last, conclude very positively that you will not be his.  To be
sure, he rather deserves an infamous death than such a wife.  But as I
really believe him innocent of the arrest, and as all his family are such
earnest pleaders, and will be guarantees, for him, I think the compliance
with their entreaties, and his own, will be now the best step you can
take; your own family remaining implacable, as I can assure you they do.
He is a man of sense; and it is not impossible but he may make you a good
husband, and in time may become no bad man.

My mother is entirely of my opinion: and on Friday, pursuant to a hint I
gave you in my last, Mr. Hickman had a conference with the strange
wretch: and though he liked not, by any means, his behaviour to himself;
nor indeed, had reason to do so; yet he is of opinion that he is
sincerely determined to marry you, if you will condescend to have him.

Perhaps Mr. Hickman may make you a private visit before we set out.  If
I may not attend you myself, I shall not be easy except he does.  And he
will then give you an account of the admirable character the surprising
wretch gave of you, and of the justice he does to your virtue.

He was as acknowledging to his relations, though to his own condemnation,
as his two cousins told me.  All he apprehends, as he said to Mr.
Hickman, is that if you go on exposing him, wedlock itself will not wipe
off the dishonour to both: and moreover, 'that you would ruin your
constitution by your immoderate sorrow; and, by seeking death when you
might avoid it, would not be able to escape it when you would wish to do
so.'

So, my dearest friend, I charge you, if you can, to get over your
aversion to this vile man.  You may yet live to see many happy days, and
be once more the delight of all your friends, neighbours, and
acquaintance, as well as a stay, a comfort, and a blessing to your Anna
Howe.

I long to have your answer to mine of the 13th.  Pray keep the messenger
till it be ready.  If he return on Monday night, it will be time enough
for his affairs, and to find me come back from Colonel Ambrose's; who
gives a ball on the anniversary of Mrs. Ambrose's birth and marriage both
in one.  The gentry all round the neighbourhood are invited this time, on
some good news they have received from Mrs. Ambrose's brother, the
governor.

My mother promised the Colonel for me and herself, in my absence.  I
would fain have excused myself to her; and the rather, as I had
exceptions on account of the day:* but she is almost as young as her
daughter; and thinking it not so well to go without me, she told me.  And
having had a few sparring blows with each other very lately, I think I
must comply.  For I don't love jingling when I can help it; though I
seldom make it my study to avoid the occasion, when it offers of itself.
I don't know, if either were not a little afraid of the other, whether it
would be possible that we could live together:--I, all my father!--My
mamma--What?--All my mother--What else should I say?


* The 24th of July, Miss Clarissa Harlowe's birth-day.


O my dear, how many things happen in this life to give us displeasure!
How few to give us joy!--I am sure I shall have none on this occasion;
since the true partner of my heart, the principal of the one soul, that
it used to be said, animated the pair of friends, as we were called; you,
my dear, [who used to irradiate every circle you set your foot into, and
to give me real significance in a second place to yourself,] cannot be
there!--One hour of your company, my ever instructive friend, [I thirst
for it!] how infinitely preferable would it be to me to all the
diversions and amusements with which our sex are generally most delighted
--Adieu, my dear!

A. HOWE.



LETTER XLI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 23.


What pain, my dearest friend, does your kind solicitude for my welfare
give me!  How much more binding and tender are the ties of pure
friendship, and the union of like minds, than the ties of nature!  Well
might the sweet-singer of Israel, when he was carrying to the utmost
extent the praises of the friendship between him and his beloved friend,
say, that the love of Jonathan to him was wonderful; that it surpassed
the love of women!  What an exalted idea does it give of the soul of
Jonathan, sweetly attempered for the sacred band, if we may suppose it
but equal to that of my Anna Howe for her fallen Clarissa?--But, although
I can glory in your kind love for me, think, my dear, what concern must
fill a mind, not ungenerous, when the obligation lies all on one side.
And when, at the same time that your light is the brighter for my
darkness, I must give pain to a dear friend, to whom I delighted to give
pleasure; and not pain only, but discredit, for supporting my blighted
fame against the busy tongues of uncharitable censures!

This is that makes me, in the words of my admired exclaimer, very little
altered, often repeat: 'Oh! that I were as in months past! as in the days
when God preserved me! when his candle shined upon my head, and when by
his light I walked through darkness!  As I was in the days of my
childhood--when the Almighty was yet with me: when I was in my father's
house: when I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out
rivers of oil.'

You set before me your reasons, enforced by the opinion of your honoured
mother, why I should think of Mr. Lovelace for a husband.*


* See the preceding Letter.


And I have before me your letter of the 13th,* containing the account of
the visit and proposals, and kind interposition of the two Misses
Montague, in the names of the good Ladies Sadleir and Betty Lawrance, and
in that of my Lord M.


* See Letter IX. of this vol.


Also your's of the 18th,* demanding me, as I may say, of those ladies,
and of that family, when I was so infamously and cruelly arrested, and
you knew not what was become of me.


* See Letter XI. ibid.


The answer likewise of those ladies, signed in so full and generous a
manner by themselves,* and by that nobleman, and those two venerable
ladies; and, in his light way, by the wretch himself.


* See Letter XIV. ibid.


Thse, my dearest Miss Howe; and your letter of the 16th,* which came when
I was under arrest, and which I received not till some days after; are
all before me.


* See Letter X. of this volume.


And I have as well weighed the whole matter, and your arguments in
support of your advice, as at present my head and my heart will let me
weigh them.

I am, moreover, willing to believe, not only from your own opinion, but
from the assurances of one of Mr. Lovelace's friends, Mr. Belford, a
good-natured and humane man, who spares not to censure the author of my
calamities (I think, with undissembled and undesigning sincerity) that
that man is innocent of the disgraceful arrest.

And even, if you please, in sincere compliment to your opinion, and to
that of Mr. Hickman, that (over-persuaded by his friends, and ashamed of
his unmerited baseness to me) he would in earnest marry me, if I would
have him.

'*Well, and now, what is the result of all?--It is this--that I must
abide by what I have already declared--and that is, [don't be angry at
me, my best friend,] that I have much more pleasure in thinking of death,
than of such a husband.  In short, as I declared in my last, that I
cannot [forgive me, if I say, I will not] ever be his.


* Those parts of this letter which are marked with an inverted comma
[thus ' ] were afterwards transcribed by Miss Howe in Letter LV. written
to the Ladies of Mr. Lovelace's family; and are thus distinguished to
avoid the necessity of repeating them in that letter.


'But you will expect my reasons; I know you will: and if I give them not,
will conclude me either obstinate, or implacable, or both: and those
would be sad imputations, if just, to be laid to the charge of a person
who thinks and talks of dying.  And yet, to say that resentment and
disappointment have no part in my determination, would be saying a thing
hardly to be credited.  For I own I have resentment, strong resentment,
but not unreasonable ones, as you will be convinced, if already you are
not so, when you know all my story--if ever you do know it--for I begin
to fear (so many things more necessary to be thought of than either this
man, or my own vindication, have I to do) that I shall not have time to
compass what I have intended, and, in a manner, promised you.*


* See Vol. VI. Letter LXXIII.


'I have one reason to give in support of my resolution, that, I believe,
yourself will allow of: but having owned that I have resentments, I will
begin with those considerations in which anger and disappointment have
too great a share; in hopes that, having once disburdened my mind upon
paper, and to my Anna Howe, of those corroding uneasy passions, I shall
prevent them for ever from returning to my heart, and to have their place
supplied by better, milder, and more agreeable ones.

'My pride, then, my dearest friend, although a great deal mortified, is
not sufficiently mortified, if it be necessary for me to submit to make
that man my choice, whose actions are, and ought to be, my abhorrence!--
What!--Shall I, who have been treated with such premeditated and
perfidious barbarity, as is painful to be thought of, and cannot, with
modesty be described, think of taking the violator to my heart?  Can I
vow duty to one so wicked, and hazard my salvation by joining myself to
so great a profligate, now I know him to be so?  Do you think your
Clarissa Harlowe so lost, so sunk, at least, as that she could, for the
sake of patching up, in the world's eye, a broken reputation, meanly
appear indebted to the generosity, or perhaps compassion, of a man, who
has, by means so inhuman, robbed her of it?  Indeed, my dear, I should
not think my penitence for the rash step I took, any thing better than a
specious delusion, if I had not got above the least wish to have Mr.
Lovelace for my husband.

'Yes, I warrant, I must creep to the violator, and be thankful to him for
doing me poor justice!

'Do you not already see me (pursuing the advice you give) with a downcast
eye, appear before his friends, and before my own, (supposing the latter
would at last condescend to own me,) divested of that noble confidence
which arises from a mind unconscious of having deserved reproach?

'Do you not see me creep about mine own house, preferring all my honest
maidens to myself--as if afraid, too, to open my lips, either by way of
reproof or admonition, lest their bolder eyes should bid me look inward,
and not expect perfection from them?

'And shall I entitle the wretch to upbraid me with his generosity, and
his pity; and perhaps to reproach me for having been capable of forgiving
crimes of such a nature?

'I once indeed hoped, little thinking him so premeditatedly vile a man,
that I might have the happiness to reclaim him: I vainly believed that he
loved me well enough to suffer my advice for his good, and the example I
humbly presumed I should be enabled to set him, to have weight with him;
and the rather, as he had no mean opinion of my morals and understanding:
But now what hope is there left for this my prime hope?--Were I to marry
him, what a figure should I make, preaching virtue and morality to a man
whom I had trusted with opportunities to seduce me from all my own
duties!--And then, supposing I were to have children by such a husband,
must it not, think you, cut a thoughtful person to the heart; to look
round upon her little family, and think she had given them a father
destined, without a miracle, to perdition; and whose immoralities,
propagated among them by his vile example, might, too probably, bring
down a curse upon them?  And, after all, who knows but that my own sinful
compliances with a man, who might think himself entitled to my obedience,
might taint my own morals, and make me, instead of a reformer, an
imitator of him?--For who can touch pitch, and not be defiled?

'Let me then repeat, that I truly despise this man!  If I know my own
heart, indeed I do!--I pity him! beneath my very pity as he is, I
nevertheless pity him!--But this I could not do, if I still loved him:
for, my dear, one must be greatly sensible of the baseness and
ingratitude of those we love.  I love him not, therefore! my soul
disdains communion with him.

'But, although thus much is due to resentment, yet have I not been so
far carried away by its angry effects as to be rendered incapable of
casting about what I ought to do, and what could be done, if the
Almighty, in order to lengthen the time of my penitence, were to bid
me to live.

'The single life, at such times, has offered to me, as the life, the
only life, to be chosen.  But in that, must I not now sit brooding over
my past afflictions, and mourning my faults till the hour of my release?
And would not every one be able to assign the reason why Clarissa Harlowe
chose solitude, and to sequester herself from the world?  Would not the
look of every creature, who beheld me, appear as a reproach to me?  And
would not my conscious eye confess my fault, whether the eyes of others
accused me or not?  One of my delights was, to enter the cots of my poor
neighbours, to leave lessons to the boys, and cautions to the elder
girls: and how should I be able, unconscious, and without pain, to say
to the latter, fly the delusions of men, who had been supposed to have
run away with one?

'What then, my dear and only friend, can I wish for but death?--And what,
after all, is death?  'Tis but a cessation from mortal life: 'tis but the
finishing of an appointed course: the refreshing inn after a fatiguing
journey; the end of a life of cares and troubles; and, if happy, the
beginning of a life of immortal happiness.

'If I die not now, it may possibly happen that I may be taken when I am
less prepared.  Had I escaped the evils I labour under, it might have
been in the midst of some gay promising hope; when my heart had beat high
with the desire of life; and when the vanity of this earth had taken hold
of me.

'But now, my dear, for your satisfaction let me say that, although I wish
not for life, yet would I not, like a poor coward, desert my post when I
can maintain it, and when it is my duty to maintain it.

'More than once, indeed, was I urged by thoughts so sinful: but then it
was in the height of my distress: and once, particularly, I have reason
to believe, I saved myself by my desperation from the most shocking
personal insults; from a repetition, as far as I know, of his vileness;
the base women (with so much reason dreaded by me) present, to intimidate
me, if not to assist him!--O my dear, you know not what I suffered on
that occasion!--Nor do I what I escaped at the time, if the wicked man
had approached me to execute the horrid purposes of his vile heart.'

As I am of opinion, that it would have manifested more of revenge and
despair than of principle, had I committed a violence upon myself, when
the villany was perpetrated; so I should think it equally criminal, were
I now wilfully to neglect myself; were I purposely to run into the arms
of death, (as that man supposes I shall do,) when I might avoid it.

Nor, my dear, whatever are the suppositions of such a short-sighted, such
a low-souled man, must you impute to gloom, to melancholy, to
despondency, nor yet to a spirit of faulty pride, or still more faulty
revenge, the resolution I have taken never to marry this: and if not
this, any man.  So far from deserving this imputation, I do assure you,
(my dear and only love,) that I will do every thing I can to prolong my
life, till God, in mercy to me, shall be pleased to call for it.  I have
reason to think my punishment is but the due consequence of my fault, and
I will not run away from it; but beg of Heaven to sanctify it to me.
When appetite serves, I will eat and drink what is sufficient to support
nature.  A very little, you know, will do for that.  And whatever my
physicians shall think fit to prescribe, I will take, though ever so
disagreeable.  In short, I will do every thing I can do to convince all
my friends, who hereafter may think it worth their while to inquire after
my last behaviour, that I possessed my soul with tolerable patience; and
endeavoured to bear with a lot of my own drawing; for thus, in humble
imitation of the sublimest exemplar, I often say:--Lord, it is thy will;
and it shall be mine.  Thou art just in all thy dealings with the
children of men; and I know thou wilt not afflict me beyond what I can
bear: and, if I can bear it, I ought to bear it; and (thy grace assisting
me) I will bear it.

'But here, my dear, is another reason; a reason that will convince you
yourself that I ought not to think of wedlock; but of a preparation for a
quite different event.  I am persuaded, as much as that I am now alive,
that I shall not long live.  The strong sense I have ever had of my
fault, the loss of my reputation, my disappointments, the determined
resentment of my friends, aiding the barbarous usage I have met with
where I least deserved it, have seized upon my heart: seized upon it,
before it was so well fortified by religious considerations as I hope it
now is.  Don't be concerned, my dear--But I am sure, if I may say it with
as little presumption as grief, That God will soon dissolve my substance;
and bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living.'

And now, my dearest friend, you know all my mind.  And you will be
pleased to write to the ladies of Mr. Lovelace's family, that I think
myself infinitely obliged to them for their good opinion of me; and that
it has given me greater pleasure than I thought I had to come in this
life, that, upon the little knowledge they have of me, and that not
personal, I was thought worthy (after the ill usage I have received) of
an alliance with their honourable family: but that I can by no means
think of their kinsman for a husband: and do you, my dear, extract from
the above such reasons as you think have any weight with them.

I would write myself to acknowledge their favour, had I not more
employment for my head, my heart, and my fingers, than I doubt they will
be able to go through.

I should be glad to know when you set out on your journey; as also your
little stages; and your time of stay at your aunt Harman's; that my
prayers may locally attend you whithersoever you go, and wherever you
are.

CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XLII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 23.


The letter accompanying this being upon a very particular subject, I
would not embarrass it, as I may say, with any other.  And yet having
some farther matters upon my mind, which will want your excuse for
directing them to you, I hope the following lines will have that excuse.

My good Mrs. Norton, so long ago as in a letter dated the 3d of this
month,* hinted to me that my relations took amiss some severe things you
were pleased, in love to me, to say to them.  Mrs. Norton mentioned it
with that respectful love which she bears to my dearest friend: but
wished, for my sake, that you would rein in a vivacity, which, on most
other occasions, so charmingly becomes you.  This was her sense.  You
know that I am warranted to speak and write freer to my Anna Howe than
Mrs. Norton would do.


* See Vol. VI. Letter LXIII.


I durst not mention it to you at that time, because appearances were so
strong against me, on Mr. Lovelace's getting me again into his power,
(after my escape to Hampstead,) as made you very angry with me when you
answered mine on my second escape.  And, soon afterwards, I was put under
that barbarous arrest; so that I could not well touch upon the subject
till now.

Now, therefore, my dearest Miss Howe, let me repeat my earnest request
(for this is not the first time by several that I have been obliged to
chide you on this occasion,) that you will spare my parents, and other
relations, in all your conversations about me.  Indeed, I wish they had
thought fit to take other measures with me: But who shall judge for them?
--The event has justified them, and condemned me.--They expected nothing
good of this vile man; he had not, therefore, deceived them: but they
expected other things from me; and I have.  And they have the more reason
to be set against me, if (as my aunt Hervey wrote* formerly,) they
intended not to force my inclinations in favour of Mr. Solmes; and if
they believe that my going off was the effect of choice and
premeditation.


* See Vol. III. Letter LII.


I have no desire to be received to favour by them: For why should I sit
down to wish for what I have no reason to expect?--Besides, I could not
look them in the face, if they would receive me.  Indeed I could not.
All I have to hope for is, first, that my father will absolve me from his
heavy malediction: and next, for a last blessing.  The obtaining of these
favours are needful to my peace of mind.

I have written to my sister; but have only mentioned the absolution.

I am afraid I shall receive a very harsh answer from her: my fault, in
the eyes of my family, is of so enormous a nature, that my first
application will hardly be encouraged.  Then they know not (nor perhaps
will believe) that I am so very ill as I am.  So that, were I actually to
die before they could have time to take the necessary informations, you
must not blame them too severely.  You must call it a fatality.  I know
not what you must call it: for, alas! I have made them as miserable as I
am myself.  And yet sometimes I think that, were they cheerfully to
pronounce me forgiven, I know not whether my concern for having offended
them would not be augmented: since I imagine that nothing can be more
wounding to a spirit not ungenerous than a generous forgiveness.

I hope your mother will permit our correspondence for one month more,
although I do not take her advice as to having this man.  When
catastrophes are winding up, what changes (changes that make one's heart
shudder to think of,) may one short month produce?--But if she will not--
why then, my dear, it becomes us both to acquiesce.

You can't think what my apprehensions would have been, had I known Mr.
Hickman was to have had a meeting (on such a questioning occasion as must
have been his errand from you) with that haughty and uncontroulable man.

You give me hope of a visit from Mr. Hickman: let him expect to see me
greatly altered.  I know he loves me: for he loves every one whom you
love.  A painful interview, I doubt!  But I shall be glad to see a man
whom you will one day, and that on an early day, I hope, make happy;
whose gentle manners, and unbounded love for you, will make you so, if it
be not your own fault.

I am, my dearest, kindest friend, the sweet companion of my happy hours,
the friend ever dearest and nearest to my fond heart,

Your equally obliged and faithful,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XLIII

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, JULY 24.


Excuse, my dearest young lady, my long silence.  I have been extremely
ill.  My poor boy has also been at death's door; and, when I hoped that
he was better, he has relapsed.  Alas! my dear, he is very dangerously
ill.  Let us both have your prayers!

Very angry letters have passed between your sister and Miss Howe.  Every
one of your family is incensed against that young lady.  I wish you would
remonstrate against her warmth; since it can do no good; for they will
not believe but that her interposition had your connivance; nor that you
are so ill as Miss Howe assures them you are.

Before she wrote, they were going to send up young Mr. Brand, the
clergyman, to make private inquiries of your health, and way of life.--
But now they are so exasperated that they have laid aside their
intention.

We have flying reports here, and at Harlowe-place, of some fresh insults
which you have undergone: and that you are about to put yourself into
Lady Betty Lawrance's protection.  I believe they would not be glad (as I
should be) that you would do so; and this, perhaps, will make them
suspend, for the present, any determination in your favour.

How unhappy am I, that the dangerous way my son is in prevents my
attendance on you!  Let me beg of you to write to me word how you are,
both as to person and mind.  A servant of Sir Robert Beachcroft, who
rides post on his master's business to town, will present you with this;
and, perhaps, will bring me the favour of a few lines in return.  He will
be obliged to stay in town several hours for an answer to his dispatches.

This is the anniversary that used to give joy to as many as had the
pleasure and honour of knowing you.  May the Almighty bless you, and
grant that it may be the only unhappy one that may ever be known by you,
my dearest young lady, and by

Your ever affectionate
JUDITH NORTON.



LETTER XLIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MRS. NORTON
MONDAY NIGHT, JULY 24.


MY DEAR MRS. NORTON,

Had I not fallen into fresh troubles, which disabled me for several days
from holding a pen, I should not have forborne inquiring after your
health, and that of your son; for I should have been but too ready to
impute your silence to the cause to which, to my very great concern, I
find it was owing.  I pray to Heaven, my dear good friend, to give you
comfort in the way most desirable to yourself.

I am exceedingly concerned at Miss Howe's writing about me to my friends.
I do assure you, that I was as ignorant of her intention so to do as of
the contents of her letter.  Nor has she yet let me know (discouraged, I
suppose, by her ill success) that she did write.  It is impossible to
share the delight which such charming spirits give, without the
inconvenience that will attend their volatility.--So mixed are our best
enjoyments!

It was but yesterday that I wrote to chide the dear creature for freedoms
of that nature, which her unseasonably-expressed love for me had made her
take, as you wrote me word in your former.  I was afraid that all such
freedoms would be attributed to me.  And I am sure that nothing but my
own application to my friends, and a full conviction of my contrition,
will procure me favour.  Least of all can I expect that either your
mediation or her's (both of whose fond and partial love of me is so well
known) will avail me.


[She then gives a brief account of the arrest: of her dejection under it:
      of her apprehensions of being carried to her former lodgings: of
      Mr. Lovelace's avowed innocence as to that insult: of her release
      by Mr. Belford: of Mr. Lovelace's promise not to molest her: of her
      clothes being sent her: of the earnest desire of all his friends,
      and of himself, to marry her: of Miss Howe's advice to comply with
      their requests: and of her declared resolution rather to die than
      be his, sent to Miss Howe, to be given to his relations, but as the
      day before.  After which she thus proceeds:]

Now, my dear Mrs. Norton, you will be surprised, perhaps, that I should
have returned such an answer: but when you have every thing before you,
you, who know me so well, will not think me wrong.  And, besides, I am
upon a better preparation than for an earthly husband.

Nor let it be imagined, my dear and ever venerable friend, that my
present turn of mind proceeds from gloominess or melancholy; for although
it was brought on by disappointment, (the world showing me early, even at
my first rushing into it, its true and ugly face,) yet I hope that it has
obtained a better root, and will every day more and more, by its fruits,
demonstrate to me, and to all my friends, that it has.

I have written to my sister.  Last Friday I wrote.  So the die is thrown.
I hope for a gentle answer.  But, perhaps, they will not vouchsafe me
any.  It is my first direct application, you know.  I wish Miss Howe had
left me to my own workings in this tender point.

It will be a great satisfaction to me to hear of your perfect recovery;
and that my foster-brother is out of danger.  But why, said I, out of
danger?--When can this be justly said of creatures, who hold by so
uncertain a tenure?  This is one of those forms of common speech, that
proves the frailty and the presumption of poor mortal at the same time.

Don't be uneasy, you cannot answer your wishes to be with me.  I am
happier than I could have expected to be among mere strangers.  It was
grievous at first; but use reconciles every thing to us.  The people of
the house where I am are courteous and honest.  There is a widow who
lodges in it [have I not said so formerly?] a good woman; who is the
better for having been a proficient in the school of affliction.

An excellent school! my dear Mrs. Norton, in which we are taught to know
ourselves, to be able to compassionate and bear with one another, and to
look up to a better hope.

I have as humane a physician, (whose fees are his least regard,) and as
worthy an apothecary, as ever patient was visited by.  My nurse is
diligent, obliging, silent, and sober.  So I am not unhappy without: and
within--I hope, my dear Mrs. Norton, that I shall be every day more and
more happy within.

No doubt it would be one of the greatest comforts I could know to have
you with me: you, who love me so dearly: who have been the watchful
sustainer of my helpless infancy: you, by whose precepts I have been so
much benefited!--In your dear bosom could I repose all my griefs: and by
your piety and experience in the ways of Heaven, should I be strengthened
in what I am still to go through.

But, as it must not be, I will acquiesce; and so, I hope, will you: for
you see in what respects I am not unhappy; and in those that I am, they
lie not in your power to remedy.

Then as I have told you, I have all my clothes in my own possession.  So
I am rich enough, as to this world, in common conveniencies.

You see, my venerable and dear friend, that I am not always turning the
dark side of my prospects, in order to move compassion; a trick imputed
to me, too often, by my hard-hearted sister; when, if I know my own
heart, it is above all trick or artifice.  Yet I hope at last I shall be
so happy as to receive benefit rather than reproach from this talent, if
it be my talent.  At last, I say; for whose heart have I hitherto moved?
--Not one, I am sure, that was not predetermined in my favour.

As to the day--I have passed it, as I ought to pass it.  It has been a
very heavy day to me!--More for my friends sake, too, than for my own!--
How did they use to pass it!--What a festivity!--How have they now passed
it?--To imagine it, how grievous!--Say not that those are cruel, who
suffer so much for my fault; and who, for eighteen years together,
rejoiced in me, and rejoiced me by their indulgent goodness!--But I will
think the rest!--Adieu, my dearest Mrs. Norton!--

Adieu!



LETTER XLV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS ARABELLA HARLOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 21.


If, my dearest Sister, I did not think the state of my health very
precarious, and that it was my duty to take this step, I should hardly
have dared to approach you, although but with my pen, after having found
your censures so dreadfully justified as they have been.

I have not the courage to write to my father himself, nor yet to my
mother.  And it is with trembling that I address myself to you, to beg of
you to intercede for me, that my father will have the goodness to revoke
that heaviest part of the very heavy curse he laid upon me, which relates
to HEREAFTER; for, as to the HERE, I have indeed met with my punishment
from the very wretch in whom I was supposed to place my confidence.

As I hope not for restoration to favour, I may be allowed to be very
earnest on this head: yet will I not use any arguments in support of my
request, because I am sure my father, were it in his power, would not
have his poor child miserable for ever.

I have the most grateful sense of my mother's goodness in sending me up
my clothes.  I would have acknowledged the favour the moment I received
them, with the  most thankful duty, but that I feared any line from me
would be unacceptable.

I would not give fresh offence: so will decline all other commendations
of duty and love: appealing to my heart for both, where both are flaming
with an ardour that nothing but death can extinguish: therefore only
subscribe myself, without so much as a name,

My dear and happy Sister,
Your afflicted servant.


A letter directed for me, at Mr. Smith's, a glover, in King-street,
      Covent-garden, will come to hand.



LETTER XLVI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTERS XXIX. XXXII. OF THIS VOLUME.]
EDGWARE, MONDAY, JULY 24.


What pains thou takest to persuade thyself, that the lady's ill health
is owing to the vile arrest, and to the implacableness of her friends.
Both primarily (if they were) to be laid at thy door.  What poor excuses
will good hearts make for the evils they are put upon by bad hearts!--But
'tis no wonder that he who can sit down premeditatedly to do a bad
action, will content himself with a bad excuse: and yet what fools must
he suppose the rest of the world to be, if he imagines them as easy to be
imposed upon as he can impose upon himself?

In vain dost thou impute to pride or wilfulness the necessity to which
thou hast reduced this lady of parting with her clothes; For can she do
otherwise, and be the noble-minded creature she is?

Her implacable friends have refused her the current cash she left behind
her; and wished, as her sister wrote to her, to see her reduced to want:
probably therefore they will not be sorry that she is reduced to such
straights; and will take it for a justification from Heaven of their
wicked hard heartedness.  Thou canst not suppose she would take supplies
from thee: to take them from me would, in her opinion, be taking them
from thee.  Miss Howe's mother is an avaricious woman; and, perhaps, the
daughter can do nothing of that sort unknown to her; and, if she could,
is too noble a girl to deny it, if charged.  And then Miss Harlowe is
firmly of opinion, that she shall never want nor wear the think she
disposes of.

Having heard nothing from town that obliges me to go thither, I shall
gratify poor Belton with my company till to-morrow, or perhaps till
Wednesday.  For the unhappy man is more and more loth to part with me.
I shall soon set out for Epsom, to endeavour to serve him there, and
re-instate him in his own house.  Poor fellow! he is most horribly low
spirited; mopes about; and nothing diverts him.  I pity him at my heart;
but can do him no good.--What consolation can I give him, either from his
past life, or from his future prospects?

Our friendships and intimacies, Lovelace, are only calculated for strong
life and health.  When sickness comes, we look round us, and upon one
another, like frighted birds, at the sight of a kite ready to souse upon
them.  Then, with all our bravery, what miserable wretches are we!

Thou tallest me that thou seest reformation is coming swiftly upon me.  I
hope it is.  I see so much difference in the behaviour of this admirable
woman in her illness, and that of poor Belton in his, that it is plain to
me the sinner is the real coward, and the saint the true hero; and,
sooner or later, we shall all find it to be so, if we are not cut off
suddenly.

The lady shut herself up at six o'clock yesterday afternoon; and intends
not to see company till seven or eight this; not even her nurse--imposing
upon herself a severe fast.  And why?  It is her BIRTH-DAY!--Every
birth-day till this, no doubt, happy!--What must be her reflections!--
What ought to be thine!

What sport dost thou make with my aspirations, and my prostrations, as
thou callest them; and with my dropping of the banknote behind her chair!
I had too much awe of her at the time, to make it with the grace that
would better have become my intention.  But the action, if awkward, was
modest.  Indeed, the fitter subject for ridicule with thee; who canst no
more taste the beauty and delicacy of modest obligingness than of modest
love.  For the same may be said of inviolable respect, that the poet says
of unfeigned affection,

          I speak!  I know not what!--
      Speak ever so: and if I answer you
      I know not what, it shows the more of love.
      Love is a child that talks in broken language;
      Yet then it speaks most plain.

The like may be pleaded in behalf of that modest respect which made the
humble offerer afraid to invade the awful eye, or the revered hand; but
awkwardly to drop its incense behind the altar it should have been laid
upon.  But how should that soul, which could treat delicacy itself
brutally, know any thing of this!

But I am still more amazed at thy courage, to think of throwing thyself
in the way of Miss Howe, and Miss Arabella Harlowe!--Thou wilt not dare,
surely, to carry this thought into execution!

As to my dress, and thy dress, I have only to say, that the sum total of
thy observation is this: that my outside is the worst of me; and thine
the best of thee: and what gettest thou by the comparison?  Do thou
reform the one, I'll try to mend the other.  I challenge thee to begin.

Mrs. Lovick gave me, at my request, the copy of a meditation she showed
me, which was extracted by the lady from the scriptures, while under
arrest at Rowland's, as appears by the date.  The lady is not to know
that I have taken a copy.

You and I always admired the noble simplicity, and natural ease and
dignity of style, which are the distinguishing characteristics of these
books, whenever any passages from them, by way of quotation in the works
of other authors, popt upon us.  And once I remember you, even you,
observed, that those passages always appeared to you like a rich vein of
golden ore, which runs through baser metals; embellishing the work they
were brought to authenticate.

Try, Lovelace, if thou canst relish a Divine beauty.  I think it must
strike transient (if not permanent) remorse into thy heart.  Thou
boastest of thy ingenuousness: let this be the test of it; and whether
thou canst be serious on a subject too deep, the occasion of it resulting
from thyself.


MEDITATION
Saturday, July 15.

O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the
balance together!

For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words
are swallowed up!

For the arrows of the Almighty are within me; the poison whereof drinketh
up my spirit.  The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise?  When will the night be gone?
And I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day.

My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope--
mine eye shall no more see good.

Wherefore is light given to her that is in misery; and life unto the
bitter in soul?

Who longeth for death; but it cometh not; and diggeth for it more than
for hid treasures?

Why is light given to one whose way is hid; and whom God hath hedged in?

For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me!

I was not in safety; neither had I rest; neither was I quiet; yet trouble
came.

But behold God is mighty, and despiseth not any.

He giveth right to the poor--and if they be found in fetters, and holden
in cords of affliction, then he showeth them their works and their
transgressions.


I have a little leisure, and am in a scribbing vein: indulge me,
Lovelace, a few reflections on these sacred books.

We are taught to read the Bible, when children, as a rudiment only; and,
as far as I know, this may be the reason why we think ourselves above it
when at a maturer age.  For you know that our parents, as well as we,
wisely rate our proficiency by the books we are advanced to, and not by
our understanding of those we have passed through.  But, in my uncle's
illness, I had the curiosity, in some of my dull hours, (lighting upon
one in his closet,) to dip into it: and then I found, wherever I turned,
that there were admirable things in it.  I have borrowed one, on
receiving from Mrs. Lovick the above meditation; for I had a mind to
compare the passages contained in it by the book, hardly believing they
could be so exceedingly apposite as I find they are.  And one time or
another, it is very likely, that I shall make a resolution to give the
whole Bible a perusal, by way of course, as I may say.

This, meantime, I will venture to repeat, is certain, that the style is
that truly easy, simple, and natural one, which we should admire in each
other authors excessively.  Then all the world join in an opinion of the
antiquity, and authenticity too, of the book; and the learned are fond of
strengthening their different arguments by its sanctions.  Indeed, I was
so much taken with it at my uncle's, that I was half ashamed that it
appeared so new to me.  And yet, I cannot but say, that I have some of
the Old Testament history, as it is called, in my head: but, perhaps, am
more obliged for it to Josephus than to the Bible itself.

Odd enough, with all our pride of learning, that we choose to derive the
little we know from the under currents, perhaps muddy ones too, when the
clear, the pellucid fountain-head, is much nearer at hand, and easier to
be come at--slighted the more, possibly, for that very reason!

But man is a pragmatical, foolish creature; and the more we look into
him, the more we must despise him--Lords of the creation!--Who can
forbear indignant laughter!  When we see not one of the individuals of
that creation (his perpetually-eccentric self excepted) but acts within
its own natural and original appointment: is of fancied and
self-dependent excellence, he is obliged not only for the ornaments, but
for the necessaries of life, (that is to say, for food as well as
raiment,) to all the other creatures; strutting with their blood and
spirits in his veins, and with their plumage on his back: for what has he
of his own, but a very mischievous, monkey-like, bad nature!  Yet thinks
himself at liberty to kick, and cuff, and elbow out every worthier
creature: and when he has none of the animal creation to hunt down and
abuse, will make use of his power, his strength, or his wealth, to
oppress the less powerful and weaker of his own species!

When you and I meet next, let us enter more largely into this subject:
and, I dare say, we shall take it by turns, in imitation of the two sages
of antiquity, to laugh and to weep at the thoughts of what miserable, yet
conceited beings, men in general, but we libertines in particular, are.

I fell upon a piece at Dorrell's, this very evening, intituled, The
Sacred Classics, written by one Blackwell.

I took it home with me, and had not read a dozen pages, when I was
convinced that I ought to be ashamed of myself to think how greatly I
have admired less noble and less natural beauties in Pagan authors; while
I have known nothing of this all-exciting collection of beauties, the
Bible!  By my faith, Lovelace, I shall for the future have a better
opinion of the good sense and taste of half a score of parsons, whom I
have fallen in with in my time, and despised for magnifying, as I thought
they did, the language and the sentiments to be found in it, in
preference to all the ancient poets and philosophers.  And this is now a
convincing proof to me, and shames as much an infidel's presumption as
his ignorance, that those who know least are the greatest scoffers.  A
pretty pack of would-be wits of us, who censure without knowledge, laugh
without reason, and are most noisy and loud against things we know least
of!



LETTER XLVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, JULY 26.


I came not to town till this morning early: poor Belton clinging to me,
as a man destitute of all other hold.

I hastened to Smith's, and had but a very indifferent account of the
lady's health.  I sent up my compliments; and she desired to see me in
the afternoon.

Mrs. Lovick told me, that after I went away on Saturday, she actually
parted with one of her best suits of clothes to a gentlewoman who is her
[Mrs. Lovick's] benefactress, and who bought them for a niece who is very
speedily to be married, and whom she fits out and portions as her
intended heiress.  The lady was so jealous that the money might come from
you or me, that she would see the purchaser: who owned to Mrs. Lovick
that she bought them for half their worth: but yet, though her conscience
permitted her to take them at such an under rate, the widow says her
friend admired the lady, as one of the loveliest of her sex: and having
been let into a little of her story, could not help shedding tears at
taking away her purchase.

She may be a good sort of woman: Mrs. Lovick says she is: but SELF is an
odious devil, that reconciles to some people the most cruel and dishonest
actions.  But, nevertheless, it is my opinion, that those who can suffer
themselves to take advantage of the necessities of their
fellow-creatures, in order to buy any thing at a less rate than would
allow them the legal interest of their purchase-money (supposing they
purchase before they want) are no better than robbers for the difference.
--To plunder a wreck, and to rob at a fire, are indeed higher degrees of
wickedness: but do not those, as well as these, heighten the distresses
of the distressed, and heap misery on the miserable, whom it is the duty
of every one to relieve?

About three o'clock I went again to Smith's.  The lady was writing when I
sent up my name; but admitted of my visit.  I saw a miserable alteration
in her countenance for the worse; and Mrs. Lovick respectfully accusing
her of too great assiduity to her pen, early and late, and of her
abstinence the day before, I took notice of the alteration; and told her,
that her physician had greater hopes of her than she had of herself; and
I would take the liberty to say, that despair of recovery allowed not
room for cure.

She said she neither despaired nor hoped.  Then stepping to the glass,
with great composure, My countenance, said she, is indeed an honest
picture of my heart.  But the mind will run away with the body at any
time.

Writing is all my diversion, continued she: and I have subjects that
cannot be dispensed with.  As to my hours, I have always been an early
riser: but now rest is less in my power than ever.  Sleep has a long time
ago quarreled with me, and will not be friends, although I have made the
first advances.  What will be, must.

She then stept to her closet, and brought me a parcel sealed up with
three seals: Be so kind, said she, as to give this to your friend.  A
very grateful present it ought to be to him: for, Sir, this packet
contains such letters of his to me, as, compared with his actions, would
reflect dishonour upon all his sex, were they to fall into other hands.

As to my letters to him, they are not many.  He may either keep or
destroy them, as he pleases.

I thought, Lovelace, I ought not to forego this opportunity to plead for
you: I therefore, with the packet in my hand, urged all the arguments I
could think of in your favour.

She heard me out with more attention than I could have promised myself,
considering her determined resolution.

I would not interrupt you, Mr. Belford, said she, though I am far from
being pleased with the subject of your discourse.  The motives for your
pleas in his favour are generous.  I love to see instances of generous
friendship in either sex.  But I have written my full mind on this
subject to Miss Howe, who will communicate it to the ladies of his
family.  No more, therefore, I pray you, upon a topic that may lead to
disagreeable recrimination.

Her apothecary came in.  He advised her to the air, and blamed her for so
great an application, as he was told she made to her pen; and he gave it
as the doctor's opinion, as well as his own, that she would recover, if
she herself desired to recover, and would use the means.

She may possibly write too much for her health: but I have observed, on
several occasions, that when the medical men are at a loss what to
prescribe, they inquire what their patients like best, or are most
diverted with, and forbid them that.

But, noble minded as they see this lady is, they know not half her
nobleness of mind, nor how deeply she is wounded; and depend too much
upon her youth, which I doubt will not do in this case; and upon time,
which will not alleviate the woes of such a mind: for, having been bent
upon doing good, and upon reclaiming a libertine whom she loved, she is
disappointed in all her darling views, and will never be able, I fear, to
look up with satisfaction enough in herself to make life desirable to
her.  For this lady had other views in living, than the common ones of
eating, sleeping, dressing, visiting, and those other fashionable
amusements, which fill up the time of most of her sex, especially of
those of it who think themselves fitted to shine in and adorn polite
assemblies.  Her grief, in short, seems to me to be of such a nature,
that time, which alleviates most other person's afflictions, will, as the
poet says, give increase to her's.

Thou, Lovelace, mightest have seen all this superior excellence, as thou
wentest along.  In every word, in every sentiment, in every action, is it
visible.--But thy cursed inventions and intriguing spirit ran away with
thee.  'Tis fit that the subject of thy wicked boast, and thy reflections
on talents so egregiously misapplied, should be thy punishment and thy
curse.

Mr. Goddard took his leave; and I was going to do so too, when the maid
came up, and told her a gentleman was below, who very earnestly inquired
after her health, and desired to see her: his name Hickman.

She was overjoyed; and bid the maid desire the gentleman to walk up.

I would have withdrawn; but I supposed she thought it was likely I should
have met him upon the stairs; and so she forbid it.

She shot to the stairs-head to receive him, and, taking his hand, asked
half a dozen questions (without waiting for any answer) in relation to
Miss Howe's health; acknowledging, in high terms, her goodness in sending
him to see her, before she set out upon her little journey.

He gave her a letter from that young lady, which she put into her bosom,
saying, she would read it by-and-by.

He was visibly shocked to see how ill she looked.

You look at me with concern, Mr. Hickman, said she--O Sir! times are
strangely altered with me since I saw you last at my dear Miss Howe's!--
What a cheerful creature was I then!--my heart at rest! my prospects
charming! and beloved by every body!--but I will not pain you!

Indeed, Madam, said he, I am grieved for you at my soul.

He turned away his face, with visible grief in it.

Her own eyes glistened: but she turned to each of us, presenting one to
the other--him to me, as a gentleman truly deserving to be called so--me
to him, as your friend, indeed, [how was I at that instant ashamed of
myself!] but, nevertheless, as a man of humanity; detesting my friend's
baseness; and desirous of doing her all manner of good offices.

Mr. Hickman received my civilities with a coldness, which, however, was
rather to be expected on your account, than that it deserved exception on
mine.  And the lady invited us both to breakfast with her in the morning;
he being obliged to return the next day.

I left them together, and called upon Mr. Dorrell, my attorney, to
consult him upon poor Belton's affairs; and then went home, and wrote
thus far, preparative to what may occur in my breakfasting-visit in the
morning.



LETTER XLVIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, JULY 27.


I went this morning, according to the lady's invitation, to breakfast,
and found Mr. Hickman with her.

A good deal of heaviness and concern hung upon his countenance: but he
received me with more respect than he did yesterday; which, I presume,
was owing to the lady's favourable character of me.

He spoke very little; for I suppose they had all their talk out
yesterday, and before I came this morning.

By the hints that dropped, I perceived that Miss Howe's letter gave an
account of your interview with her at Col. Ambrose's--of your professions
to Miss Howe; and Miss Howe's opinion, that marrying you was the only way
now left to repair her wrongs.

Mr. Hickman, as I also gathered, had pressed her, in Miss Howe's name, to
let her, on her return from the Isle of Wight, find her at a neighbouring
farm-house, where neat apartments would be made ready to receive her.
She asked how long it would be before they returned?  And he told her, it
was proposed to be no more than a fortnight out and in.  Upon which she
said, she should then perhaps have time to consider of that kind
proposal.

He had tendered her money from Miss Howe; but could not induce her to
take any.  No wonder I was refused! she only said, that, if she had
occasion, she would be obliged to nobody but Miss Howe.

Mr. Goddard, her apothecary, came in before breakfast was over.  At her
desire he sat down with us.  Mr. Hickman asked him, if he could give him
any consolation in relation to Miss Harlowe's recovery, to carry down to
a friend who loved her as she loved her own life?

The lady, said he, will do very well, if she will resolve upon it
herself.  Indeed you will, Madam.  The doctor is entirely of this
opinion; and has ordered nothing for you but weak jellies and innocent
cordials, lest you should starve yourself.  And let me tell you, Madam,
that so much watching, so little nourishment, and so much grief, as you
seem to indulge, is enough to impair the most vigorous health, and to
wear out the strongest constitution.

What, Sir, said she, can I do?  I have no appetite.  Nothing you call
nourishing will stay on my stomach.  I do what I can: and have such kind
directors in Dr. H. and you, that I should be inexcusable if I did not.

I'll give you a regimen, Madam, replied he; which, I am sure, the doctor
will approve of, and will make physic unnecessary in your case.  And that
is, 'go to rest at ten at night.  Rise not till seven in the morning.
Let your breakfast be watergruel, or milk-pottage, or weak broths: your
dinner any thing you like, so you will but eat: a dish of tea, with milk,
in the afternoon; and sago for your supper: and, my life for your's, this
diet, and a month's country air, will set you up.'

We were much pleased with the worthy gentleman's disinterested regimen:
and she said, referring to her nurse, (who vouched for her,) Pray, Mr.
Hickman, let Miss Howe know the good hands I am in: and as to the kind
charge of the gentleman, assure her, that all I promised to her, in the
longest of my two last letters, on the subject of my health, I do and
will, to the utmost of my power, observe.  I have engaged, Sir, (to Mr.
Goddard,) I have engaged, Sir, (to me,) to Miss Howe, to avoid all wilful
neglects.  It would be an unpardonable fault, and very ill become the
character I would be glad to deserve, or the temper of mind I wish my
friends hereafter to think me mistress of, if I did not.

Mr. Hickman and I went afterwards to a neighbouring coffee-house; and he
gave me some account of your behaviour at the ball on Monday night, and
of your treatment of him in the conference he had with you before that;
which he represented in a more favourable light than you had done
yourself: and yet he gave his sentiments of you with great freedom, but
with the politeness of a gentleman.

He told me how very determined the lady was against marrying you; that
she had, early this morning, set herself to write a letter to Miss Howe,
in answer to one he brought her, which he was to call for at twelve, it
being almost finished before he saw her at breakfast; and that at three
he proposed to set out on his return.

He told me that Miss Howe, and her mother, and himself, were to begin
their little journey for the Isle of Wight on Monday next: but that he
must make the most favourable representation of Miss Harlowe's bad
health, or they should have a very uneasy absence.  He expressed the
pleasure he had in finding the lady in such good hands.  He proposed to
call on Dr. H. to take his opinion whether it were likely she would
recover; and hoped he should find it favourable.

As he was resolved to make the best of the matter, and as the lady had
refused to accept of the money offered by Mr. Hickman, I said nothing of
her parting with her clothes.  I thought it would serve no other end to
mention it, but to shock Miss Howe: for it has such a sound with it, that
a woman of her rank and fortune should be so reduced, that I cannot
myself think of it with patience; nor know I but one man in the world who
can.

This gentleman is a little finical and formal.  Modest or diffident men
wear not soon off those little precisenesses, which the confident, if
ever they had them, presently get above; because they are too confident
to doubt any thing.  But I think Mr. Hickman is an agreeable, sensible
man, and not at all deserving of the treatment or the character you give
him.

But you are really a strange mortal: because you have advantages in your
person, in your air, and intellect, above all the men I know, and a face
that would deceive the devil, you can't think any man else tolerable.

It is upon this modest principle that thou deridest some of us, who, not
having thy confidence in their outside appearance, seek to hide their
defects by the tailor's and peruke-maker's assistance; (mistakenly
enough, if it be really done so absurdly as to expose them more;) and
sayest, that we do but hang out a sign, in our dress, of what we have in
the shop of our minds.  This, no doubt, thou thinkest, is smartly
observed: but pr'ythee, Lovelace, let me tell thee, if thou canst, what
sort of a sign must thou hang out, wert thou obliged to give us a clear
idea by it of the furniture of thy mind?

Mr. Hickman tells me, he should have been happy with Miss Howe some weeks
ago, (for all the settlements have been some time engrossed;) but that
she will not marry, she declares, while her dear friend is so unhappy.

This is truly a charming instance of the force of female friendship;
which you and I, and our brother rakes, have constantly ridiculed as a
chimerical thing in women of equal age, and perfections.

But really, Lovelace, I see more and more that there are not in the
world, with our conceited pride, narrower-souled wretches than we rakes
and libertines are.  And I'll tell thee how it comes about.

Our early love of roguery makes us generally run away from instruction;
and so we become mere smatterers in the sciences we are put to learn;
and, because we will know no more, think there is no more to be known.

With an infinite deal of vanity, un-reined imaginations, and no judgments
at all, we next commence half-wits, and then think we have the whole
field of knowledge in possession, and despise every one who takes more
pains, and is more serious, than ourselves, as phlegmatic, stupid
fellows, who have no taste for the most poignant pleasures of life.

This makes us insufferable to men of modesty and merit, and obliges us to
herd with those of our own cast; and by this means we have no
opportunities of seeing or conversing with any body who could or would
show us what we are; and so we conclude that we are the cleverest fellows
in the world, and the only men of spirit in it; and looking down with
supercilious eyes on all who gave not themselves the liberties we take,
imagine the world made for us, and for us only.

Thus, as to useful knowledge, while others go to the bottom, we only skim
the surface; are despised by people of solid sense, of true honour, and
superior talents; and shutting our eyes, move round and round, like so
many blind mill-horses, in one narrow circle, while we imagine we have
all the world to range in.


***


I threw myself in Mr. Hickman's way, on his return from the lady.

He was excessively moved at taking leave of her; being afraid, as he said
to me, (though he would not tell her so,) that he should never see her
again.  She charged him to represent every thing to Miss Howe in the most
favourable light that the truth would bear.

He told me of a tender passage at parting; which was, that having saluted
her at her closet-door, he could not help once more taking the same
liberty, in a more fervent manner, at the stairs-head, whither she
accompanied him; and this in the thought, that it was the last time he
should ever have that honour; and offering to apologize for his freedom
(for he had pressed her to his heart with a vehemence, that he could
neither account for or resist)--'Excuse you, Mr. Hickman! that I will:
you are my brother and my friend: and to show you that the good man, who
is to be happy with my beloved Miss Howe, is very dear to me, you shall
carry to her this token of my love,' [offering her sweet face to his
salute, and pressing his hand between her's:] 'and perhaps her love of me
will make it more agreeable to her, than her punctilio would otherwise
allow it to be: and tell her, said she, dropping on one knee, with
clasped hands, and uplifted eyes, that in this posture you see me, in the
last moment of our parting, begging a blessing upon you both, and that
you may be the delight and comfort of each other, for many, very many
happy years!'

Tears, said he, fell from my eyes: I even sobbed with mingled joy and
sorrow; and she retreating as soon as I raised her, I went down stairs
highly dissatisfied with myself for going; yet unable to stay; my eyes
fixed the contrary way to my feet, as long as I could behold the skirts
of her raiment.

I went to the back-shop, continued the worthy man, and recommended the
angelic lady to the best care of Mrs. Smith; and, when I was in the
street, cast my eye up at her window: there, for the last time, I doubt,
said he, that I shall ever behold her, I saw her; and she waved her
charming hand to me, and with such a look of smiling goodness, and
mingled concern, as I cannot describe.

Pr'ythee tell me, thou vile Lovelace, if thou hast not a notion, even
from these jejune descriptions of mine, that there must be a more exalted
pleasure in intellectual friendship, than ever thou couldst taste in the
gross fumes of sensuality?  And whether it may not be possible for thee,
in time, to give that preference to the infinitely preferable, which I
hope, now, that I shall always give?

I will leave thee to make the most of this reflection, from

Thy true friend,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XLIX

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 25.*

* Text error: should be Tuesday.


Your two affecting letters were brought to me (as I had directed any
letter from you should be) to the Colonel's, about an hour before we
broke up.  I could not forbear dipping into them there; and shedding
more tears over them than I will tell you of; although I dried my eyes
as well as I could, that the company I was obliged to return to, and my
mother, should see as little of my concern as possible.

I am yet (and was then still more) excessively fluttered.  The occasion
I will communicate to you by-and-by: for nothing but the flutters given
by the stroke of death could divert my first attention from the sad and
solemn contents of your last favour.  These therefore I must begin with.

How can I bear the thoughts of losing so dear a friend!  I will not so
much as suppose it.  Indeed I cannot! such a mind as your's was not
vested in humanity to be snatched away from us so soon.  There must still
be a great deal for you to do for the good of all who have the happiness
to know you.

You enumerate in your letter of Thursday last,* the particulars in which
your situation is already mended: let me see by effects that you are in
earnest in that enumeration; and that you really have the courage to
resolve to get above the sense of injuries you could not avoid; and then
will I trust to Providence and my humble prayers for your perfect
recovery: and glad at my heart shall I be, on my return from the little
island, to find you well enough to be near us according to the proposal
Mr. Hickman has to make to you.


* See Vol. VII. Letter XXV.


You chide me in your's of Sunday on the freedom I take with your
friends.*


* Ibid. Letter XLII.


I may be warm.  I know I am--too warm.  Yet warmth in friendship, surely,
cannot be a crime; especially when our friend has great merit, labours
under oppression, and is struggling with undeserved calamity.

I have no opinion of coolness in friendship, be it dignified or
distinguished by the name of prudence, or what it will.

You may excuse your relations.  It was ever your way to do so.  But, my
dear, other people must be allowed to judge as they please.  I am not
their daughter, nor the sister of your brother and sister--I thank
Heaven, I am not.

But if you are displeased with me for the freedoms I took so long ago as
you mention, I am afraid, if you knew what passed upon an application I
made to your sister very lately, (in hopes to procure you the absolution
your heart is so much set upon,) that you would be still more concerned.
But they have been even with me--but I must not tell you all.  I hope,
however, that these unforgivers [my mother is among them] were always
good, dutiful, passive children to their parents.

Once more forgive me.  I owned I was too warm.  But I have no example to
the contrary but from you: and the treatment you meet with is very little
encouragement to me to endeavour to imitate you in your dutiful meekness.

You leave it to me to give a negative to the hopes of the noble family,
whose only disgrace is, that so very vile a man is so nearly related to
them.  But yet--alas! my dear, I am so fearful of consequences, so
selfishly fearful, if this negative must be given--I don't know what I
should say--but give me leave to suspend, however, this negative till I
hear from you again.

This earnest courtship of you into their splendid family is so very
honourable to you--they so justly admire you--you must have had such a
noble triumph over the base man--he is so much in earnest--the world
knows so much of the unhappy affair--you may do still so much good--your
will is so inviolate--your relations are so implacable--think, my dear,
and re-think.

And let me leave you to do so, while I give you the occasion of the
flutter I mentioned at the beginning of this letter; in the conclusion
of which you will find the obligation I have consented to lay myself
under, to refer this important point once more to your discussion, before
I give, in your name, the negative that cannot, when given, be with
honour to yourself repented of or recalled.

Know, then, my dear, that I accompanied my mother to Colonel Ambrose's on
the occasion I mentioned to you in my former.  Many ladies and gentlemen
were there whom you know; particularly Miss Kitty D'Oily, Miss Lloyd,
Miss Biddy D'Ollyffe, Miss Biddulph, and their respective admirers, with
the Colonel's two nieces; fine women both; besides many whom you know
not; for they were strangers to me but by name.  A splendid company, and
all pleased with one another, till Colonel Ambrose introduced one, who,
the moment he was brought into the great hall, set the whole assembly
into a kind of agitation.

It was your villain.

I thought I should have sunk as soon as I set my eyes upon him.  My
mother was also affected; and, coming to me, Nancy, whispered she, can
you bear the sight of that wretch without too much emotion?--If not,
withdraw into the next apartment.

I could not remove.  Every body's eyes were glanced from him to me.  I
sat down and fanned myself, and was forced to order a glass of water.
Oh! that I had the eye the basilisk is reported to have, thought I, and
that his life were within the power of it!--directly would I kill him.

He entered with an air so hateful to me, but so agreeable to every other
eye, that I could have looked him dead for that too.

After the general salutations he singled out Mr. Hickman, and told him he
had recollected some parts of his behaviour to him, when he saw him last,
which had made him think himself under obligation to his patience and
politeness.

And so, indeed, he was.

Miss D'Oily, upon his complimenting her, among a knot of ladies, asked
him, in their hearing, how Miss Clarissa Harlowe did?

He heard, he said, you were not so well as he wished you to be, and as
you deserved to be.

O Mr. Lovelace, said she, what have you to answer for on that young
lady's account, if all be true that I have heard.

I have a great deal to answer for, said the unblushing villain: but that
dear lady has so many excellencies, and so much delicacy, that little
sins are great ones in her eye.

Little sins! replied Miss D'Oily: Mr. Lovelace's character is so well
known, that nobody believes he can commit little sins.

You are very good to me, Miss D'Oily.

Indeed I am not.

Then I am the only person to whom you are not very good: and so I am the
less obliged to you.

He turned, with an unconcerned air, to Miss Playford, and made her some
genteel compliments.  I believe you know her not.  She visits his cousins
Montague.  Indeed he had something in his specious manner to say to every
body: and this too soon quieted the disgust each person had at his
entrance.

I still kept my seat, and he either saw me not, or would not yet see me;
and addressing himself to my mother, taking her unwilling hand, with an
air of high assurance, I am glad to see you here, Madam, I hope Miss Howe
is well.  I have reason to complain greatly of her: but hope to owe to
her the highest obligation that can be laid on man.

My daughter, Sir, is accustomed to be too warm and too zealous in her
friendships for either my tranquility or her own.

There had indeed been some late occasion given for mutual displeasure
between my mother and me: but I think she might have spared this to him;
though nobody heard it, I believe, but the person to whom it was spoken,
and the lady who told it me; for my mother spoke it low.

We are not wholly, Madam, to live for ourselves, said the vile hypocrite:
it is not every one who had a soul capable of friendship: and what a
heart must that be, which can be insensible to the interests of a
suffering friend?

This sentiment from Mr. Lovelace's mouth! said my mother--forgive me,
Sir; but you can have no end, surely, in endeavouring to make me think as
well of you as some innocent creatures have thought of you to their cost.

She would have flung from him.  But, detaining her hand--Less severe,
dear Madam, said he, be less severe in this place, I beseech you.  You
will allow, that a very faulty person may see his errors; and when he
does, and owns them, and repents, should he not be treated mercifully?

Your air, Sir, seems not to be that of a penitent.  But the place may as
properly excuse this subject, as what you call my severity.

But, dearest Madam, permit me to say, that I hope for your interest with
your charming daughter (was his syncophant word) to have it put in my
power to convince all the world that there never was a truer penitent.
And why, why this anger, dear Madam, (for she struggled to get her hand
out of his,) these violent airs--so maidenly! [impudent fellow!]--May I
not ask, if Miss Howe be here?

She would not have been here, replied my mother, had she known whom she
had been to see.

And is she here, then?--Thank Heaven!--he disengaged her hand, and stept
forward into company.

Dear Miss Lloyd, said he, with an air, (taking her hand as he quitted my
mother's,) tell me, tell me, is Miss Arabella Harlowe here?  Or will she
be here?  I was informed she would--and this, and the opportunity of
paying my compliments to your friend Miss Howe, were great inducements
with me to attend the Colonel.

Superlative assurance! was it not, my dear?

Miss Arabella Harlowe, excuse me, Sir, said Miss Lloyd, would be very
little inclined to meet you here, or any where else.

Perhaps so, my dear Miss Lloyd: but, perhaps, for that very reason, I am
more desirous to see her.

Miss Harlowe, Sir, and Miss Biddulph, with a threatening air, will hardly
be here without her brother.  I imagine, if one comes, both will come.

Heaven grant they both may! said the wretch.  Nothing, Miss Biddulph,
shall begin from me to disturb this assembly, I assure you, if they do.
One calm half-hour's conversation with that brother and sister, would be
a most fortunate opportunity to me, in presence of the Colonel and his
lady, or whom else they should choose.

Then, turning round, as if desirous to find out the one or the other, he
'spied me, and with a very low bow, approached me.

I was all in a flutter, you may suppose.  He would have taken my hand.  I
refused it, all glowing with indignation: every body's eyes upon us.

I went down from him to the other end of the room, and sat down, as I
thought, out of his hated sight; but presently I heard his odious voice,
whispering, behind my chair, (he leaning upon the back of it, with
impudent unconcern,) Charming Miss Howe! looking over my shoulder: one
request--[I started up from my seat; but could hardly stand neither, for
very indignation]--O this sweet, but becoming disdain! whispered on the
insufferable creature--I am sorry to give you all this emotion: but
either here, or at your own house, let me entreat from you one quarter of
an hour's audience.--I beseech you, Madam, but one quarter of an hour, in
any of the adjoining apartments.

Not for a kingdom, fluttering my fan.  I knew not what I did.--But I
could have killed him.

We are so much observed--else on my knees, my dear Miss Howe, would I beg
your interest with your charming friend.

She'll have nothing to say to you.

(I had not then your letters, my dear.)

Killing words!--But indeed I have deserved them, and a dagger in my heart
besides.  I am so conscious of my demerits, that I have no hope, but in
your interposition--could I owe that favour to Miss Howe's mediation
which I cannot hope for on any other account--

My mediation, vilest of men!--My mediation!--I abhor you!--From my soul,
I abhor you, vilest of men!--Three or four times I repeated these words,
stammering too.--I was excessively fluttered.

You can tell me nothing, Madam, so bad as I will call myself.  I have
been, indeed, the vilest of men; but now I am not so.  Permit me--every
body's eyes are upon us!--but one moment's audience--to exchange but ten
words with you, dearest Miss Howe--in whose presence you please--for your
dear friend's sake--but ten words with you in the next apartment.

It is an insult upon me to presume that I would exchange with you, if I
could help it!--Out of my way!  Out of my sight--fellow!

And away I would have flung: but he took my hand.  I was excessively
disordered--every body's eyes more and more intent upon us.

Mr. Hickman, whom my mother had drawn on one side, to enjoin him a
patience, which perhaps needed not to have been enforced, came up just
then, with my mother who had him by his leading-strings--by his sleeve
I should say.

Mr. Hickman, said the bold wretch, be my advocate but for ten words in
the next apartment with Miss Howe, in your presence; and in your's,
Madam, to my mother.

Hear, Nancy, what he has to say to you.  To get rid of him, hear his ten
words.

Excuse me, Madam! his very breath--Unhand me, Sir!

He sighed and looked--O how the practised villain sighed and looked!  He
then let go my hand, with such a reverence in his manner, as brought
blame upon me from some, that I would not hear him.--And this incensed me
the more.  O my dear, this man is a devil!  This man is indeed a devil!--
So much patience when he pleases!  So much gentleness!--Yet so resolute,
so persisting, so audacious!

I was going out of the assembly in great disorder.  He was at the door as
soon as I.

How kind this is, said the wretch; and, ready to follow me, opened the
door for me.

I turned back upon this: and, not knowing what I did, snapped my fan just
in his face, as he turned short upon me; and the powder flew from his
hair.

Every body seemed as much pleased as I was vexed.

He turned to Mr. Hickman, nettled at the powder flying, and at the smiles
of the company upon him; Mr. Hickman, you will be one of the happiest men
in the world, because you are a good man, and will do nothing to provoke
this passionate lady; and because she has too much good sense to be
provoked without reason: but else the Lord have mercy upon you!

This man, this Mr. Hickman, my dear, is too meek for a man.  Indeed he
is.--But my patient mother twits me, that her passionate daughter ought
to like him the better for that.  But meek men abroad are not always meek
at home.  I have observed that in more instances than one: and if they
were, I should not, I verily think, like them the better for being so.

He then turned to my mother, resolved to be even with her too: Where,
good Madam, could Miss Howe get all this spirit?

The company around smiled; for I need not tell you that my mother's high
spiritedness is pretty well known; and she, sadly vexed, said, Sir, you
treat me, as you do the rest of the world--but--

I beg pardon, Madam, interrupted he: I might have spared my question--and
instantly (I retiring to the other end of the hall) he turned to Miss
Playford; What would I give, Madam, to hear you sing that song you
obliged us with at Lord M.'s!

He then, as if nothing had happened, fell into a conversation with her
and Miss D'Ollyffe, upon music; and whisperingly sung to Miss Playford;
holding her two hands, with such airs of genteel unconcern, that it vexed
me not a little to look round, and see how pleased half the giddy fools
of our sex were with him, notwithstanding his notorious wicked character.
To this it is that such vile fellows owe much of their vileness: whereas,
if they found themselves shunned, and despised, and treated as beasts of
prey, as they are, they would run to their caverns; there howl by
themselves; and none but such as sad accident, or unpitiable presumption,
threw in their way, would suffer by them.

He afterwards talked very seriously, at times, to Mr. Hickman: at times,
I say; for it was with such breaks and starts of gaiety, turning to this
lady, and to that, and then to Mr. Hickman again, resuming a serious or
a gay air at pleasure, that he took every body's eye, the women's
especially; who were full of their whispering admirations of him,
qualified with if's and but's, and what pity's, and such sort of stuff,
that showed in their very dispraises too much liking.

Well may our sex be the sport and ridicule of such libertines!
Unthinking eye-governed creatures!--Would not a little reflection teach
us, that a man of merit must be a man of modesty, because a diffident
one? and that such a wretch as this must have taken his degrees in
wickedness, and gone through a course of vileness, before he could arrive
at this impenetrable effrontery? an effrontery which can produce only
from the light opinion he has of us, and the high one of himself.

But our sex are generally modest and bashful themselves, and are too apt
to consider that which in the main is their principal grace, as a defect:
and finely do they judge, when they think of supplying that defect by
choosing a man that cannot be ashamed.

His discourse to Mr. Hickman turned upon you, and his acknowledged
injuries of you: though he could so lightly start from the subject, and
return to it.

I have no patience with such a devil--man he cannot be called.  To be
sure he would behave in the same manner any where, or in any presence,
even at the altar itself, if a woman were with him there.

It shall ever be a rule with me, that he who does not regard a woman with
some degree of reverence, will look upon her and occasionally treat her
with contempt.

He had the confidence to offer to take me out; but I absolutely refused
him, and shunned him all I could, putting on the most contemptuous airs;
but nothing could mortify him.

I wished twenty times I had not been there.

The gentlemen were as ready as I to wish he had broken his neck, rather
than been present, I believe: for nobody was regarded but he.  So little
of the fop; yet so elegant and rich in his dress: his person so specious:
his air so intrepid: so much meaning and penetration in his face: so much
gaiety, yet so little affectation; no mere toupet-man; but all manly; and
his courage and wit, the one so known, the other so dreaded, you must
think the petits-maitres (of which there were four or five present) were
most deplorably off in his company; and one grave gentleman observed to
me, (pleased to see me shun him as I did,) that the poet's observation
was too true, that the generality of ladies were rakes in their hearts,
or they could not be so much taken with a man who had so notorious a
character.

I told him the reflection both of the poet and applier was much too
general, and made with more ill-nature than good manners.

When the wretch saw how industriously I avoided him, (shifting from one
part of the hall to another,) he at last boldly stept up to me, as my
mother and Mr. Hickman were talking to me; and thus before them accosted
me:

I beg your pardon, Madam; but by your mother's leave, I must have a few
moments' conversation with you, either here, or at your own house; and I
beg you will give me the opportunity.

Nancy, said my mother, hear what he has to say to you.  In my presence
you may: and better in the adjoining apartment, if it must be, than to
come to you at our own house.

I retired to one corner of the hall, my mother following me, and he,
taking Mr. Hickman under his arm, following her--Well, Sir, said I, what
have you to say?--Tell me here.

I have been telling Mr. Hickman, said he, how much I am concerned for the
injuries I have done to the most excellent woman in the world: and yet,
that she obtained such a glorious triumph over me the last time I had the
honour to see her, as, with my penitence, ought to have abated her former
resentments: but that I will, with all my soul, enter into any measures
to obtain her forgiveness of me.  My cousins Montague have told you this.
Lady Betty and Lady Sarah and my Lord M. are engaged for my honour.  I
know your power with the dear creature.  My cousins told me you gave them
hopes you would use it in my behalf.  My Lord M. and his two sisters are
impatiently expecting the fruits of it.  You must have heard from her
before now: I hope you have.  And will you be so good as to tell me, if I
may have any hopes?

If I must speak on this subject, let me tell you that you have broken her
heart.  You know not the value of the lady you have injured.  You deserve
her not.  And she despises you, as she ought.

Dear Miss Howe, mingle not passion with denunciations so severe.  I must
know my fate.  I will go abroad once more, if I find her absolutely
irreconcileable.  But I hope she will give me leave to attend upon her,
to know my doom from her own mouth.

It would be death immediate for her to see you.  And what must you be, to
be able to look her in the face?

I then reproached him (with vehemence enough you may believe) on his
baseness, and the evils he had made you suffer: the distress he had
reduced you to; all your friends made your enemies: the vile house he had
carried you to; hinted at his villanous arts; the dreadful arrest: and
told him of your present deplorable illness, and resolution to die rather
than to have him.

He vindicated not any part of his conduct, but that of the arrest; and so
solemnly protested his sorrow for his usage of you, accusing himself in
the freest manner, and by deserved appellations, that I promised to lay
before you this part of our conversation.  And now you have it.

My mother, as well as Mr. Hickman, believes, from what passed on this
occasion, that he is touched in conscience for the wrongs he has done
you: but, by his whole behaviour, I must own, it seems to me that nothing
can touch him for half an hour together.  Yet I have no doubt that he
would willingly marry you; and it piques his pride, I could see, that he
should be denied; as it did mine, that such a wretch had dared to think
it in his power to have such a woman whenever he pleased; and that it
must be accounted a condescension, and matter of obligation (by all his
own family at least) that he would vouchsafe to think of marriage.

Now, my dear, you have before you the reason why I suspend the decisive
negative to the ladies of his family.  My mother, Miss Lloyd, and Miss
Biddulph, who were inquisitive after the subject of our retired
conversation, and whose curiosity I thought it was right, in some degree,
to gratify, (especially as these young ladies are of our select
acquaintance,) are all of opinion that you should be his.

You will let Mr. Hickman know your whole mind; and when he acquaint me
with it, I will tell you all my own.

Mean time, may the news he will bring me of the state of your health be
favourable! prays, with the utmost fervency,

Your ever faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER L

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 27.


MY DEAREST MISS HOWE,

After I have thankfully acknowledged your favour in sending Mr. Hickman
to visit me before you set out upon your intended journey, I must chide
you (in the sincerity of that faithful love, which could not be the love
it is if it would not admit of that cementing freedom) for suspending the
decisive negative, which, upon such full deliberation, I had entreated
you to give to Mr. Lovelace's relations.

I am sorry that I am obliged to repeat to you, my dear, who know me so
well, that, were I sure I should live many years, I would not have Mr.
Lovelace; much less can I think of him, as it is probable I may not live
one.

As to the world and its censures, you know, my dear, that, however
desirous I always was of a fair fame, yet I never thought it right to
give more than a second place to the world's opinion.  The challenges
made to Mr. Lovelace, by Miss D'Oily, in public company, are a fresh
proof that I have lost my reputation: and what advantage would it be to
me, were it retrievable, and were I to live long, if I could not acquit
myself to myself?

Having in my former said so much on the freedoms you have taken with my
friends, I shall say the less now; but your hint, that something else has
newly passed between some of them and you, gives me great concern, and
that as well for my own sake as for theirs, since it must necessarily
incense them against me.  I wise, my dear, that I had been left to my own
course on an occasion so very interesting to myself.  But, since what is
done cannot be helped, I must abide the consequences: yet I dread more
than before, what may be my sister's answer, if an answer will be at all
vouchsafed.

Will you give me leave, my dear, to close this subject with one remark?
--It is this: that my beloved friend, in points where her own laudable
zeal is concerned, has ever seemed more ready to fly from the rebuke,
than from the fault.  If you will excuse this freedom, I will acknowledge
thus far in favour of your way of thinking, as to the conduct of some
parents in these nice cases, that indiscreet opposition does frequently
as much mischief as giddy love.

As to the invitation you are so kind as to give me, to remove privately
into your neighbourhood, I have told Mr. Hickman that I will consider of
it; but believe, if you will be so good as to excuse me, that I shall not
accept of it, even should I be able to remove.  I will give you my
reasons for declining it; and so I ought, when both my love and my
gratitude would make a visit now-and-then from my dear Miss Howe the most
consolate thing in the world to me.

You must know then, that this great town, wicked as it is, wants not
opportunities of being better; having daily prayers at several churches
in it; and I am desirous, as my strength will permit, to embrace those
opportunities.  The method I have proposed to myself (and was beginning
to practise when that cruel arrest deprived me of both freedom and
strength) is this: when I was disposed to gentle exercise, I took a chair
to St. Dunstan's church in Fleet-street, where are prayers at seven in
the morning; I proposed if the weather favoured, to walk (if not, to take
chair) to Lincoln's-inn chapel, where, at eleven in the morning, and at
five in the afternoon, are the same desirable opportunities; and at other
times to go no farther than Covent-garden church, where are early morning
prayers likewise.

This method pursued, I doubt not, will greatly help, as it has already
done, to calm my disturbed thoughts, and to bring me to that perfect
resignation after which I aspire: for I must own, my dear, that sometimes
still my griefs and my reflections are too heavy for me; and all the aid
I can draw from religious duties is hardly sufficient to support my
staggering reason.  I am a very young creature you know, my dear, to be
left to my own conduct in such circumstances as I am in.

Another reason why I choose not to go down into your neighbourhood, is
the displeasure that might arise, on my account, between your mother and
you.

If indeed you were actually married, and the worthy man (who would then
have a title to all your regard) were earnestly desirous of near
neighbourhood, I know not what I might do: for although I might not
perhaps intend to give up my other important reasons at the time I should
make you a congratulatory visit, yet I might not know how to deny myself
the pleasure of continuing near you when there.

I send you enclosed the copy of my letter to my sister.  I hope it will
be thought to be written with a true penitent spirit; for indeed it is.
I desire that you will not think I stoop too low in it; since there can
be no such thing as that in a child to parents whom she has unhappily
offended.

But if still (perhaps more disgusted than before at your freedom with
them) they should pass it by with the contempt of silence, (for I have
not yet been favoured with an answer,) I must learn to think it right in
them to do so; especially as it is my first direct application: for I
have often censured the boldness of those, who, applying for a favour,
which it is in a person's option to grant or refuse, take the liberty of
being offended, if they are not gratified; as if the petitioned had not
as good a right to reject, as the petitioner to ask.

But if my letter should be answered, and that in such terms as will make
me loth to communicate it to so warm a friend--you must not, my dear,
take it upon yourself to censure my relations; but allow for them as they
know not what I have suffered; as being filled with just resentments
against me, (just to them if they think them just;) and as not being able
to judge of the reality of my penitence.

And after all, what can they do for me?--They can only pity me: and what
will that but augment their own grief; to which at present their
resentment is an alleviation? for can they by their pity restore to me my
lost reputation?  Can they by it purchase a sponge that will wipe out
from the year the past fatal four months of my life?*


* She takes in the time that she appointed to meet Mr. Lovelace.


Your account of the gay, unconcerned behaviour of Mr. Lovelace, at the
Colonel's, does not surprise me at all, after I am told that he had the
intrepidity to go there, knowing who were invited and expected.--Only
this, my dear, I really wonder at, that Miss Howe could imagine that I
could have a thought of such a man for a husband.

Poor wretch!  I pity him, to see him fluttering about; abusing talents
that were given him for excellent purposes; taking in consideration for
courage; and dancing, fearless of danger, on the edge of a precipice!

But indeed his threatening to see me most sensibly alarms and shocks me.
I cannot but hope that I never, never more shall see him in this world.

Since you are so loth, my dear, to send the desired negative to the
ladies of his family, I will only trouble you to transmit the letter I
shall enclose for that purpose; directed indeed to yourself, because it
was to you that those ladies applied themselves on this occasion; but to
be sent by you to any one of the ladies, at your own choice.

I commend myself, my dearest Miss Howe, to your prayers; and conclude
with repeated thanks for sending Mr. Hickman to me; and with wishes for
your health and happiness, and for the speedy celebration of your
nuptials;

Your ever affectionate and obliged,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
[ENCLOSED IN THE PRECEDING.]
THURSDAY, JULY 27.


MY DEAREST MISS HOWE,

Since you seem loth to acquiesce in my determined resolution, signified
to you as soon as I was able to hold a pen, I beg the favour of you, by
this, or by any other way you think most proper, to acquaint the worthy
ladies, who have applied to you in behalf of their relation, that
although I am infinitely obliged to their generous opinion of me, yet I
cannot consent to sanctify, as I may say, Mr. Lovelace's repeated
breaches of all moral sanctions, and hazard my future happiness by a
union with a man, through whose premeditated injuries, in a long train of
the basest contrivances, I have forfeited my temporal hopes.

He himself, when he reflects upon his own actions, must surely bear
testimony to the justice as well as fitness of my determination.  The
ladies, I dare say, would, were they to know the whole of my unhappy
story.

Be pleased to acquaint them that I deceive myself, if my resolution on
this head (however ungratefully and even inhumanely he has treated me) be
not owing more to principle than passion.  Nor can I give a stronger
proof of the truth of this assurance, on this one easy condition, that he
will never molest me more.

In whatever way you choose to make this declaration, be pleased to let my
most respectful compliments to the ladies of that noble family, and to my
Lord M., accompany it.  And do you, my dear, believe that I shall be, to
the last moment of my life,

Your ever obliged and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JULY 28.


I have three letters of thine to take notice of:* but am divided in my
mind, whether to quarrel with thee on thy unmerciful reflections, or to
thank thee for thy acceptable particularity and diligence.  But several
of my sweet dears have I, indeed, in my time, made to cry and laugh
before the cry could go off the other: Why may I not, therefore, curse
and applaud thee in the same moment?  So take both in one: and what
follows, as it shall rise from my pen.


* Letters XLVI. XLVII. and XLVIII. of this volume.


How often have I ingenuously confessed my sins against this excellent
creature?--Yet thou never sparest me, although as bad a man as myself.
Since then I get so little by my confessions, I had a good mind to try to
defend myself; and that not only from antient and modern story, but from
common practice; and yet avoid repeating any thing I have suggested
before in my own behalf.

I am in a humour to play the fool with my pen: briefly then, from antient
story first:--Dost thou not think that I am as much entitled to
forgiveness on Miss Harlowe's account, as Virgil's hero was on Queen
Dido's?  For what an ungrateful varlet was that vagabond to the
hospitable princess, who had willingly conferred upon him the last
favour?--Stealing away, (whence, I suppose, the ironical phrase of trusty
Trojan to this day,) like a thief--pretendedly indeed at the command of
the gods; but could that be, when the errand he went upon was to rob
other princes, not only of their dominions, but of their lives?--Yet this
fellow is, at every word, the pious AEneas, with the immortal bard who
celebrates him.

Should Miss Harlowe even break her heart, (which Heaven forbid!) for the
usage she has received, (to say nothing of her disappointed pride, to
which her death would be attributable, more than to reason,) what
comparison will her fate hold to Queen Dido's?  And have I half the
obligation to her, that AEneas had to the Queen of Carthage?  The latter
placing a confidence, the former none, in her man?--Then, whom else have
I robbed?  Whom else have I injured?  Her brother's worthless life I gave
him, instead of taking any man's; while the Trojan vagabond destroyed his
thousands.  Why then should it not be the pious Lovelace, as well as the
pious AEneas?  For, dost thou think, had a conflagration happened, and had
it been in my power, that I would not have saved my old Anchises, (as he
did his from the Ilion bonfire,) even at the expense of my Creuesa, had I
a wife of that name?

But for a more modern instance in my favour--Have I used Miss Harlowe, as
our famous Maiden Queen, as she was called, used one of her own blood, a
sister-queen, who threw herself into her protection from her
rebel-subjects, and whom she detained prisoner eighteen years, and at
last cut off her head?  Yet do not honest protestants pronounce her pious
too?--And call her particularly their Queen?

As to common practice--Who, let me ask, that has it in his power to
gratify a predominant passion, be it what it will, denies himself the
gratification?--Leaving it to cooler deliberation, (and, if he be a great
man, to his flatterers,) to find a reason for it afterwards?

Then, as to the worst part of my treatment of this lady, How many men are
there, who, as well as I, have sought, by intoxicating liquors, first to
inebriate, then to subdue?  What signifies what the potations were, when
the same end was in view?

Let me tell thee, upon the whole, that neither the Queen of Carthage, nor
the Queen of Scots, would have thought they had any reason to complain of
cruelty, had they been used no worse than I have used the queen of my
heart: And then do I not aspire with my whole soul to repair by marriage?
Would the pious AEneas, thinkest thou, have done such a piece of justice
by Dido, had she lived?

Come, come, Belford, let people run away with notions as they will, I am
comparatively a very innocent man.  And if by these, and other like
reasonings, I have quieted my own conscience, a great end is answered.
What have I to do with the world?

And now I sit me peaceably down to consider thy letters.

I hope thy pleas in my favour,* when she gave thee, (so generously gave
thee,) for me my letters, were urged with an honest energy.  But I
suspect thee much for being too ready to give up thy client.  Then thou
hast such a misgiving aspect, an aspect rather inviting rejection than
carrying persuasion with it; and art such an hesitating, such a humming
and hawing caitiff; that I shall attribute my failure, if I do fail,
rather to the inability and ill looks of my advocate, than to my cause.
Again, thou art deprived of the force men of our cast give to arguments;
for she won't let thee swear!-Art, moreover, a very heavy, thoughtless
fellow; tolerable only at a second rebound; a horrid dunce at the
impromptu.  These, encountering with such a lady, are great
disadvantages.--And still a greater is thy balancing, (as thou dost at
present,) between old rakery and new reformation; since this puts thee
into the same situation with her, as they told me, at Leipsick, Martin
Luther was in, at the first public dispute which he held in defence of
his supposed new doctrines with Eckius.  For Martin was then but a
linsey-wolsey reformer.  He retained some dogmas, which, by natural
consequence, made others, that he held, untenable.  So that Eckius, in
some points, had the better of him.  But, from that time, he made clear
work, renouncing all that stood in his way: and then his doctrines ran
upon all fours.  He was never puzzled afterwards; and could boldly
declare that he would defend them in the face of angels and men; and to
his friends, who would have dissuaded him from venturing to appear before
the Emperor Charles at Spires, That, were there as many devils at Spires,
as tiles upon the houses, he would go.  An answer that is admired by
every protestant Saxon to this day.


* See Letter XLVII. of this volume.


Since then thy unhappy awkwardness destroys the force of thy arguments, I
think thou hadst better (for the present, however) forbear to urge her on
the subject of accepting the reparation I offer; lest the continual
teasing of her to forgive me should but strengthen her in her denials of
forgiveness; till, for consistency sake, she'll be forced to adhere to a
resolution so often avowed--Whereas, if left to herself, a little time,
and better health, which will bring on better spirits, will give her
quicker resentments; those quicker resentments will lead her into
vehemence; that vehemence will subside, and turn into expostulation and
parley: my friends will then interpose, and guaranty for me: and all our
trouble on both sides will be over.--Such is the natural course of
things.

I cannot endure thee for thy hopelessness in the lady's recovery;* and
that in contradiction to the doctor and apothecary.


* See Letter XLVII. of this volume.


Time, in the words of Congreve, thou sayest, will give increase to her
afflictions.  But why so?  Knowest thou not that those words (so contrary
to common experience) were applied to the case of a person, while passion
was in its full vigour?--At such a time, every one in a heavy grief
thinks the same: but as enthusiasts do by Scripture, so dost thou by the
poets thou hast read: any thing that carries the most distant allusion
from either to the case in hand, is put down by both for gospel, however
incongruous to the general scope of either, and to that case.  So once,
in a pulpit, I heard one of the former very vehemently declare himself to
be a dead dog; when every man, woman, and child, were convinced to the
contrary by his howling.

I can tell thee that, if nothing else will do, I am determined, in spite
of thy buskin-airs, and of thy engagements for me to the contrary, to see
her myself.

Face to face have I known many a quarrel made up, which distance would
have kept alive, and widened.  Thou wilt be a madder Jack than he in the
tale of a Tub, if thou givest an active opposition to this interview.

In short, I cannot bear the thought, that a woman whom once I had bound
to me in the silken cords of love, should slip through my fingers, and be
able, while my heart flames out with a violent passion for her, to
despise me, and to set both love and me at defiance.  Thou canst not
imagine how much I envy thee, and her doctor, and her apothecary, and
every one who I hear are admitted to her presence and conversation; and
wish to be the one or the other in turn.

Wherefore, if nothing else will do, I will see her.  I'll tell thee of an
admirable expedient, just come cross me, to save thy promise, and my own.

Mrs. Lovick, you say, is a good woman: if the lady be worse, you shall
advise her to send for a parson to pray by her: unknown to her, unknown
to the lady, unknown to thee, (for so it may pass,) I will contrive to be
the man, petticoated out, and vested in a gown and cassock.  I once, for
a certain purpose, did assume the canonicals; and I was thought to make a
fine sleek appearance; my broad rose-bound beaver became me mightily; and
I was much admired upon the whole by all who saw me.

Methinks it must be charmingly a propos to see me kneeling down by her
bed-side, (I am sure I shall pray heartily,) beginning out of the
common-prayer book the sick-office for the restoration of the languishing
lady, and concluding with an exhortation to charity and forgiveness for
myself.

I will consider of this matter.  But, in whatever shape I shall choose to
appear, of this thou mayest assure thyself, I will apprize thee
beforehand of my visit, that thou mayst contrive to be out of the way,
and to know nothing of the matter.  This will save thy word; and, as to
mine, can she think worse of me than she does at present?

An indispensable of true love and profound respect, in thy wise opinion,*
is absurdity or awkwardness.--'Tis surprising that thou shouldst be one
of those partial mortals who take their measures of right and wrong from
what they find themselves to be, and cannot help being!--So awkwardness
is a perfection in the awkward!--At this rate, no man ever can be in the
wrong.  But I insist upon it, that an awkward fellow will do every thing
awkwardly: and, if he be like thee, will, when he has done foolishly,
rack his unmeaning brain for excuses as awkward as his first fault.
Respectful love is an inspirer of actions worthy of itself; and he who
cannot show it, where he most means it, manifests that he is an unpolite
rough creature, a perfect Belford, and has it not in him.


* See Letter XLVI. of this volume.


But here thou'lt throw out that notable witticism, that my outside is the
best of me, thine the worst of thee; and that, if I set about mending my
mind, thou wilt mend thy appearance.

But, pr'ythee, Jack, don't stay for that; but set about thy amendment in
dress when thou leavest off thy mourning; for why shouldst thou
prepossess in thy disfavour all those who never saw thee before?--It is
hard to remove early-taken prejudices, whether of liking or distaste.
People will hunt, as I may say, for reasons to confirm first impressions,
in compliment to their own sagacity: nor is it every mind that has the
ingenuousness to confess itself half mistaken, when it finds itself to be
wrong.  Thou thyself art an adept in the pretended science of reading
men; and, whenever thou art out, wilt study to find some reasons why it
was more probable that thou shouldst have been right; and wilt watch
every motion and action, and every word and sentiment, in the person thou
hast once censured, for proofs, in order to help thee to revive and
maintain thy first opinion.  And, indeed, as thou seldom errest on the
favourable side, human nature is so vile a thing that thou art likely to
be right five times in six on what thou findest in thine own heart, to
have reason to compliment thyself on thy penetration.

Here is preachment for thy preachment: and I hope, if thou likest thy
own, thou wilt thank me for mine; the rather, as thou mayest be the
better for it, if thou wilt: since it is calculated for thy own meridian.

Well, but the lady refers my destiny to the letter she has written,
actually written, to Miss Howe; to whom it seems she has given her
reasons why she will not have me.  I long to know the contents of this
letter: but am in great hopes that she has so expressed her denials, as
shall give room to think she only wants to be persuaded to the contrary,
in order to reconcile herself to herself.

I could make some pretty observations upon one or two places of the
lady's mediation: but, wicked as I am thought to be, I never was so
abandoned as to turn into ridicule, or even to treat with levity, things
sacred.  I think it the highest degree of ill manners to jest upon those
subjects which the world in general look upon with veneration, and call
divine.  I would not even treat the mythology of the heathen to a
heathen, with the ridicule that perhaps would fairly lie from some of the
absurdities that strike every common observer.  Nor, when at Rome, and in
other popish countries, did I ever behave indecently at those ceremonies
which I thought very extraordinary: for I saw some people affected, and
seemingly edified, by them; and I contented myself to think, though they
were any good end to the many, there was religion enough in them, or
civil policy at least, to exempt them from the ridicule of even a bad man
who had common sense and good manners.

For the like reason I have never given noisy or tumultuous instances of
dislike to a new play, if I thought it ever so indifferent: for I
concluded, first, that every one was entitled to see quietly what he paid
for: and, next, as the theatre (the epitome of the world) consisted of
pit, boxes, and gallery, it was hard, I thought, if there could be such a
performance exhibited as would not please somebody in that mixed
multitude: and, if it did, those somebodies had as much right to enjoy
their own judgments, undisturbedly, as I had to enjoy mine.

This was my way of showing my disapprobation; I never went again.  And as
a man is at his option, whether he will go to a play or not, he has not
the same excuse for expressing his dislike clamorously as if he were
compelled to see it.

I have ever, thou knowest, declared against those shallow libertines, who
could not make out their pretensions to wit, but on two subjects, to
which every man of true wit will scorn to be beholden: PROFANENESS and
OBSCENITY, I mean; which must shock the ears of every man or woman of
sense, without answering any end, but of showing a very low and abandoned
nature. And, till I came acquainted with the brutal Mowbray, [no great
praise to myself from such a tutor,] I was far from making so free as I
do now, with oaths and curses; for then I was forced to out-swear him
sometimes in order to keep him in his allegiance to me his general: nay,
I often check myself to myself, for this empty unprofitable liberty of
speech; in which we are outdone by the sons of the common-sewer.

All my vice is women, and the love of plots and intrigues; and I cannot
but wonder how I fell into those shocking freedoms of speech; since,
generally speaking, they are far from helping forward my main end: only,
now-and-then, indeed, a little novice rises to one's notice, who seems to
think dress, and oaths, and curses, the diagnostics of the rakish spirit
she is inclined to favour: and indeed they are the only qualifications
that some who are called rakes and pretty fellows have to boast of.  But
what must the women be, who can be attracted by such empty-souled
profligates!--since wickedness with wit is hardly tolerable; but, without
it, is equally shocking and contemptible.

There again is preachment for thy preachment; and thou wilt be apt to
think that I am reforming too: but no such matter.  If this were new
light darting in upon me, as thy morality seems to be to thee, something
of this kind might be apprehended: but this was always my way of
thinking; and I defy thee, or any of thy brethren, to name a time when I
have either ridiculed religion, or talked obscenely.  On the contrary,
thou knowest how often I have checked that bear, in love-matters,
Mowbray, and the finical Tourville, and thyself too, for what ye have
called the double-entendre.  In love, as in points that required a
manly-resentment, it has always been my maxim, to act, rather than to
talk; and I do assure thee, as to the first, the women themselves will
excuse the one sooner than the other.

As to the admiration thou expressest for the books of scripture, thou art
certainly right in it.  But 'tis strange to me, that thou wert ignorant
of their beauty, and noble simplicity, till now.  Their antiquity always
made me reverence them: And how was it possible that thou couldest not,
for that reason, if for no other, give them a perusal?

I'll tell thee a short story, which I had from my tutor, admonishing me
against exposing myself by ignorant wonder, when I should quit college,
to go to town, or travel.

'The first time Dryden's Alexander's Feast fell into his hands, he told
me, he was prodigiously charmed with it: and, having never heard any body
speak of it before, thought, as thou dost of the Bible, that he had made
a new discovery.

'He hastened to an appointment which he had with several wits, (for he
was then in town,) one of whom was a noted critic, who, according to him,
had more merit than good fortune; for all the little nibblers in wit,
whose writings would not stand the test of criticism, made it, he said, a
common cause to run him down, as men would a mad dog.

'The young gentleman (for young he then was) set forth magnificently in
the praises of that inimitable performance; and gave himself airs of
second-hand merit, for finding out its beauties.

'The old bard heard him out with a smile, which the collegian took for
approbation, till he spoke; and then it was in these mortifying words:
'Sdeath, Sir, where have you lived till now, or with what sort of company
have you conversed, young as you are, that you have never before heard of
the finest piece in the English language?'

This story had such an effect upon me, who had ever a proud heart, and
wanted to be thought a clever fellow, that, in order to avoid the like
disgrace, I laid down two rules to myself.  The first, whenever I went
into company where there were strangers, to hear every one of them speak,
before I gave myself liberty to prate: The other, if I found any of them
above my match, to give up all title to new discoveries, contenting
myself to praise what they praised, as beauties familiar to me, though I
had never heard of them before.  And so, by degrees, I got the reputation
of a wit myself: and when I threw off all restraint, and books, and
learned conversation, and fell in with some of our brethren who are now
wandering in Erebus, and with such others as Belton, Mowbray, Tourville,
and thyself, I set up on my own stock; and, like what we have been told
of Sir Richard, in his latter days, valued myself on being the emperor of
the company; for, having fathomed the depth of them all, and afraid of no
rival but thee, whom also I had got a little under, (by my gaiety and
promptitude at least) I proudly, like Addison's Cato, delighted to give
laws to my little senate.

Proceed with thee by-and-by.



LETTER LIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


But now I have cleared myself of any intentional levity on occasion of my
beloved's meditation; which, as you observe, is finely suited to her
case, (that is to say, as she and you have drawn her case;) I cannot help
expressing my pleasure, that by one or two verses of it, [the arrow,
Jack, and what she feared being come upon her!] I am encouraged to hope,
what it will be very surprising to me if it do not happen: that is, in
plain English, that the dear creature is in the way to be a mamma.

This cursed arrest, because of the ill effects the terror might have had
upon her, in that hoped-for circumstance, has concerned me more than on
any other account.  It would be the pride of my life to prove, in this
charming frost-piece, the triumph of Nature over principle, and to have a
young Lovelace by such an angel: and then, for its sake, I am confident
she will live, and will legitimate it.  And what a meritorious little
cherub would it be, that should lay an obligation upon both parents
before it was born, which neither of them would be able to repay!--Could
I be sure it is so, I should be out of all pain for her recovery: pain, I
say; since, were she to die--[die! abominable word! how I hate it!] I
verily think I should be the most miserable man in the world.

As for the earnestness she expresses for death, she has found the words
ready to her hand in honest Job; else she would not have delivered
herself with such strength and vehemence.

Her innate piety (as I have more than once observed) will not permit her
to shorten her own life, either by violence or neglect.  She has a mind
too noble for that; and would have done it before now, had she designed
any such thing: for to do it, like the Roman matron, when the mischief is
over, and it can serve no end; and when the man, however a Tarquin, as
some may think me in this action, is not a Tarquin in power, so that no
national point can be made of it; is what she has too much good sense to
think of.

Then, as I observed in a like case, a little while ago, the distress,
when this was written, was strong upon her; and she saw no end of it: but
all was darkness and apprehension before her.  Moreover, has she it not
in her power to disappoint, as much as she has been disappointed?
Revenge, Jack, has induced many a woman to cherish a life, to which grief
and despair would otherwise have put an end.

And, after all, death is no such eligible thing, as Job in his
calamities, makes it.  And a death desired merely from worldly
disappointments shows not a right mind, let me tell this lady, whatever
she may think of it.*  You and I Jack, although not afraid, in the height
of passion or resentment, to rush into those dangers which might be
followed by a sudden and violent death, whenever a point of honour calls
upon us, would shudder at his cool and deliberate approach in a lingering
sickness, which had debilitated the spirits.


* Mr. Lovelace could not know, that the lady was so thoroughly sensible
of the solidity of this doctrine, as she really was: for, in her letter
to Mrs. Norton, (Letter XLIV. of this volume,) she says,--'Nor let it be
imagined, that my present turn of mind proceeds from gloominess or
melancholy: for although it was brought on by disappointment, (the world
showing me early, even at my first rushing into it, its true and ugly
face,) yet I hope, that it has obtained a better root, and will every day
more and more, by its fruits, demonstrate to me, and to all my friends,
that it has.'


So we read of a famous French general [I forget as well the reign of the
prince as the name of the man] who, having faced with intrepidity the
ghastly varlet on an hundred occasions in the field, was the most
dejected of wretches, when, having forfeited his life for treason, he was
led with all the cruel parade of preparation, and surrounding guards, to
the scaffold.

The poet says well:

      'Tis not the stoic lesson, got by rote,
      The pomp of words, and pedant dissertation,
      That can support us in the hour of terror.
      Books have taught cowards to talk nobly of it:
      But when the trial comes, they start, and stand aghast.

Very true: for then it is the old man in the fable, with his bundle of
sticks.

The lady is well read in Shakspeare, our English pride and glory; and
must sometimes reason with herself in his words, so greatly expressed,
that the subject, affecting as it is, cannot produce any thing greater.

      Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
      To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
      This sensible, warm motion to become
      A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
      To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
      In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice:
      To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
      Or blown, with restless violence, about
      The pendant worlds; or to be worse than worst
      Of those that lawless and uncertain thought
      Imagines howling: 'tis too horrible!
      The weariest and most loaded worldly life,
      That pain, age, penury, and imprisonment,
      Can lay on nature, is a paradise
      To what we fear of death.----

I find, by one of thy three letters, that my beloved had some account
from Hickman of my interview with Miss Howe, at Col. Ambrose's.  I had a
very agreeable time of it there; although severely rallied by several of
the assembly.  It concerns me, however, not a little, to find our affair
so generally known among the flippanti of both sexes.  It is all her own
fault.  There never, surely, was such an odd little soul as this.--Not to
keep her own secret, when the revealing of it could answer no possible
good end; and when she wants not (one would think) to raise to herself
either pity or friends, or to me enemies, by the proclamation!--Why,
Jack, must not all her own sex laugh in their sleeves at her weakness?
what would become of the peace of the world, if all women should take it
into their heads to follow her example? what a fine time of it would the
heads of families have?  Their wives always filling their ears with their
confessions; their daughters with theirs: sisters would be every day
setting their brothers about cutting of throats, if the brothers had at
heart the honour of their families, as it is called; and the whole world
would either be a scene of confusion; or cuckoldom as much the fashion as
it is in Lithuania.*


* In Lithuania, the women are said to have so allowedly their gallants,
called adjutores, that the husbands hardly ever enter upon any part of
pleasure without them.


I am glad, however, that Miss Howe (as much as she hates me) kept her
word with my cousins on their visit to her, and with me at the Colonel's,
to endeavour to persuade her friend to make up all matters by matrimony;
which, no doubt, is the best, nay, the only method she can take, for her
own honour, and that of her family.

I had once thoughts of revenging myself on that vixen, and, particularly,
as thou mayest* remember, had planned something to this purpose on the
journey she is going to take, which had been talked of some time.  But, I
think--let me see--yet, I think, I will let this Hickman have her safe
and entire, as thou believest the fellow to be a tolerable sort of a
mortal, and that I have made the worst of him: and I am glad, for his own
sake, he has not launched out too virulently against me to thee.


* See Vol. IV. Letter LIV.


But thou seest, Jack, by her refusal of money from him, or Miss Howe,*
that the dear extravagant takes a delight in oddnesses, choosing to part
with her clothes, though for a song.  Dost think she is not a little
touched at times?  I am afraid she is.  A little spice of that insanity,
I doubt, runs through her, that she had in a stronger degree, in the
first week of my operations.  Her contempt of life; her proclamations;
her refusal of matrimony; and now of money from her most intimate
friends; are sprinklings of this kind, and no other way, I think, to be
accounted for.


* See Letter XLVIII. of this volume.


Her apothecary is a good honest fellow.  I like him much.  But the silly
dear's harping so continually upon one string, dying, dying, dying, is
what I have no patience with.  I hope all this melancholy jargon is owing
entirely to the way I would have her to be in.  And it being as new to
her, as the Bible beauties to thee,* no wonder she knows not what to make
of herself; and so fancies she is breeding death, when the event will
turn out quite the contrary.


* See Letter XLVI. of this volume.


Thou art a sorry fellow in thy remarks on the education and qualification
of smarts and beaux of the rakish order; if by thy we's and us's thou
meanest thyself or me:* for I pretend to say, that the picture has no
resemblance of us, who have read and conversed as we have done.  It may
indeed, and I believe it does, resemble the generality of the fops and
coxcombs about town.  But that let them look to; for, if it affects not
me, to what purpose thy random shot?--If indeed thou findest, by the new
light darted in upon thee, since thou hast had the honour of conversing
with this admirable creature, that the cap fits thy own head, why then,
according to the qui capit rule, e'en take and clap it on: and I will
add a string of bells to it, to complete thee for the fore-horse of the
idiot team.


* Ibid. and Letter LXVIII.


Although I just now said a kind thing or two for this fellow Hickman; yet
I can tell thee, I could (to use one of my noble peer's humble phrases)
eat him up without a corn of salt, when I think of his impudence to
salute my charmer twice at parting:*  And have still less patience with
the lady herself for presuming to offer her cheek or lip [thou sayest not
which] to him, and to press his clumsy fist between her charming hands.
An honour worth a king's ransom; and what I would give--what would I not
give? to have!--And then he, in return, to press her, as thou sayest he
did, to his stupid heart; at that time, no doubt, more sensible, than
ever it was before!


* See Letter XLVIII. of this volume.


By thy description of their parting, I see thou wilt be a delicate fellow
in time.  My mortification in this lady's displeasure, will be thy
exaltation from her conversation.  I envy thee as well for thy
opportunities, as for thy improvements: and such an impression has thy
concluding paragraph* made upon me, that I wish I do not get into a
reformation-humour as well as thou: and then what a couple of lamentable
puppies shall we make, howling in recitative to each other's discordant
music!


* Ibid.


Let me improve upon the thought, and imagine that, turned hermits, we
have opened the two old caves at Hornsey, or dug new ones; and in each of
our cells set up a death's head, and an hour-glass, for objects of
contemplation--I have seen such a picture: but then, Jack, had not the
old penitent fornicator a suffocating long grey beard?  What figures
would a couple of brocaded or laced-waistcoated toupets make with their
sour screw'd up half-cock'd faces, and more than half shut eyes, in a
kneeling attitude, recapitulating their respective rogueries?  This
scheme, were we only to make trial of it, and return afterwards to our
old ways, might serve to better purpose by far, than Horner's in the
Country Wife, to bring the pretty wenches to us.

Let me see; the author of Hudibras has somewhere a description that would
suit us, when met in one of our caves, and comparing our dismal notes
together.  This is it.  Suppose me described--

       --He sat upon his rump,
       His head like one in doleful dump:
       Betwixt his knees his hands apply'd
       Unto his cheeks, on either side:
       And by him, in another hole,
       Sat stupid Belford, cheek by jowl.

I know thou wilt think me too ludicrous.  I think myself so.  It is
truly, to be ingenuous, a forced put: for my passions are so wound up,
that I am obliged either to laugh or cry.  Like honest drunken Jack
Daventry, [poor fellow!--What an unhappy end was his!]--thou knowest, I
used to observe, that whenever he rose from an entertainment, which he
never did sober, it was his way, as soon as he got to the door, to look
round him like a carrier pigeon just thrown up, in order to spy out his
course; and then, taking to his heels, he would run all the way home,
though it were a mile or two, when he could hardly stand, and must have
tumbled on his nose if he had attempted to walk moderately.  This then
must be my excuse, in this my unconverted estate, for a conclusion so
unworthy of the conclusion to thy third letter.

What a length have I run!--Thou wilt own, that if I pay thee not in
quality, I do in quantity: and yet I leave a multitude of things
unobserved upon.  Indeed I hardly at this present know what to do with
myself but scribble.  Tired with Lord M. who, in his recovery, has played
upon me the fable of the nurse, the crying child, and the wolf--tired
with my cousins Montague, though charming girls, were they not so near of
kin--tired with Mowbray and Tourville, and their everlasting identity--
tired with the country--tired of myself--longing for what I have not--I
must go to town; and there have an interview with the charmer of my soul:
for desperate diseases must have desperate remedies; and I only wait to
know my doom from Miss Howe! and then, if it be rejection, I will try my
fate, and receive my sentence at her feet.--But I will apprize thee of it
beforehand, as I told thee, that thou mayest keep thy parole with the
lady in the best manner thou canst.



LETTER LIV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S OF JULY 27, SEE LETTERS L. LI. OF THIS VOLUME.]
FRIDAY NIGHT, JULY 28.


I will now, my dearest friend, write to you all my mind, without reserve,
on your resolution not to have this vilest of men.  You gave me, in
your's of Sunday the 23d, reasons so worthy of the pure mind of my
Clarissa, in support of this your resolution, that nothing but self-love,
lest I should lose my ever-amiable friend, could have prevailed upon me
to wish you to alter it.

Indeed, I thought it was impossible there could be (however desirable) so
noble an instance given by any of our sex, of a passion conquered, when
there were so many inducements to give way to it.  And, therefore, I was
willing to urge you once more to overcome your just indignation, and to
be prevailed upon by the solicitations of his friends, before you carried
your resentments to so great a height, that it would be more difficult
for you, and less to your honour to comply, than if you had complied at
first.

But now, my dear, that I see you fixed in your noble resolution; and that
it is impossible for your pure mind to join itself with that of so
perjured a miscreant; I congratulate you most heartily upon it; and beg
your pardon for but seeming to doubt that theory and practice were not
the same thing with my beloved Clarissa.

I have only one thing that saddens my heart on this occasion; and that
is, the bad state of health Mr. Hickman (unwillingly) owns you are in.
Hitherto you have well observed the doctrine you always laid down to me,
That a cursed person should first seek the world's opinion of her; and,
in all cases where the two could not be reconciled, have preferred the
first to the last; and are, of consequence, well justified to your own
heart, as well as to your Anna Howe.  Let me therefore beseech you to
endeavour, by all possible means, to recover your health and spirits:
and this, as what, if it can be effected, will crown the work, and show
the world, that you were indeed got above the base wretch; and, though
put out of your course for a little while, could resume it again, and go
on blessing all within your knowledge, as well by your example as by your
precepts.

For Heaven's sake, then, for the world's sake, for the honour of our sex,
and for my sake, once more I beseech you, try to overcome this shock:
and, if you can overcome it, I shall then be as happy as I wish to be;
for I cannot, indeed I cannot, think of parting with you, for many, many
years to come.

The reasons you give for discouraging my wishes to have you near us are
so convincing, that I ought at present to acquiesce in them: but, my
dear, when your mind is fully settled, as, (now you are so absolutely
determined in it, with regard this wretch,) I hope it will soon be, I
shall expect you with us, or near us: and then you shall chalk out every
path that I will set my foot in; nor will I turn aside either to the
right hand or to the left.

You wish I had not mediated for you to your friends.  I wish so too;
because my mediation was ineffectual; because it may give new ground for
the malice of some of them to work upon; and because you are angry with
me for doing so.  But how, as I said in my former, could I sit down in
quiet, when I knew how uneasy their implacableness made you?--But I will
tear myself from the subject; for I see I shall be warm again--and
displease you--and there is not one thing in the world that I would do,
however agreeable to myself, if I thought it would disoblige you; nor any
one that I would omit to do, if I knew it would give you pleasure.  And
indeed, my dear half-severe friend, I will try if I cannot avoid the
fault as willingly as I would the rebuke.

For this reason, I forbear saying any thing on so nice a subject as your
letter to your sister.  It must be right, because you think it so--and if
it be taken as it ought, that will show you that it is.  But if it beget
insults and revilings, as it is but too likely, I find you don't intend
to let me know it.

You were always so ready to accuse yourself for other people's faults,
and to suspect your own conduct rather than the judgment of your
relations, that I have often told you I cannot imitate you in this.  It
is not a necessary point of belief with me, that all people in years are
therefore wise; or that all young people are therefore rash and
headstrong: it may be generally the case, as far as I know: and possibly
it may be so in the case of my mother and her girl: but I will venture
to say that it has not yet appeared to be so between the principals of
Harlowe-place and their second daughter.

You are for excusing them beforehand for their expected cruelty, as not
knowing what you have suffered, nor how ill you are: they have heard of
the former, and are not sorry for it: of the latter they have been told,
and I have most reason to know how they have taken it--but I shall be far
from avoiding the fault, and as surely shall incur the rebuke, if I say
any more upon this subject.  I will therefore only add at present, That
your reasonings in their behalf show you to be all excellence; their
returns to you that they are all----Do, my dear, let me end with a little
bit of spiteful justice--but you won't, I know--so I have done, quite
done, however reluctantly: yet if you think of the word I would have
said, don't doubt the justice of it, and fill up the blank with it.

You intimate that were I actually married, and Mr. Hickman to desire it,
you would think of obliging me with a visit on the occasion; and that,
perhaps, when with me, it would be difficult for you to remove far from
me.

Lord, my dear, what a stress do you seem to lay upon Mr. Hickman's
desiring it!--To be sure he does and would of all things desire to have
you near us, and with us, if we might be so favoured--policy, as well as
veneration for you, would undoubtedly make the man, if not a fool, desire
this.  But let me tell you, that if Mr. Hickman, after marriage, should
pretend to dispute with me my friendships, as I hope I am not quite a
fool, I should let him know how far his own quiet was concerned in such
an impertinence; especially if they were such friendships as were
contracted before I knew him.

I know I always differed from you on this subject: for you think more
highly of a husband's prerogative than most people do of the royal one.
These notions, my dear, from a person of your sense and judgment, are no
way advantageous to us; inasmuch as they justify the assuming sex in
their insolence; when hardly one out of ten of them, their opportunities
considered, deserves any prerogative at all.  Look through all the
families we know; and we shall not find one-third of them have half the
sense of their wives.  And yet these are to be vested with prerogatives!
And a woman of twice their sense has nothing to do but hear, tremble, and
obey--and for conscience-sake too, I warrant!

But Mr. Hickman and I may perhaps have a little discourse upon these
sorts of subjects, before I suffer him to talk of the day: and then I
shall let him know what he has to trust to; as he will me, if he be a
sincere man, what he pretends to expect from me.  But let me tell you, my
dear, that it is more in your power than, perhaps, you think it, to
hasten the day so much pressed for by my mother, as well as wished for by
you--for the very day that you can assure me that you are in a tolerable
state of health, and have discharged your doctor and apothecary, at their
own motions, on that account--some day in a month from that desirable
news shall be it.  So, my dear, make haste and be well, and then this
matter will be brought to effect in a manner more agreeable to your Anna
Howe than it otherwise ever can.

I sent this day, by a particular hand, to the Misses Montague, your
letter of just reprobation of the greatest profligate in the kingdom; and
hope I shall not have done amiss that I transcribe some of the paragraphs
of your letter of the 23d, and send them with it, as you at first
intended should be done.

You are, it seems, (and that too much for your health,) employed in
writing.  I hope it is in penning down the particulars of your tragical
story.  And my mother has put me in mind to press you to it, with a view
that one day, if it might be published under feigned names, it would be
as much use as honour to the sex.  My mother says she cannot help
admiring you for the propriety of your resentment of the wretch; and she
would be extremely glad to have her advice of penning your sad story
complied with.  And then, she says, your noble conduct throughout your
trials and calamities will afford not only a shining example to your sex,
but at the same time, (those calamities befalling SUCH a person,) a
fearful warning to the inconsiderate young creatures of it.

On Monday we shall set out on our journey; and I hope to be back in a
fortnight, and on my return will have one pull more with my mother for a
London journey: and, if the pretence must be the buying of clothes, the
principal motive will be that of seeing once more my dear friend, while I
can say I have not finally given consent to the change of a visiter into
a relation, and so can call myself MY OWN, as well as

Your
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER LV

MISS HOWE, TO THE TWO MISSES MONTAGUE
SAT. JULY 29.


DEAR LADIES,

I have not bee wanting to use all my interest with my beloved friend, to
induce her to forgive and be reconciled to your kinsman, (though he has
so ill deserved it;) and have even repeated my earnest advice to her on
this head.  This repetition, and the waiting for her answer, having taken
up time, have bee the cause that I could not sooner do myself the honour
of writing to you on this subject.

You will see, by the enclosed, her immovable resolution, grounded on
noble and high-souled motives, which I cannot but regret and applaud at
the same time: applaud, for the justice of her determination, which will
confirm all your worthy house in the opinion you had conceived of her
unequalled merit; and regret, because I have but too much reason to
apprehend, as well by that, as by the report of a gentleman just come
from her, that she is in a declining way, as to her health, that her
thoughts are very differently employed than on a continuance here.

The enclosed letter she thought fit to send to me unsealed, that, after
I had perused it, I might forward it to you: and this is the reason it is
superscribed by myself, and sealed with my seal.  It is very full and
peremptory; but as she had been pleased, in a letter to me, dated the 23d
instant, (as soon as she could hold a pen,) to give me more ample reasons
why she could not comply with your pressing requests, as well as mine, I
will transcribe some of the passages in that letter, which will give one
of the wickedest men in the world, (if he sees them,) reason to think
himself one of the most unhappy, in the loss of so incomparable a wife as
he might have gloried in, had he not been so superlatively wicked.  These
are the passages.


[See, for these passages, Miss Harlowe's letter, No. XLI. of this volume,
      dated July 23, marked with a turned comma, thus ']

And now, Ladies, you have before you my beloved friend's reasons for her
refusal of a man unworthy of the relation he bears to so many excellent
persons: and I will add, [for I cannot help it,] that the merit and rank
of the person considered, and the vile manner of his proceedings, there
never was a greater villany committed: and since she thinks her first and
only fault cannot be expiated but by death, I pray to God daily, and will
hourly from the moment I shall hear of that sad catastrophe, that He will
be pleased to make him the subject of His vengeance, in some such way, as
that all who know of his perfidious crime, may see the hand of Heaven in
the punishment of it!

You will forgive me, Ladies: I love not mine own soul better than I do
Miss Clarissa Harlowe.  And the distresses she has gone through; the
persecution she suffers from all her friends; the curse she lies under,
for his sake, from her implacable father; her reduced health and
circumstances, from high health and affluence; and that execrable arrest
and confinement, which have deepened all her other calamities, [and which
must be laid at his door, as it was the act of his vile agents, that,
whether from his immediate orders or not, naturally flowed from his
preceding baseness;] the sex dishonoured in the eye of the world, in the
person of one of the greatest ornaments of it; the unmanly methods,
whatever they were, [for I know not all as yet,] by which he compassed
her ruin; all these considerations join to justify my warmth, and my
execrations of a man whom I think excluded by his crimes from the benefit
even of christian forgiveness--and were you to see all she writes, and to
know the admirable talents she is mistress of, you yourselves would join
with me to admire her, and execrate him.

Believe me to be, with a high sense of your merits,

Dear Ladies,
Your most obedient and humble servant,
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER LVI

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 28.


MY DEAREST YOUNG LADY,

I have the consolation to tell you that my son is once again in a hopeful
way, as to his health.  He desires his duty to you.  He is very low and
weak.  And so am I.  But this is the first time that I have been able,
for several days past, to sit up to write, or I would not have been so
long silent.

Your letter to your sister is received and answered.  You have the answer
by this time, I suppose.  I wish it may be to your satisfaction: but am
afraid it will not: for, by Betty Barnes, I find they were in a great
ferment on receiving your's, and much divided whether it should be
answered or not.  They will not yet believe that you are so ill, as [to
my infinite concern] I find you are.  What passed between Miss Harlowe
and Miss Howe has been, as I feared it would be, an aggravation.

I showed Betty two or three passages in your letter to me; and she seemed
moved, and said, She would report them favourably, and would procure me a
visit from Miss Harlowe, if I would promise to show the same to her.  But
I have heard no more of that.

Methinks, I am sorry you refuse the wicked man: but doubt not,
nevertheless, that your motives for doing so are more commendable than my
wishes that you would not.  But as you would be resolved, as I may say,
on life, if you gave way to such a thought; and as I have so much
interest in your recovery; I cannot forbear showing this regard to
myself; and to ask you, If you cannot get over your just resentments?--
But I dare say no more on this subject.

What a dreadful thing indeed was it for my dearest tender young lady to
be arrested in the streets of London!--How does my heart go over again
and again for you, what your's must have suffered at that time!--Yet
this, to such a mind as your's, must be light, compared to what you had
suffered before.

O my dearest Miss Clary, how shall we know what to pray for, when we
pray, but that God's will may be done, and that we may be resigned to it!
--When at nine years old, and afterwards at eleven, you had a dangerous
fever, how incessantly did we grieve, and pray, and put up our vows to
the Throne of Grace, for your recovery!--For all our lives were bound up
in your life--yet now, my dear, as it has proved, [especially if we are
soon to lose you,] what a much more desirable event, both for you and for
us, would it have been, had we then lost you!

A sad thing to say!  But as it is in pure love to you that I say it, and
in full conviction that we are not always fit to be our own choosers, I
hope it may be excusable; and the rather, as the same reflection will
naturally lead both you and me to acquiesce under the
dispensation; since we are assured that nothing happens by chance; and
the greatest good may, for aught we know, be produced from the heaviest
evils.

I am glad you are with such honest people; and that you have all your
effects restored.  How dreadfully have you been used, that one should be
glad of such a poor piece of justice as that!

Your talent at moving the passions is always hinted at; and this Betty of
your sister's never comes near me that she is not full of it.  But, as
you say, whom has it moved, that you wished to move?  Yet, were it not
for this unhappy notion, I am sure your mother would relent.  Forgive me,
my dear Miss Clary; for I must try one way to be convinced if my opinion
be not just.  But I will not tell you what that is, unless it succeeds.
I will try, in pure duty and love to them, as to you.

May Heaven be your support in all your trials, is the constant prayer, my
dearest young lady, of

Your ever affectionate friend and servant,
JUDITH NORTON.



LETTER LVII

MRS. NORTON, TO MRS. HARLOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 28.


HONOURED MADAM,

Being forbid (without leave) to send you any thing I might happen to
receive from my beloved Miss Clary, and so ill, that I cannot attend
you to ask your leave, I give you this trouble, to let you know that I
have received a letter from her; which, I think, I should hereafter be
held inexcusable, as things may happen, if I did not desire permission
to communicate to you, and that as soon as possible.

Applications have been made to the dear young lady from Lord M., from
the two ladies his sisters, and from both his nieces, and from the wicked
man himself, to forgive and marry him.  This, in noble indignation for
the usage she has received from him, she has absolutely refused.  And
perhaps, Madam, if you and the honoured family should be of opinion that
to comply with their wishes is now the properest measure that can be
taken, the circumstances of things may require your authority or advice,
to induce her to change her mind.

I have reason to believe that one motive for her refusal is her full
conviction that she shall not long be a trouble to any body; and so she
would not give a husband a right to interfere with her family, in
relation to the estate her grandfather devised to her.  But of this,
however, I have not the least intimation from her.  Nor would she, I dare
say, mention it as a reason, having still stronger reasons, from his vile
treatment of her, to refuse him.

The letter I have received will show how truly penitent the dear creature
is; and, if I have your permission, I will send it sealed up, with a copy
of mine, to which it is an answer.  But as I resolve upon this step
without her knowledge, [and indeed I do,] I will not acquaint her with
it, unless it be attended with desirable effects: because, otherwise,
besides making me incur her displeasure, it might quite break her already
half-broken heart.  I am,

Honoured Madam,
Your dutiful and ever-obliged servant,
JUDITH NORTON.



LETTER LVIII

MRS. HARLOWE, TO MRS. JUDITH NORTON
SUNDAY, JULY 30.


We all know your virtuous prudence, worthy woman: we all do.  But your
partiality to this your rash favourite is likewise known.  And we are no
less acquainted with the unhappy body's power of painting her distresses
so as to pierce a stone.

Every one is of opinion that the dear naughty creature is working about
to be forgiven and received: and for this reason it is that Betty has
been forbidden, [not by me, you may be assured!] to mention any more of
her letters; for she did speak to my Bella of some moving passages you
read to her.

This will convince you that nothing will be heard in her favour.  To what
purpose then should I mention any thing about her?--But you may be sure
that I will, if I can have but one second.  However, that is not at all
likely, until we see what the consequences of her crime will be: And who
can tell that?--She may--How can I speak it, and my once darling daughter
unmarried?--She may be with child!--This would perpetuate her stain.  Her
brother may come to some harm; which God forbid!--One child's ruin, I
hope, will not be followed by another's murder!

As to her grief, and her present misery, whatever it be, she must bear
with it; and it must be short of what I hourly bear for her!  Indeed I am
afraid nothing but her being at the last extremity of all will make her
father, and her uncles, and her other friends, forgive her.

The easy pardon perverse children meet with, when they have done the
rashest and most rebellious thing they can do, is the reason (as is
pleaded to us every day) that so may follow their example. They depend
upon the indulgent weakness of their parents' tempers, and, in that
dependence, harden their own hearts: and a little humiliation, when they
have brought themselves into the foretold misery, is to be a sufficient
atonement for the greatest perverseness.

But for such a child as this [I mention what others hourly say, but what
I must sorrowfully subscribe to] to lay plots and stratagems to deceive
her parents as well as herself! and to run away with a libertine!  Can
there be any atonement for her crime?  And is she not answerable to God,
to us, to you, and to all the world who knew her, for the abuse of such
talents as she has abused?

You say her heart is half-broken: Is it to be wondered at?  Was not her
sin committed equally against warning and the light of her own knowledge?

That he would now marry her, or that she would refuse him, if she
believed him in earnest, as she has circumstanced herself, is not at all
probable; and were I inclined to believe it, nobody else here would.  He
values not his relations; and would deceive them as soon as any others:
his aversion to marriage he has always openly declared; and still
occasionally declares it.  But, if he be now in earnest, which every one
who knows him must doubt, which do you think (hating us too as he
professes to hate and despise us all) would be most eligible here, To
hear of her death, or of her marriage to such a vile man?

To all of us, yet, I cannot say!  For, O my good Mrs. Norton, you know
what a mother's tenderness for the child of her heart would make her
choose, notwithstanding all that child's faults, rather than lose her
for ever!

But I must sail with the tide; my own judgment also joining with the
general resentment; or I should make the unhappiness of the more worthy
still greater, [my dear Mr. Harlowe's particularly;] which is already
more than enough to make them unhappy for the remainder of their days.
This I know; if I were to oppose the rest, our son would fly out to find
this libertine; and who could tell what would be the issue of that with
such a man of violence and blood as that Lovelace is known to be?

All I can expect to prevail for her is, that in a week, or so, Mr. Brand
may be sent up to inquire privately about her present state and way of
life, and to see she is not altogether destitute: for nothing she writes
herself will be regarded.

Her father indeed has, at her earnest request, withdrawn the curse,
which, in a passion, he laid upon her, at her first wicked flight from
us.  But Miss Howe, [it is a sad thing, Mrs. Norton, to suffer so many
ways at once,] had made matters so difficult by her undue liberties with
us all, as well by speech in all companies, as by letters written to my
Bella, that we could hardly prevail upon him to hear her letter read.

These liberties of Miss Howe with us; the general cry against us abroad
wherever we are spoken of; and the visible, and not seldom audible,
disrespectfulness, which high and low treat us with to our faces, as we
go to and from church, and even at church, (for no where else have we the
heart to go,) as if none of us had been regarded but upon her account;
and as if she were innocent, we all in fault; are constant aggravations,
you must needs think, to the whole family.

She has made my lot heavy, I am sure, that was far from being light
before!--To tell you truth, I am enjoined not to receive any thing of
her's, from any hand, without leave.  Should I therefore gratify my
yearnings after her, so far as to receive privately the letter you
mention, what would the case be, but to torment myself, without being
able to do her good?--And were it to be known--Mr. Harlowe is so
passionate--And should it throw his gout into his stomach, as her rash
flight did--Indeed, indeed, I am very unhappy!--For, O my good woman,
she is my child still!--But unless it were more in my power--Yet do I
long to see the letter--you say it tells of her present way and
circumstances.  The poor child, who ought to be in possession of
thousands!--And will!--For her father will be a faithful steward for
her.--But it must be in his own way, and at his own time.

And is she really ill?--so very ill?--But she ought to sorrow--she has
given a double measure of it.

But does she really believe she shall not long trouble us?--But, O my
Norton!--She must, she will, long trouble us--For can she think her
death, if we should be deprived of her, will put an end to our
afflictions?--Can it be thought that the fall of such a child will not
be regretted by us to the last hour of our lives?

But, in the letter you have, does she, without reserve, express her
contrition?  Has she in it no reflecting hints?  Does she not aim at
extenuations?--If I were to see it, will it not shock me so much, that
my apparent grief may expose me to harshnesses?--Can it be contrived--

But to what purpose?--Don't send it--I charge you don't--I dare not see
it--

Yet--

But alas!--

Oh! forgive the almost distracted mother!  You can.--You know how to
allow for all this--so I will let it go.--I will not write over again
this part of my letter.

But I choose not to know more of her than is communicated to us all--
no more than I dare own I have seen--and what some of them may rather
communicate to me, than receive from me: and this for the sake of my
outward quiet: although my inward peace suffers more and more by the
compelled reserve.


***


I was forced to break off.  But I will now try to conclude my long
letter.

I am sorry you are ill.  But if you were well, I could not, for your own
sake, wish you to go up, as Betty tells us you long to do.  If you went,
nothing would be minded that came from you.  As they already think you
too partial in her favour, your going up would confirm it, and do
yourself prejudice, and her no good.  And as every body values you here,
I advise you not to interest yourself too warmly in her favour,
especially before my Bella's Betty, till I can let you know a proper
time.  Yet to forbid you to love the dear naughty creature, who can?  O
my Norton! you must love her!--And so must I!

I send you five guineas, to help you in your present illness, and your
son's; for it must have lain heavy upon you.  What a sad, sad thing, my
dear good woman, that all your pains, and all my pains, for eighteen or
nineteen years together, have, in so few months, been rendered thus
deplorably vain!  Yet I must be always your friend, and pity you, for the
very reason that I myself deserve every one's pity.

Perhaps I may find an opportunity to pay you a visit, as in your illness;
and then may weep over the letter you mention with you.  But, for the
future, write nothing to me about the poor girl that you think may not be
communicated to us all.

And I charge you, as you value my friendship, as you wish my peace, not
to say any thing of a letter you have from me, either to the naughty one,
or to any body else.  It was with some little relief (the occasion given)
to write to you, who must, in so particular a manner, share my
affliction.  A mother, Mrs. Norton, cannot forget her child, though that
child could abandon her mother; and, in so doing, run away with all her
mother's comforts!--As I truly say is the case of

Your unhappy friend,
CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.



LETTER LIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MRS. JUDITH NORTON
SAT. JULY 29.


I congratulate you, my dear Mrs. Norton, with all my heart, on your son's
recovery; which I pray to God, with all your own health, to perfect.

I write in some hurry, being apprehensive of the sequence of the hints
you give of some method you propose to try in my favour [with my
relations, I presume, you mean]: but you will not tell me what, you say,
if it prove unsuccessful.

Now I must beg of you that you will not take any step in my favour, with
which you do not first acquaint me.

I have but one request to make to them, besides what is contained in my
letter to my sister; and I would not, methinks, for the sake of their own
future peace of mind, that they should be teased so by your well-meant
kindness, and that of Miss Howe, as to be put upon denying me that.  And
why should more be asked for me than I can partake of?  More than is
absolutely necessary for my own peace?

You suppose I should have my sister's answer to my letter by the time
your's reached my hand.  I have it: and a severe one, a very severe one,
it is.  Yet, considering my fault in their eyes, and the provocations I
am to suppose they so newly had from my dear Miss Howe, I am to look upon
it as a favour that it was answered at all.  I will send you a copy of it
soon; as also of mine, to which it is an answer.

I have reason to be very thankful that my father has withdrawn that heavy
malediction, which affected me so much--A parent's curse, my dear Mrs.
Norton!  What child could die in peace under a parent's curse? so
literally fulfilled too as this has been in what relates to this life!

My heart is too full to touch upon the particulars of my sister's letter.
I can make but one atonement for my fault.  May that be accepted!  And
may it soon be forgotten, by every dear relation, that there was such an
unhappy daughter, sister, or niece, as Clarissa Harlowe!

My cousin Morden was one of those who was so earnest in prayer for my
recovery, at nine and eleven years of age, as you mention.  My sister
thinks he will be one of those who wish I never had had a being.  But
pray, when he does come, let me hear of it with the first.

You think that, were it not for that unhappy notion of my moving talent,
my mother would relent.  What would I give to see her once more, and,
although unknown to her, to kiss but the hem of her garment!

Could I have thought that the last time I saw her would have been the
last, with what difficulty should I have been torn from her embraced
feet!--And when, screened behind the yew-hedge on the 5th of April last,*
I saw my father, and my uncle Antony, and my brother and sister, how
little did I think that that would be the last time I should ever see
them; and, in so short a space, that so many dreadful evils would befal
me!


* See Vol. II. Letter XXXVI.


But I can write nothing but what must give you trouble.  I will
therefore, after repeating my desire that you will not intercede for me
but with my previous consent, conclude with the assurance, that I am, and
ever will be,

Your most affectionate and dutiful
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LX

MISS AR. HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S OF FRIDAY, JULY 21, LETTER XLV. OF THIS VOLUME.]
THURSDAY, JULY 27.


O MY UNHAPPY LOST SISTER!

What a miserable hand have you made of your romantic and giddy
expedition!--I pity you at my heart.

You may well grieve and repent!--Lovelace has left you!--In what way or
circumstances you know best.

I wish your conduct had made your case more pitiable.  But 'tis your own
seeking!

God help you!--For you have not a friend will look upon you!--Poor,
wicked, undone creature!--Fallen, as you are, against warning, against
expostulation, against duty!

But it signifies nothing to reproach you.  I weep over you.

My poor mother!--Your rashness and folly have made her more miserable
than you can be.--Yet she has besought my father to grant your request.

My uncles joined with her: for they thought there was a little more
modesty in your letter than in the letters of your pert advocate: and my
father is pleased to give me leave to write; but only these words for
him, and no more: 'That he withdraws the curse he laid upon you, at the
first hearing of your wicked flight, so far as it is in his power to do
it; and hopes that your present punishment may be all that you will meet
with.  For the rest, he will never own you, nor forgive you; and grieves
he has such a daughter in the world.'

All this, and more you have deserved from him, and from all of us: But
what have you done to this abandoned libertine, to deserve what you have
met with at his hands?--I fear, I fear, Sister!--But no more!--A blessed
four months' work have you made of it.

My brother is now at Edinburgh, sent thither by my father, [though he
knows not this to be the motive,] that he may not meet your triumphant
deluder.

We are told he would be glad to marry you: But why, then, did he abandon
you?  He had kept you till he was tired of you, no question; and it is
not likely he would wish to have you but upon the terms you have already
without all doubt been his.

You ought to advise your friend Miss Howe to concern herself less in your
matters than she does, except she could do it with more decency.  She has
written three letters to me: very insolent ones.  Your favourer, poor
Mrs. Norton, thinks you know nothing of the pert creature's writing.  I
hope you don't.  But then the more impertinent the writer.  But,
believing the fond woman, I sat down the more readily to answer your
letter; and I write with less severity, I can tell you, than otherwise I
should have done, if I had answered it all.

Monday last was your birth-day.  Think, poor ungrateful wretch, as you
are! how we all used to keep it; and you will not wonder to be told, that
we ran away from one another that day.  But God give you true penitence,
if you have it not already! and it will be true, if it be equal to the
shame and the sorrow you have given us all.

Your afflicted sister,
ARABELLA HARLOWE.


Your cousin Morden is every day expected in England.  He, as well as
      others of the family, when he comes to hear what a blessed piece of
      work you have made of it, will wish you never had had a being.



LETTER LXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 30.


You have given me great pleasure, my dearest friend, by your approbation
of my reasonings, and of my resolution founded upon them, never to have
Mr. Lovelace.  This approbation is so right a thing, give me leave to
say, from the nature of the case, and from the strict honour and true
dignity of mind, which I always admired in my Anna Howe, that I could
hardly tell to what, but to my evil destiny, which of late would not let
me please any body, to attribute the advice you gave me to the contrary.

But let not the ill state of my health, and what that may naturally tend
to, sadden you.  I have told you, that I will not run away from life, nor
avoid the means that may continue it, if God see fit: and if He do not,
who shall repine at His will!

If it shall be found that I have not acted unworthy of your love, and of
my own character, in my greater trials, that will be a happiness to both
on reflection.

The shock which you so earnestly advise me to try to get above, was a
shock, the greatest that I could receive.  But, my dear, as it was not
occasioned by my fault, I hope I am already got above it.  I hope I am.

I am more grieved (at times however) for others, than for myself.  And so
I ought.  For as to myself, I cannot but reflect that I have had an
escape, rather than a loss, in missing Mr. Lovelace for a husband--even
had he not committed the vilest of all outrages.

Let any one, who knows my story, collect his character from his behaviour
to me before that outrage; and then judge whether it was in the least
probable that such a man should make me happy.  But to collect his
character from his principles with regard to the sex in general, and from
his enterprizes upon many of them, and to consider the cruelty of his
nature, and the sportiveness of his invention, together with the high
opinion he has of himself, it will not be doubted that a wife of his must
have been miserable; and more miserable if she loved him, than she could
have been were she to be indifferent to him.

A twelvemonth might very probably have put a period to my life; situated
as I was with my friends; persecuted and harassed as I had been by my
brother and sister; and my very heart torn in pieces by the wilful, and
(as it is now apparent) premeditated suspenses of the man, whose
gratitude I wished to engage, and whose protection I was the more
entitled to expect, as he had robbed me of every other, and reduced me to
an absolute dependence upon himself.  Indeed I once thought that it was
all his view to bring me to this, (as he hated my family;) and
uncomfortable enough for me, if it had been all.

Can it be thought, my dear, that my heart was not more than half broken
(happy as I was before I knew Mr. Lovelace) by a grievous change in my
circumstances?--Indeed it was.  Nor perhaps was the wicked violence
wanting to have cut short, though possibly not so very short, a life that
he has sported with.

Had I been his but a month, he must have possessed the estate on which my
relations had set their hearts; the more to their regret, as they hated
him as much as he hated them.

Have I not reason, these things considered, to think myself happier
without Mr. Lovelace than I could have been with him?--My will too
unviolated; and very little, nay, not any thing as to him, to reproach
myself with?

But with my relations it is otherwise.  They indeed deserve to be pitied.
They are, and no doubt will long be, unhappy.

To judge of their resentments, and of their conduct, we must put
ourselves in their situation:--and while they think me more in fault than
themselves, (whether my favourers are of their opinion, or not,) and have
a right to judge for themselves, they ought to have great allowances made
for them; my parents especially.  They stand at least self-acquitted,
(that I cannot;) and the rather, as they can recollect, to their pain,
their past indulgencies to me, and their unquestionable love.

Your partiality for the friend you so much value will not easily let you
come into this way of thinking. But only, my dear, be pleased to consider
the matter in the following light.

'Here was my MOTHER, one of the most prudent persons of her sex, married
into a family, not perhaps so happily tempered as herself; but every one
of which she had the address, for a great while, absolutely to govern as
she pleased by her directing wisdom, at the same time that they knew not
but her prescriptions were the dictates of their own hearts; such a sweet
heart had she of conquering by seeming to yield.  Think, my dear, what
must be the pride and the pleasure of such a mother, that in my brother
she could give a son to the family she distinguished with her love, not
unworthy of their wishes; a daughter, in my sister, of whom she had no
reason to be ashamed; and in me a second daughter, whom every body
complimented (such was their partial favour to me) as being the still
more immediate likeness of herself?  How, self pleased, could she smile
round upon a family she had so blessed!  What compliments were paid her
upon the example she had given us, which was followed with such hopeful
effects!  With what a noble confidence could she look upon her dear Mr.
Harlowe, as a person made happy by her; and be delighted to think that
nothing but purity streamed from a fountain so pure!

'Now, my dear, reverse, as I daily do, this charming prospect.  See my
dear mother, sorrowing in her closet; endeavouring to suppress her sorrow
at her table, and in those retirements where sorrow was before a
stranger: hanging down her pensive head: smiles no more beaming over her
benign aspect: her virtue made to suffer for faults she could not be
guilty of: her patience continually tried (because she has more of it
than any other) with repetitions of faults she is as much wounded by, as
those can be from whom she so often hears of them: taking to herself, as
the fountain-head, a taint which only had infected one of the
under-currents: afraid to open her lips (were she willing) in my favour,
lest it should be thought she has any bias in her own mind to failings
that never could have been suspected in her: robbed of that pleasing
merit, which the mother of well-nurtured and hopeful children may glory
in: every one who visits her, or is visited by her, by dumb show, and
looks that mean more than words can express, condoling where they used to
congratulate: the affected silence wounding: the compassionating look
reminding: the half-suppressed sigh in them, calling up deeper sighs from
her; and their averted eyes, while they endeavour to restrain the rising
tear, provoking tears from her, that will not be restrained.

'When I consider these things, and, added to these, the pangs that tear
in pieces the stronger heart of my FATHER, because it cannot relieve
itself by those which carry the torturing grief to the eyes of softer
spirits: the overboiling tumults of my impatient and uncontroulable
BROTHER, piqued to the heart of his honour, in the fall of a sister, in
whom he once gloried: the pride of an ELDER SISTER, who had given
unwilling way to the honours paid over her head to one born after her:
and, lastly, the dishonour I have brought upon two UNCLES, who each
contended which should most favour their then happy niece:--When, I say,
I reflect upon my fault in these strong, yet just lights, what room can
there be to censure any body but my unhappy self? and how much reason
have I to say, If I justify myself, mine own heart shall condemn me: if I
say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse?'

Here permit me to lay down my pen for a few moments.


***


You are very obliging to me, intentionally, I know, when you tell me, it
is in my power to hasten the day of Mr. Hickman's happiness.  But yet,
give me leave to say, that I admire this kind assurance less than any
other paragraph of your letter.

In the first place you know it is not in my power to say when I can
dismiss my physician; and you should not put the celebration of a
marriage intended by yourself, and so desirable to your mother, upon so
precarious an issue.  Nor will I accept of a compliment, which must mean
a slight to her.

If any thing could give me a relish for life, after what I have suffered,
it would be the hopes of the continuance of the more than sisterly love,
which has, for years, uninterruptedly bound us together as one mind.--And
why, my dear, should you defer giving (by a tie still stronger) another
friend to one who has so few?

I am glad you have sent my letter to Miss Montague.  I hope I shall hear
no more of this unhappy man.

I had begun the particulars of my tragical story: but it is so painful a
task, and I have so many more important things to do, and, as I
apprehend, so little time to do them in, that, could I avoid it, I would
go no farther in it.

Then, to this hour, I know not by what means several of his machinations
to ruin me were brought about; so that some material parts of my sad
story must be defective, if I were to sit down to write it.  But I have
been thinking of a way that will answer the end wished for by your mother
and you full as well, perhaps better.

Mr. Lovelace, it seems, had communicated to his friend Mr. Belford all
that has passed between himself and me, as he went on.  Mr. Belford has
not been able to deny it.  So that (as we may observe by the way) a poor
young creature, whose indiscretion has given a libertine power over her,
has a reason she little thinks of, to regret her folly; since these
wretches, who have no more honour in one point than in another, scruple
not to make her weakness a part of their triumph to their brother
libertines.

I have nothing to apprehend of this sort, if I have the justice done me
in his letters which Mr. Belford assures me I have: and therefore the
particulars of my story, and the base arts of this vile man, will, I
think, be best collected from those very letters of his, (if Mr. Belford
can be prevailed upon to communicate them;) to which I dare appeal with
the same truth and fervour as he did, who says--O that one would hear me!
and that mine adversary had written a book!--Surely, I would take it upon
my shoulders, and bind it to me as a crown! for I covered not my
transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom.

There is one way which may be fallen upon to induce Mr. Belford to
communicate these letters; since he seems to have (and declares he always
had) a sincere abhorrence of his friend's baseness to me: but that,
you'll say, when you hear it, is a strange one.  Nevertheless, I am very
earnest upon it at present.

It is no other than this:

I think to make Mr. Belford the executor of my last will: [don't be
surprised:] and with this view I permit his visits with the less scruple:
and every time I see him, from his concern for me, am more and more
inclined to do so.  If I hold in the same mind, and if he accept the
trust, and will communicate the materials in his power, those, joined
with what you can furnish, will answer the whole end.

I know you will start at my notion of such an executor; but pray, my
dear, consider, in my present circumstances, what I can do better, as I
am empowered to make a will, and have considerable matters in my own
disposal.

Your mother, I am sure, would not consent that you should take this
office upon you.  It might subject Mr. Hickman to the insults of that
violent man.  Mrs. Norton cannot, for several reasons respecting herself.
My brother looks upon what I ought to have as his right.  My uncle
Harlowe is already one of my trustees (as my cousin Morden is the other)
for the estate my grandfather left me: but you see I could not get from
my own family the few guineas I left behind me at Harlowe-place; and my
uncle Antony once threatened to have my grandfather's will controverted.
My father!--To be sure, my dear, I could not expect that my father would
do all I wish should be done: and a will to be executed by a father for a
daughter, (parts of it, perhaps, absolutely against his own judgment,)
carries somewhat daring and prescriptive in the very word.

If indeed my cousin Morden were to come in time, and would undertake this
trust--but even him it might subject to hazards; and the more, as he is a
man of great spirit; and as the other man (of as great) looks upon me
(unprotected as I have long been) as his property.

Now Mr. Belford, as I have already mentioned, knows every thing that has
passed.  He is a man of spirit, and, it seems, as fearless as the other,
with more humane qualities.  You don't know, my dear, what instances of
sincere humanity this Mr. Belford has shown, not only on occasion of the
cruel arrest, but on several occasions since.  And Mrs. Lovick has taken
pains to inquire after his general character; and hears a very good one
of him, his justice and generosity in all his concerns of meum and tuum,
as they are called: he has a knowledge of law-matters; and has two
executorships upon him at this time, in the discharge of which his honour
is unquestioned.

All these reasons have already in a manner determined me to ask this
favour of him; although it will have an odd sound with it to make an
intimate friend of Mr. Lovelace my executor.

This is certain: my brother will be more acquiescent a great deal in such
a case with the articles of the will, as he will see that it will be to
no purpose to controvert some of them, which else, I dare say, he would
controvert, or persuade my other friends to do so.  And who would involve
an executor in a law-suit, if they could help it?--Which would be the
case, if any body were left, whom my brother could hope to awe or
controul; since my father has possession of all, and is absolutely
governed by him.  [Angry spirits, my dear, as I have often seen, will be
overcome by more angry ones, as well as sometimes be disarmed by the
meek.]--Nor would I wish, you may believe, to have effects torn out of my
father's hands: while Mr. Belford, who is a man of fortune, (and a good
economist in his own affairs) would have no interest but to do justice.

Then he exceedingly presses for some occasion to show his readiness to
serve me: and he would be able to manage his violent friend, over whom he
has more influence than any other person.

But after all, I know not if it were not more eligible by far, that my
story, and myself too, should be forgotten as soon as possible.  And of
this I shall have the less doubt, if the character of my parents [you
will forgive my, my dear] cannot be guarded against the unqualified
bitterness which, from your affectionate zeal for me, has sometimes
mingled with your ink--a point that ought, and (I insist upon it) must be
well considered of, if any thing be done which your mother and you are
desirous to have done.  The generality of the world is too apt to oppose
a duty--and general duties, my dear, ought not to be weakened by the
justification of a single person, however unhappily circumstanced.

My father has been so good as to take off the heavy malediction he laid
me under.  I must be now solicitous for a last blessing; and that is all
I shall presume to petition for.  My sister's letter, communicating this
grace, is a severe one: but as she writes to me as from every body, how
could I expect it to be otherwise?

If you set out to-morrow, this letter cannot reach you till you get to
your aunt Harman's.  I shall therefore direct it thither, as Mr. Hickman
instructed me.

I hope you will have met with no inconveniencies in your little journey
and voyage; and that you will have found in good health all whom you wish
to see well.

If your relations in the little island join their solicitations with your
mother's commands, to have your nuptials celebrated before you leave
them, let me beg of you, my dear, to oblige them.  How grateful will the
notification that you have done so be to

Your ever faithful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER LXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HARLOWE
SATURDAY, JULY 29.


I repine not, my dear Sister, at the severity you have been pleased to
express in the letter you favoured me with; because that severity was
accompanied with the grace I had petitioned for; and because the
reproaches of mine own heart are stronger than any other person's
reproaches can be: and yet I am not half so culpable as I am imagined
to be: as would be allowed, if all the circumstances of my unhappy story
were known: and which I shall be ready to communicate to Mrs. Norton, if
she be commissioned to inquire into them; or to you, my Sister, if you
can have patience to hear them.

I remembered with a bleeding heart what day the 24th of July was.  I began
with the eve of it; and I passed the day itself--as it was fit I should
pass it.  Nor have I any comfort to give to my dear and ever-honoured
father and mother, and to you, my Bella, but this--that, as it was the
first unhappy anniversary of my birth, in all probability, it will be the
last.

Believe me, my dear Sister, I say not this merely to move compassion, but
from the best grounds.  And as, on that account, I think it of the
highest importance to my peace of mind to obtain one farther favour, I
would choose to owe to your intercession, as my sister, the leave I beg,
to address half a dozen lines (with the hope of having them answered as I
wish) to either or to both my honoured parents, to beg their last
blessing.

This blessing is all the favour I have now to ask: it is all I dare to
ask: yet am I afraid to rush at once, though by letter, into the presence
of either.  And if I did not ask it, it might seem to be owing to
stubbornness and want of duty, when my heart is all humility
penitence.  Only, be so good as to embolden me to attempt this task--
write but this one line, 'Clary Harlowe, you are at liberty to write as
you desire.'  This will be enough--and shall, to my last hour, be
acknowledged as the greatest favour, by

Your truly penitent sister,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LXIII

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, JULY 31.


MY DEAREST YOUNG LADY,

I must indeed own that I took the liberty to write to your mother,
offering to enclose to her, if she gave me leave, your's of the 24th: by
which I thought she would see what was the state of your mind; what the
nature of your last troubles was from the wicked arrest; what the people
are where you lodge; what proposals were made you from Lord M.'s family;
also your sincere penitence; and how much Miss Howe's writing to them, in
the terms she wrote in, disturbed you--but, as you have taken the matter
into your own hands, and forbid me, in your last, to act in this nice
affair unknown to you, I am glad the letter was not required of me--and
indeed it may be better that the matter lie wholly between you and them;
since my affection for you is thought to proceed from partiality.

They would choose, no doubt, that you should owe to themselves, and not
to my humble mediation, the favour for which you so earnestly sue, and of
which I would not have your despair: for I will venture to assure you,
that your mother is ready to take the first opportunity to show her
maternal tenderness: and this I gather from several hints I am not at
liberty to explain myself upon.

I long to be with you, now I am better, and now my son is in a fair way
of recovery.  But is it not hard to have it signified to me that at
present it will not be taken well if I go?--I suppose, while the
reconciliation, which I hope will take place, is negotiating by means of
the correspondence so newly opened between you and your sister.  But if
you will have me come, I will rely on my good intentions, and risque
every one's displeasure.

Mr. Brand has business in town; to solicit for a benefice which it is
expected the incumbent will be obliged to quit for a better preferment:
and, when there, he is to inquire privately after your way of life, and
of your health.

He is a very officious young man; and, but that your uncle Harlowe (who
has chosen him for this errand) regards him as an oracle, your mother had
rather any body else had been sent.

He is one of those puzzling, over-doing gentlemen, who think they see
farther into matters than any body else, and are fond of discovered
mysteries where there are none, in order to be thought shrewd men.

I can't say I like him, either in the pulpit or out of it: I, who had a
father one of the soundest divines and finest scholars in the kingdom;
who never made an ostentation of what he knew; but loved and venerated he
gospel he taught, preferring it to all other learning: to be obliged to
hear a young man depart from his text as soon as he has named it, (so
contrary, too, to the example set him by his learned and worthy
principal,* when his health permits him to preach;) and throwing about,
to a christian and country audience, scraps of Latin and Greek from the
Pagan Classics; and not always brought in with great propriety neither,
(if I am to judge by the only way given me to judge of them, by the
English he puts them into;) is an indication of something wrong, either
in his head, or his heart, or both; for, otherwise, his education at the
university must have taught him better.  You know, my dear Miss Clary,
the honour I have for the cloth: it is owing to that, that I say what I
do.


* Dr. Lewen.


I know not the day he is to set out; and, as his inquiries are to be
private, be pleased to take no notice of this intelligence.  I have no
doubt that your life and conversation are such as may defy the scrutinies
of the most officious inquirer.

I am just now told that you have written a second letter to your sister:
but am afraid they will wait for Mr. Brand's report, before farther
favour will be obtained from them; for they will not yet believe you are
so ill as I fear you are.

But you would soon find that you have an indulgent mother, were she at
liberty to act according to her own inclination.  And this gives me great
hopes that all will end well at last: for I verily think you are in the
right way to a reconciliation.  God give a blessing to it, and restore
your health, and you to all your friends, prays

Your ever affectionate,
JUDITH NORTON.


Your mother has privately sent me five guineas: she is pleased to say to
      help us in the illness we have been afflicted with; but, more
      likely, that I might send them to you, as from myself.  I hope,
      therefore, I may send them up, with ten more I have still left.

I will send you word of Mr. Morden's arrival, the moment I know it.

If agreeable, I should be glad to know all that passes between your
      relations and you.



LETTER LXIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MRS. NORTON
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 2.


You give me, my dear Mrs. Norton, great pleasure in hearing of your's and
your son's recovery.  May you continue, for many, many years, a blessing
to each other!

You tell me that you did actually write to my mother, offering to enclose
to her mine of the 24th past: and you say it was not required of you.
That is to say, although you cover it over as gently as you could, that
your offer was rejected; which makes it evident that no plea could be
made for me.  Yet, you bid me hope, that the grace I sued for would, in
time, be granted.

The grace I then sued for was indeed granted; but you are afraid, you
say, that they will wait for Mr. Brand's report, before favour will be
obtained in return to the second letter which I wrote to my sister; and
you add, that I have an indulgent mother, were she at liberty to act
according to her own inclination; and that all will end well at last.

But what, my dear Mrs. Norton, what is the grace I sue for in my second
letter?--It is not that they will receive me into favour--If they think
it is, they are mistaken.  I do not, I cannot expect that.  Nor, as I
have often said, should I, if they would receive me, bear to live in the
eye of those dear friends whom I have so grievously offended.  'Tis only,
simply, a blessing I ask: a blessing to die with; not to lie with.--Do
they know that? and do they know that their unkindness will perhaps
shorten my date; so that their favour, if ever they intend to grant it,
may come too late?

Once more, I desire you not to think of coming to me.  I have no
uneasiness now, but what proceeds from the apprehension of seeing a man I
would not see for the world, if I could help it; and from the severity of
my nearest and dearest relations: a severity entirely their own, I doubt;
for you tell me that my brother is at Edinburgh!  You would therefore
heighten their severity, and  make yourself enemies besides, if you were
to come to me--Don't you see you would?

Mr. Brand may come, if he will.  He is a clergyman, and must mean well;
or I must think so, let him say of me what he will.  All my fear is,
that, as he knows I am in disgrace with a family whose esteem he is
desirous to cultivate; and as he has obligations to my uncle Harlowe and
to my father; he will be but a languid acquitter--not that I am afraid of
what he, or any body in the world, can hear as to my conduct.  You may,
my revered and dear friend, indeed you may, rest satisfied, that that is
such as may warrant me to challenge the inquiries of the most officious.

I will send you copies of what passes, as you desire, when I have an
answer to my second letter.  I now begin to wish that I had taken the
heart to write to my father himself; or to my mother, at least; instead
of to my sister; and yet I doubt my poor mother can do nothing for me of
herself.  A strong confederacy, my dear Mrs. Norton, (a strong
confederacy indeed!) against a poor girl, their daughter, sister, niece!
--My brother, perhaps, got it renewed before he left them.  He needed
not--his work is done; and more than done.

Don't afflict yourself about money-matters on my account.  I have no
occasion for money.  I am glad my mother was so considerate to you.  I
was in pain for you on the same subject.  But Heaven will not permit so
good a woman to want the humble blessings she was always satisfied with.
I wish every individual of our family were but as rich as you!--O my
mamma Norton, you are rich! you are rich indeed!--the true riches are
such content as you are blessed with.--And I hope in God that I am in the
way to be rich too.

Adieu, my ever-indulgent friend.  You say all will be at last happy--and
I know it will--I confide that it will, with as much security, as you
may, that I will be, to my last hour,

Your ever grateful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER LXV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 1.


I am most confoundedly chagrined and disappointed: for here, on Saturday,
arrived a messenger from Miss Howe, with a letter to my cousins;* which I
knew nothing of till yesterday; when Lady Sarah and Lady Betty were
procured to be here, to sit in judgment upon it with the old Peer, and my
two kinswomen.  And never was bear so miserably baited as thy poor
friend!--And for what?--why for the cruelty of Miss Harlowe: For have I
committed any new offence? and would I not have re-instated myself in her
favour upon her own terms, if I could?  And is it fair to punish me for
what is my misfortune, and not my fault?  Such event-judging fools as I
have for my relations!  I am ashamed of them all.


* See Letter LV. of this volume.


In that of Miss Howe was enclosed one to her from Miss Harlowe,* to be
transmitted to my cousins, containing a final rejection of me; and that
in very vehement and positive terms; yet she pretends that, in this
rejection, she is governed more by principle than passion--[D----d lie,
as ever was told!] and, as a proof that she is, says, that she can
forgive me, and does, on this one condition, that I will never molest her
more--the whole letter so written as to make herself more admired, me
more detested.


* See Letter XLI. of this volume.


What we have been told of the agitations and workings, and sighings and
sobbings, of the French prophets among us formerly, was nothing at all to
the scene exhibited by these maudlin souls, at the reading of these
letters; and of some affecting passages extracted from another of my fair
implacable's to Miss Howe--such lamentations for the loss of so charming
a relation! such applaudings of her virtue, of her exaltedness of soul
and sentiment! such menaces of disinherisons!  I, not needing their
reproaches to be stung to the heart with my own reflections, and with the
rage of disappointment; and as sincerely as any of them admiring her--
'What the devil,' cried I, 'is all this for?  Is it not enough to be
despised and rejected?  Can I help her implacable spirit?  Would I not
repair the evils I have made her suffer?'--Then was I ready to curse them
all, herself and Miss Howe for company: and heartily swore that she
should yet be mine.

I now swear it over again to thee--'Were her death to follow in a week
after the knot is tied, by the Lord of Heaven, it shall be tied, and she
shall die a Lovelace!'--Tell her so, if thou wilt: but, at the same time,
tell her that I have no view to her fortune; and that I will solemnly
resign that, and all pretensions to it, in whose favour she pleases, if
she resign life issueless.--I am not so low-minded a wretch, as to be
guilty of any sordid views to her fortune.--Let her judge for herself,
then, whether it be not for her honour rather to leave this world a
Lovelace than a Harlowe.

But do not think I will entirely rest a cause so near my heart upon an
advocate who so much more admires his client's adversary than his client.
I will go to town, in a few days, in order to throw myself at her feet:
and I will carry with me, or have at hand, a resolute, well-prepared
parson; and the ceremony shall be performed, let what will be the
consequence.

But if she will permit me to attend her for this purpose at either of the
churches mentioned in the license, (which she has by her, and, thank
Heaven! has not returned me with my letters,) then will I not disturb
her; but meet her at the altar in either church, and will engage to bring
my two cousins to attend her, and even Lady Sarah and Lady Betty; and my
Lord M. in person shall give her to me.

Or, if it be still more agreeable to her, I will undertake that either
Lady Sarah or Lady Betty, or both, shall go to town and attend her down;
and the marriage shall be celebrated in their presence, and in that of
Lord M., either here or elsewhere, at her own choice.

Do not play me booty, Belford; but sincerely and warmly use all the
eloquence thou art master of, to prevail upon her to choose one of these
three methods.  One of them she must choose--by my soul, she must.

Here is Charlotte tapping at my closet-door for admittance.  What a devil
wants Charlotte?--I will hear no more reproaches!--Come in, girl!


***


My cousin Charlotte, finding me writing on with too much earnestness to
have any regard for politeness to her, and guessing at my subject,
besought me to let her see what I had written.

I obliged her.  And she was so highly pleased on seeing me so much in
earnest, that she offered, and I accepted her offer, to write a letter to
Miss Harlowe; with permission to treat me in it as she thought fit.

I shall enclose a copy of her letter.

When she had written it, she brought it to me, with apologies for the
freedom taken with me in it: but I excused it; and she was ready to give
me a kiss for it; telling her I had hopes of success from it; and that I
thought she had luckily hit it off.

Every one approves of it, as well as I; and is pleased with me for so
patiently submitting to be abused, and undertaken for.--If it do not
succeed, all the blame will be thrown upon the dear creature's
perverseness: her charitable or forgiving disposition, about which she
makes such a parade, will be justly questioned; and the piety, of which
she is now in full possession, will be transferred to me.

Putting, therefore, my whole confidence in this letter, I postpone all my
other alternatives, as also my going to town, till my empress send an
answer to my cousin Montague.

But if she persist, and will not promise to take time to consider of the
matter, thou mayest communicate to her what I had written, as above,
before my cousin entered; and, if she be still perverse, assure her, that
I must and will see her--but this with all honour, all humility: and, if
I cannot move her in my favour, I will then go abroad, and perhaps never
more return to England.

I am sorry thou art, at this critical time, so busily employed, as thou
informest me thou art, in thy Watford affairs, and in preparing to do
Belton justice.  If thou wantest my assistance in the latter, command me.
Though engrossed by this perverse beauty, and plagued as I am, I will
obey thy first summons.

I have great dependence upon thy zeal and thy friendship: hasten back to
her, therefore, and resume a task so interesting to me, that it is
equally the subject of my dreams, as of my waking hours.



LETTER LXVI

MISS MONTAGUE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 1.


DEAREST MADAM,

All our family is deeply sensible of the injuries you have received at
the hands of one of it, whom you only can render in any manner worthy of
the relation he stands in to us all: and if, as an act of mercy and
charity, the greatest your pious heart can show, you will be pleased to
look over his past wickedness and ingratitude, and suffer yourself to be
our kinswoman, you will make us the happiest family in the world: and I
can engage, that Lord M., and Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty
Lawrance, and my sister, who are all admirers of your virtues, and of
your nobleness of mind, will for ever love and reverence you, and do
every thing in all their powers to make you amends for what you have
suffered from Mr. Lovelace.  This, Madam, we should not, however, dare
to petition for, were we not assured, that Mr. Lovelace is most sincerely
sorry for his past vileness to you; and that he will, on his knees, beg
your pardon, and vow eternal love and honour to you.

Wherefore, my dearest cousin, [how you will charm us all, if this
agreeable style may be permitted!] for all our sakes, for his soul's
sake, [you must, I am sure, be so good a lady, as to wish to save a
soul!] and allow me to say, for your own fame's sake, condescend to our
joint request: and if, by way of encouragement, you will but say you will
be glad to see, and to be as much known personally, as you are by fame,
to Charlotte Montague, I will, in two days' time from the receipt of your
permission, wait upon you with or without my sister, and receive your
farther commands.

Let me, our dearest cousin, [we cannot deny ourselves the pleasure of
calling you so; let me] entreat you to give me your permission for my
journey to London; and put it in the power of Lord M. and of the ladies
of the family, to make you what reparation they can make you, for the
injuries which a person of the greatest merit in the world has received
from one of the most audacious men in it; and you will infinitely oblige
us all; and particularly her, who repeatedly presumes to style herself

Your affectionate cousin, and obliged servant,
CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE.



LETTER LXVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY MORNING, AUG. 3.  SIX O'CLOCK.


I have been so much employed in my own and Belton's affairs, that I could
not come to town till last night; having contented myself with sending to
Mrs. Lovick, to know, from time to time, the state of the lady's health;
of which I received but very indifferent accounts, owing, in a great
measure, to letters or advices brought her from her implacable family.

I have now completed my own affairs; and, next week, shall go to Epsom,
to endeavour to put Belton's sister into possession of his own house for
him: after which, I shall devote myself wholly to your service, and to
that of the lady.

I was admitted to her presence last night; and found her visibly altered
for the worse.  When I went home, I had your letter of Tuesday last put
into my hands.  Let me tell thee, Lovelace, that I insist upon the
performance of thy engagement to me that thou wilt not personally molest
her.


[Mr. Belford dates again on Thursday morning, ten o'clock; and gives an
      account of a conversation which he had just held with the Lady upon
      the subject of Miss Montague's letter to her, preceding, and upon
      Mr. Lovelace's alternatives, as mentioned in Letter LXV., which Mr.
      Belford supported with the utmost earnestness.  But, as the result
      of this conversation will be found in the subsequent letters, Mr.
      Belford's pleas and arguments in favour of his friend, and the
      Lady's answers, are omitted.]



LETTER LXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS MONTAGUE
THURSDAY, AUG. 3.


DEAR MADAM,

I am infinitely obliged to you for your kind and condescending letter.  A
letter, however, which heightens my regrets, as it gives me a new
instance of what a happy creature I might have been in an alliance so
much approved of by such worthy ladies; and which, on their accounts, and
on that of Lord M. would have been so reputable to myself, and was once
so desirable.

But indeed, indeed, Madam, my heart sincerely repulses the man who,
descended from such a family, could be guilty, first, of such
premeditated violence as he has been guilty of; and, as he knows, farther
intended me, on the night previous to the day he set out for Berkshire;
and, next, pretending to spirit, could be so mean as to wish to lift into
that family a person he was capable of abasing into a companionship with
the most abandoned of her sex.

Allow me then, dear Madam, to declare with favour, that I think I never
could be ranked with the ladies of a family so splendid and so noble, if,
by vowing love and honour at the altar to such a violator, I could
sanctify, as I may say, his unprecedented and elaborate wickedness.

Permit me, however, to make one request to my good Lord M., and to Lady
Betty, and Lady Sarah, and to your kind self, and your sister.--It is,
that you will all be pleased to join your authority and interests to
prevail upon Mr. Lovelace not to molest me farther.

Be pleased to tell him, that, if I am designed for life, it will be very
cruel in him to attempt to hunt me out of it; for I am determined never
to see him more, if I can help it.  The more cruel, because he knows that
I have nobody to defend me from him: nor do I wish to engage any body to
his hurt, or to their own.

If I am, on the other hand, destined for death, it will be no less cruel,
if he will not permit me to die in peace--since a peaceable and happy end
I wish him; indeed I do.

Every worldly good attend you, dear Madam, and every branch of the
honourable family, is the wish of one, whose misfortune it is that she is
obliged to disclaim any other title than that of,

Dear Madam,
Your and their obliged and faithful servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LXIX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON, AUG. 3.


I am just now agreeably surprised by the following letter, delivered into
my hands by a messenger from the lady.  The letter she mentions, as
enclosed,* I have returned, without taking a copy of it.  The contents of
it will soon be communicated to you, I presume, by other hands.  They are
an absolute rejection of thee--Poor Lovelace!


* See Miss Harlowe's Letter, No. LXVIII.


TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
AUG. 3.


SIR,

You have frequently offered to oblige me in any thing that shall be
within your power: and I have such an opinion of you, as to be willing to
hope that, at the times you made these offers, you meant more than mere
compliment.

I have therefore two requests to make to you: the first I will now
mention; the other, if this shall be complied with, otherwise not.

It behoves me to leave behind me such an account as may clear up my
conduct to several of my friends who will not at present concern
themselves about me: and Miss Howe, and her mother, are very solicitous
that I will do so.

I am apprehensive that I shall not have time to do this; and you will not
wonder that I have less and less inclination to set about such a painful
task; especially as I find myself unable to look back with patience on
what I have suffered; and shall be too much discomposed by the
retrospection, were I obliged to make it, to proceed with the requisite
temper in a task of still greater importance which I have before me.

It is very evident to me that your wicked friend has given you, from time
to time, a circumstantial account of all his behaviour to me, and devices
against me; and you have more than once assured me, that he has done my
character all the justice I could wish for, both by writing and speech.

Now, Sir, if I may have a fair, a faithful specimen from his letters or
accounts to you, written upon some of the most interesting occasions, I
shall be able to judge whether there will or will not be a necessity for
me, for my honour's sake, to enter upon the solicited task.

You may be assured, from  my enclosed answer to the letter which Miss
Montague has honoured me with, (and which you'll be pleased to return me
as soon as read,) that it is impossible for me ever to think of your
friend in the way I am importuned to think of him: he cannot therefore
receive any detriment from the requested specimen: and I give you my
honour, that no use shall be made of it to his prejudice, in law, or
otherwise.  And that it may not, after I am no more, I assure you, that
it is a main part of my view that the passages you shall oblige me with
shall be always in your own power, and not in that of any other person.

If, Sir, you think fit to comply with my request, the passages I would
wish to be transcribed (making neither better nor worse of the matter)
are those which he has written to you, on or about the 7th and 8th of
June, when I was alarmed by the wicked pretence of a fire; and what he
has written from Sunday, June 11, to the 19th.  And in doing this you
will much oblige

Your humble servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.


***


Now, Lovelace, since there are no hopes for thee of her returning
favour--since some praise may lie for thy ingenuousness, having neither
offered [as more diminutive-minded libertines would have done] to
palliate thy crimes, by aspersing the lady, or her sex--since she may be
made easier by it--since thou must fare better from thine own pen than
from her's--and, finally, since thy actions have manifested that thy
letters are not the most guilty part of what she knows of thee--I see not
why I may not oblige her, upon her honour, and under the restrictions,
and for the reasons she has given; and this without breach of the
confidence due to friendly communication; especially, as I might have
added, since thou gloriest in thy pen and in thy wickedness, and canst
not be ashamed.

But, be this as it may, she will be obliged before thy remonstrances or
clamours against it can come; so, pr'ythee now, make the best of it, and
rave not; except for the sake of a pretence against me, and to exercise
thy talent of execration:--and, if thou likest to do so for these
reasons, rave and welcome.

I long to know what the second request is: but this I know, that if it be
any thing less than cutting thy throat, or endangering my own neck, I
will certainly comply; and be proud of having it in my power to oblige
her.

And now I am actually going to be busy in the extracts.



LETTER LXX

MR. BELFORD, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
AUG. 3, 4.


MADAM,

You have engaged me to communicate to you, upon my honour, (making
neither better nor worse of the matter,) what Mr. Lovelace has written to
me, in relation to yourself, in the period preceding your going to
Hampstead, and in that between the 11th and 19th of June:  and you assure
me you have no view in this request, but to see if it be necessary for
you, from the account he gives, to touch upon the painful subjects
yourself, for the sake of your own character.

Your commands, Madam, are of a very delicate nature, as they may seem to
affect the secrets of private friendship: but as I know you are not
capable of a view, the motives to which you will not own; and as I think
the communication may do some credit to my unhappy friend's character, as
an ingenuous man; though his actions by the most excellent woman in the
world have lost him all title to that of an honourable one; I obey you
with the greater cheerfulness.


[He then proceeds with his extracts, and concludes them with an address
      to her in his friend's behalf, in the following words:]

'And now, Madam, I have fulfilled your commands; and, I hope, have not
dis-served my friend with you; since you will hereby see the justice he
does to your virtue in every line he writes.  He does the same in all his
letters, though to his own condemnation: and, give me leave to add, that
if this ever-amiable sufferer can think it in any manner consistent with
her honour to receive his vows on the altar, on his truly penitent turn
of mind, I have not the least doubt but that he will make her the best
and tenderest of husbands.  What obligation will not the admirable lady
hereby lay upon all his noble family, who so greatly admire her! and, I
will presume to say, upon her own, when the unhappy family aversion
(which certainly has been carried to an unreasonable height against him)
shall be got over, and a general reconciliation takes place!  For who is
it that would not give these two admirable persons to each other, were
not his morals an objection?

However this be, I would humbly refer to you, Madam, whether, as you will
be mistress of very delicate particulars from me his friend, you should
not in honour think yourself concerned to pass them by, as if you had
never seen them; and not to take advantage of the communication, not even
in an argument, as some perhaps might lie, with respect to the
premeditated design he seems to have had, not against you, as you; but as
against the sex; over whom (I am sorry I can bear witness myself) it is
the villanous aim of all libertines to triumph: and I would not, if any
misunderstanding should arise between him and me, give him room to
reproach me that his losing of you, and (through his usage of you) of his
own friends, were owing to what perhaps he would call breach of trust,
were he to judge rather by the event than by my intention.

I am, Madam, with the most profound veneration,

Your most faithful humble servant,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER LXXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, AUG. 4.


SIR,

I hold myself extremely obliged to you for your communications.  I will
make no use of them, that you shall have reason to reproach either
yourself or me with.  I wanted no new lights to make the unhappy man's
premeditated baseness to me unquestionable, as my answer to Miss
Montague's letter might convince you.*


* See Letter LXVIII. of this volume.


I must own, in his favour, that he has observed some decency in his
accounts to you of the most indecent and shocking actions.  And if all
his strangely-communicative narrations are equally decent, nothing will
be rendered criminally odious by them, but the vile heart that could
meditate such contrivances as were much stronger evidences of his
inhumanity than of his wit: since men of very contemptible parts and
understanding may succeed in the vilest attempts, if they can once bring
themselves to trample on the sanctions which bind man to man; and sooner
upon an innocent person than upon any other; because such a one is apt to
judge of the integrity of others' hearts by its own.

I find I have had great reason to think myself obliged to your intention
in the whole progress of my sufferings.  It is, however, impossible, Sir,
to miss the natural inference on this occasion that lies against his
predetermined baseness.  But I say the less, because you shall not think
I borrow, from what you have communicated, aggravations that are not
needed.

And now, Sir, that I may spare you the trouble of offering any future
arguments in his favour, let me tell you that I have weighed every thing
thoroughly--all that human vanity could suggest--all that a desirable
reconciliation with my friends, and the kind respects of his own, could
bid me hope for--the enjoyment of Miss Howe's friendship, the dearest
consideration to me, now, of all the worldly ones--all these I have
weighed: and the result is, and was before you favoured me with these
communications, that I have more satisfaction in the hope that, in one
month, there will be an end of all with me, than in the most agreeable
things that could happen from an alliance with Mr. Lovelace, although I
were to be assured he would make the best and tenderest of husbands.  But
as to the rest; if, satisfied with the evils he has brought upon me, he
will forbear all further persecutions of me, I will, to my last hour,
wish him good: although he hath overwhelmed the fatherless, and digged a
pit for his friend: fatherless may she well be called, and motherless
too, who has been denied all paternal protection, and motherly
forgiveness.


***


And now, Sir, acknowledging gratefully your favour in the extracts, I
come to the second request I had to make you; which requires a great deal
of courage to mention; and which courage nothing but a great deal of
distress, and a very destitute condition, can give.  But, if improper, I
can but be denied; and dare to say I shall be at least excused.  Thus,
then, I preface it:

'You see, Sir, that I am thrown absolutely into the hands of strangers,
who, although as kind and compassionate as strangers can be wished to be,
are, nevertheless, persons from whom I cannot expect any thing more than
pity and good wishes; nor can my memory receive from them any more
protection than my person, if either should need it.

'If then I request it, of the only person possessed of materials that
will enable him to do my character justice;

'And who has courage, independence, and ability to oblige me;

'To be the protector or my memory, as I may say;

'And to be my executor; and to see some of my dying requests performed;

'And if I leave it to him to do the whole in his own way, manner, and
time; consulting, however, in requisite cases, my dear Miss Howe;

'I presume to hope that this my second request may be granted.'

And if it may, these satisfactions will accrue to me from the favour done
me, and the office undertaken:

'It will be an honour to my memory, with all those who shall know that I
was so well satisfied of my innocence, that, having not time to write my
own story, I could intrust it to the relation which the destroyer of my
fame and fortunes has given of it.

'I shall not be apprehensive of involving any one in my troubles or
hazards by this task, either with my own  relations, or with your friend;
having dispositions to make which perhaps my own friends will not be so
well pleased with as it were to be wished they would be;' as I intend not
unreasonable ones; but you know, Sir, where self is judge, matters, even
with good people, will not always be rightly judged of.

'I shall also be freed from the pain of recollecting things that my soul
is vexed at; and this at a time when its tumults should be allayed, in
order to make way for the most important preparation.

'And who knows, but that Mr. Belford, who already, from a principle of
humanity, is touched at my misfortunes, when he comes to revolve the
whole story, placed before him in one strong light: and when he shall
have the catastrophe likewise before him; and shall become in a manner
interested in it; who knows, but that, from a still higher principle, he
may so regulate his future actions as to find his own reward in the
everlasting welfare which is wished him by his

'Obliged servant,
'CLARISSA HARLOWE?'



LETTER LXXII

MR. BELFORD, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 4.


MADAM,

I am so sensible of the honour done me in your's of this day, that I
would not delay for one moment the answering of it.  I hope you will live
to see many happy years; and to be your own executrix in those points
which your heart is most set upon.  But, in the case of survivorship, I
most cheerfully accept of the sacred office you are pleased to offer me;
and you may absolutely rely upon my fidelity, and, if possible, upon the
literal performance of every article you shall enjoin me.

The effect of the kind wish you conclude with, had been my concern ever
since I have been admitted to the honour of your conversation.  It shall
be my whole endeavour that it be not vain.  The happiness of approaching
you, which this trust, as I presume, will give me frequent opportunities
of doing, must necessarily promote the desired end: since it will be
impossible to be a witness of your piety, equanimity, and other virtues,
and not aspire to emulate you.  All I beg is, that you will not suffer
any future candidate, or event, to displace me; unless some new instances
of unworthiness appear either in the morals or behaviour of,

Madam,
Your most obliged and faithful servant,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER LXXIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY NIGHT, AUG. 4.


I have actually delivered to the lady the extracts she requested me to
give her from your letters.  I do assure you that I have made the very
best of the matter for you, not that conscience, but that friendship,
could oblige me to make.  I have changed or omitted some free words.  The
warm description of her person in the fire-scene, as I may call it, I
have omitted.  I have told her, that I have done justice to you, in the
justice you have done to her by her unexampled virtue.  But take the very
words which I wrote to her immediately following the extracts:


'And now, Madam,'--See the paragraph marked with an inverted comma
[thus '], Letter LXX. of this volume.


The lady is extremely uneasy at the thoughts of your attempting to visit
her.  For Heaven's sake, (your word being given,) and for pity's sake,
(for she is really in a very weak and languishing way,) let me beg of you
not to think of it.

Yesterday afternoon she received a cruel letter (as Mrs. Lovick supposes
it to be, by the effect it had upon her) from her sister, in answer to
one written last Saturday, entreating a blessing and forgiveness from her
parents.

She acknowledges, that if the same decency and justice are observed in
all of your letters, as in the extracts I have obliged her with, (as I
have assured her they are,) she shall think herself freed from the
necessity of writing her own story: and this is an advantage to thee
which thou oughtest to thank me for.

But what thinkest thou is the second request she had to make to me? no
other than that I would be her executor!--Her motives will appear before
thee in proper time; and then, I dare to answer, will be satisfactory.

You cannot imagine how proud I am of this trust.  I am afraid I shall too
soon come into the execution of it.  As she is always writing, what a
melancholy pleasure will be the perusal and disposition of her papers
afford me! such a sweetness of temper, so much patience and resignation,
as she seems to be mistress of; yet writing of and in the midst of
present distresses! how much more lively and affecting, for that reason,
must her style be; her mind tortured by the pangs of uncertainty, (the
events then hidden in the womb of fate,) than the dry, narrative,
unanimated style of persons, relating difficulties and dangers
surmounted; the relater perfectly at ease; and if himself unmoved by his
own story, not likely greatly to affect the reader!


***


SATURDAY MORNING, AUG. 5.

I am just returned from visiting the lady, and thanking her in person for
the honour she has done me; and assuring her, if called to the sacred
trust, of the utmost fidelity and exactness.

I found her very ill.  I took notice of it.  She said, she had received a
second hard-hearted letter from her sister; and she had been writing a
letter (and that on her knees) directly to her mother; which, before, she
had not had the courage to do.  It was for a last blessing and
forgiveness.   No wonder, she said, that I saw her affected.  Now that I
had accepted of the last charitable office for her, (for which, as well
as for complying with her other request, she thanked me,) I should one
day have all these letters before me: and could she have a kind one in
return to that she had been now writing, to counterbalance the unkind one
she had from her sister, she might be induced to show me both together--
otherwise, for her sister's sake, it were no matter how few saw the poor
Bella's letter.

I knew she would be displeased if I had censured the cruelty of her
relations: I therefore only said, that surely she must have enemies, who
hoped to find their account in keeping up the resentments of her friends
against her.

It may be so, Mr. Belford, said she: the unhappy never want enemies.  One
fault, wilfully committed, authorizes the imputation of many more.  Where
the ear is opened to accusations, accusers will not be wanting; and every
one will officiously come with stories against a disgraced child, where
nothing dare be said in her favour.  I should have been wise in time, and
not have needed to be convinced, by my own misfortunes, of the truth of
what common experience daily demonstrates.  Mr. Lovelace's baseness, my
father's inflexibility, my sister's reproaches, are the natural
consequences of my own rashness; so I must make the best of my hard lot.
Only, as these consequences follow one another so closely, while they are
new, how can I help being anew affected?

I asked, if a letter written by myself, by her doctor or apothecary, to
any of her friends, representing her low state of health, and great
humility, would be acceptable? or if a journey to any of them would be of
service, I would gladly undertake it in person, and strictly conform to
her orders, to whomsoever she should direct me to apply.

She earnestly desired that nothing of this sort might be attempted,
especially without her knowledge and consent.  Miss Howe, she said, had
done harm by her kindly-intended zeal; and if there were room to expect
favour by mediation, she had ready at hand a kind friend, Mrs. Norton,
who for piety and prudence had few equals; and who would let slip no
opportunity to endeavour to do her service.

I let her know that I was going out of town till Monday: she wished me
pleasure; and said she should be glad to see me on my return.

Adieu!



LETTER LXXIV

MISS AR. HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S OF JULY 29.  SEE LETTER LXII. OF THIS VOLUME.]
THURSDAY MORN. AUG. 3.


SISTER CLARY,

I wish you would not trouble me with any more of your letters.  You had
always a knack at writing; and depended upon making every one do what you
would when you wrote.  But your wit and folly have undone you.  And now,
as all naughty creatures do, when they can't help themselves, you come
begging and praying, and make others as uneasy as yourself.

When I wrote last to you, I expected that I should not be at rest.

And so you'd creep on, by little and little, till you'll want to be
received again.

But you only hope for forgiveness and a blessing, you say.  A blessing
for what, sister Clary?  Think for what!--However, I read your letter to
my father and mother.

I won't tell you what my father said--one who has the true sense you
boast to have of your misdeeds, may guess, without my telling you, what a
justly-incensed father would say on such an occasion.

My poor mother--O wretch! what has not your ungrateful folly cost my poor
mother!--Had you been less a darling, you would not, perhaps, have been
so graceless: But I never in my life saw a cockered favourite come to
good.

My heart is full, and I can't help writing my mind; for your crimes have
disgraced us all; and I am afraid and ashamed to go to any public or
private assembly or diversion: And why?--I need not say why, when your
actions are the subjects either of the open talk, or of the affronting
whispers, of both sexes at all such places.

Upon the whole, I am sorry I have no more comfort to send you: but I find
nobody willing to forgive you.

I don't know what time may do for you; and when it is seen that your
penitence is not owing more to disappointment than to true conviction:
for it is too probable, Miss Clary, that, had not your feather-headed
villain abandoned you, we should have heard nothing of these moving
supplications; nor of any thing but defiances from him, and a guilt
gloried in from you.  And this is every one's opinion, as well as that of

Your afflicted sister,
ARABELLA HARLOWE.


I send this by a particular hand, who undertakes to give it you or leave
      it for you by to-morrow night.



LETTER LXXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO HER MOTHER
SATURDAY, AUG. 5


HONOURED MADAM,

No self-convicted criminal ever approached her angry and just judge with
greater awe, nor with a truer contrition, than I do you by these lines.

Indeed I must say, that if the latter of my humble prayer had not
respected my future welfare, I had not dared to take this liberty.  But
my heart is set upon it, as upon a thing next to God Almighty's
forgiveness necessary for me.

Had my happy sister known my distresses, she would not have wrung my
heart, as she has done, by a severity, which I must needs think unkind
and unsisterly.

But complaint of any unkindness from her belongs not to me: yet, as she
is pleased to write that it must be seen that my penitence is less owing
to disappointment than to true conviction, permit me, Madam, to insist
upon it, that, if such a plea can be allowed me, I an actually entitled
to the blessing I sue for; since my humble prayer is founded upon a true
and unfeigned repentance: and this you will the readier believe, if the
creature who never, to the best of her remembrance, told her mamma a
wilful falsehood may be credited, when she declares, as she does, in the
most solemn manner, that she met the seducer with a determination not to
go off with him: that the rash step was owing more to compulsion than to
infatuation: and that her heart was so little in it, that she repented
and grieved from the moment she found herself in his power; and for every
moment after, for several weeks before she had any cause from him to
apprehend the usage she met with.

Wherefore, on my knees, my ever-honoured Mamma, (for on my knees I write
this letter,) I do most humbly beg your blessing: say but, in so many
words, (I ask you not, Madam, to call me your daughter,)--Lost, unhappy
wretch, I forgive you! and may God bless you!--This is all!  Let me, on
a blessed scrap of paper, but see one sentence to this effect, under your
dear hand, that I may hold it to my heart in my most trying struggles,
and I shall think it a passport to Heaven.  And, if I do not too much
presume, and it were WE instead of I, and both your honoured names
subjoined to it, I should then have nothing more to wish.  Then would I
say, 'Great and merciful God! thou seest here in this paper thy poor
unworthy creature absolved by her justly-offended parents: Oh! join, for
my Redeemer's sake, thy all-gracious fiat, and receive a repentant sinner
to the arms of thy mercy!'

I can conjure you, Madam, by no subject of motherly tenderness, that will
not, in the opinion of my severe censurers, (before whom this humble
address must appear,) add to reproach: let me therefore, for God's sake,
prevail upon you to pronounce me blest and forgiven, since you will
thereby sprinkle comfort through the last hours of

Your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LXXVI

MISS MONTAGUE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S OF AUG. 3.  SEE LETTER LXVIII. OF THIS VOLUME.]
MONDAY, AUG. 7.


DEAR MADAM,

We were all of opinion, before your letter came, that Mr. Lovelace was
utterly unworthy of you, and deserved condign punishment, rather than to
be blessed with such a wife: and hoped far more from your kind
consideration for us, than any we supposed you could have for so base an
injurer.  For we were all determined to love you, and admire you, let his
behaviour to you be what it would.

But, after your letter, what can be said?

I am, however, commanded to write in all the subscribing names, to let
you know how greatly your sufferings have affected us: to tell you that
my Lord M. has forbid him ever more to enter the doors of the apartments
where he shall be: and as you labour under the unhappy effects of your
friends' displeasure, which may subject you to inconveniencies, his
Lordship, and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, beg of you to accept, for your
life, or, at least, till you are admitted to enjoy your own estate, of
one hundred guineas per quarter, which will be regularly brought you by
an especial hand, and of the enclosed bank-bill for a beginning.  And do
not, dearest Madam, we all beseech you, do not think you are beholden
(for this token of Lord M.'s, and Lady Sarah's, and Lady Betty's, love to
you) to the friends of this vile man; for he has not one friend left
among us.

We each of us desire to be favoured with a place in your esteem; and to
be considered upon the same foot of relationship as if what once was so
much our pleasure to hope would be, had been.  And it shall be our united
prayer, that you may recover health and spirits, and live to see many
happy years: and, since this wretch can no more be pleaded for, that,
when he is gone abroad, as he now is preparing to do, we may be permitted
the honour of a personal acquaintance with a lady who has no equal.
These are the earnest requests, dearest young lady, of

Your affectionate friends,
and most faithful servants,
M.
SARAH SADLEIR.
ELIZ. LAWRANCE.
CHARL. MONTAGUE.
MARTH. MONTAGUE.


You will break the hearts of the three first-named more particularly, if
       you refuse them your acceptance.  Dearest young lady, punish not
       them for his crimes.  We send by a particular hand, which will
       bring us, we hope, your accepting favour.

Mr. Lovelace writes by the same hand; but he knows nothing of our letter,
       nor we of his: for we shun each other; and one part of the house
       holds us, another him, the remotest from each other.



LETTER LXXVII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. AUG. 23.


I am so disturbed at the contents of Miss Harlowe's answer to my cousin
Charlotte's letter of Tuesday last, (which was given her by the same
fellow that gave me your's,) that I have hardly patience or consideration
enough to weigh what you write.

She had need indeed to cry out for mercy for herself from her friends,
who knows not how to show any!  She is a true daughter of the Harlowes!--
By my soul, Jack, she is a true daughter of the Harlowes!  Yet has she so
many excellencies, that I must love her; and, fool that I am, love her
the more for despising me.

Thou runnest on with thy cursed nonsensical reformado rote, of dying,
dying, dying! and, having once got the word by the end, canst not help
foisting it in at every period!  The devil take me, if I don't think thou
wouldst rather give her poison with thy own hands, rather than she should
recover, and rob thee of the merit of being a conjurer!

But no more of thy cursed knell; thy changes upon death's candlestick
turned bottom-upwards: she'll live to bury me; I see that: for, by my
soul, I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep, nor, what is still worse, love
any woman in the world but her.  Nor care I to look upon a woman now: on
the contrary, I turn my head from every one I meet: except by chance an
eye, an air, a feature, strikes me, resembling her's in some glancing-by
face; and then I cannot forbear looking again: though the second look
recovers me; for there can be nobody like her.

But surely, Belford, the devil's in this woman!  The more I think of her
nonsense and obstinacy, the less patience I have with her.  Is it
possible she can do herself, her family, her friends, so much justice any
other way, as by marrying me?  Were she sure she should live but a day,
she ought to die a wife.  If her christian revenge will not let her wish
to do so for her own sake, ought she not for the sake of her family, and
of her sex, which she pretends sometimes to have so much concern for?
And if no sake is dear enough to move her Harlowe-spirit in my favour,
has she any title to the pity thou so pitifully art always bespeaking for
her?

As to the difference which her letter has made between me and the stupid
family here, [and I must tell thee we are all broke in pieces,] I value
not that of a button.  They are fools to anathematize and curse me, who
can give them ten curses for one, were they to hold it for a day
together.

I have one half of the house to myself; and that the best; for the great
enjoy that least which costs them most: grandeur and use are two things:
the common part is their's; the state part is mine: and here I lord it,
and will lord it, as long as I please; while the two pursy sisters, the
old gouty brother, and the two musty nieces, are stived up in the other
half, and dare not stir for fear of meeting me: whom, (that's the jest
of it,) they have forbidden coming into their apartments, as I have them
into mine.  And so I have them all prisoners, while I range about as I
please.  Pretty dogs and doggesses to quarrel and bark at me, and yet,
whenever I appear, afraid to pop out of their kennels; or, if out before
they see me, at the sight of me run growling in again, with their flapt
ears, their sweeping dewlaps, and their quivering tails curling inwards.

And here, while I am thus worthily waging war with beetles, drones,
wasps, and hornets, and am all on fire with the rage of slighted love,
thou art regaling thyself with phlegm and rock-water, and art going on
with thy reformation-scheme and thy exultations in my misfortunes!

The devil take thee for an insensible dough-baked varlet!  I have no more
patience with thee than with the lady; for thou knowest nothing either of
love or friendship, but art as unworthy of the one, as incapable of the
other; else wouldst thou not rejoice, as thou dost under the grimace of
pity, in my disappointments.

And thou art a pretty fellow, art thou not? to engage to transcribe for
her some parts of my letters written to thee in confidence?  Letters that
thou shouldest sooner have parted with thy cursed tongue, than have owned
that thou ever hadst received such: yet these are now to be communicated
to her!  But I charge thee, and woe be to thee if it be too late! that
thou do not oblige her with a line of mine.

If thou hast done it, the least vengeance I will take is to break through
my honour given to thee not to visit her, as thou wilt have broken
through thine to me, in communicating letters written under the seal of
friendship.

I am now convinced, too sadly for my hopes, by her letter to my cousin
Charlotte, that she is determined never to have me.

Unprecedented wickedness, she calls mine to her.  But how does she know
what love, in its flaming ardour, will stimulate men to do?  How does she
know the requisite distinctions of the words she uses in this case?--To
think the worst, and to be able to make comparisons in these very
delicate situations, must she not be less delicate than I had imagined
her to be?--But she has head that the devil is black; and having a mind
to make one of me, brays together, in the mortar of her wild fancy,
twenty chimney-sweepers, in order to make one sootier than ordinary rise
out of the dirty mass.

But what a whirlwind does she raise in my soul by her proud contempts of
me!  Never, never, was mortal man's pride so mortified!  How does she
sink me, even in my own eyes!--'Her heart sincerely repulses me, she
says, for my MEANNESS!'--Yet she intends to reap the benefit of what she
calls so!--Curse upon her haughtiness, and her meanness, at the same
time!--Her haughtiness to me, and her meanness to her own relations; more
unworthy of kindred with her, than I can be, or I am mean indeed.

Yet who but must admire, who but must adore her; Oh! that cursed, cursed
house!  But for the women of that!--Then their d----d potions!  But for
those, had her unimpaired intellects, and the majesty of her virtue,
saved her, as once it did by her humble eloquence,* another time by her
terrifying menaces against her own life.**


* In the fire-scene, Vol. V. Letter XVI.
** Vol. VI. Letter XXXVI. in the pen-knife-scene.


Yet in both these to find her power over me, and my love for her, and to
hate, to despise, and to refuse me!--She might have done this with some
show of justice, had the last-intended violation been perpetrated:--but
to go away conqueress and triumphant in every light!--Well may she
despise me for suffering her to do so.

She left me low and mean indeed!--And the impression holds with her.--I
could tear my flesh, that I gave her not cause--that I humbled her not
indeed;--or that I staid not in town to attend her motions instead of
Lord M.'s, till I could have exalted myself, by giving to myself a wife
superior to all trial, to all temptation.

I will venture one more letter to her, however; and if that don't do, or
procure me an answer, then will I endeavour to see her, let what will be
the consequence.  If she get out of my way, I will do some noble mischief
to the vixen girl whom she most loves, and then quit the kingdom for
ever.

And now, Jack, since thy hand is in at communicating the contents of
private letters, tell her this, if thou wilt.  And add to it, That if SHE
abandon me, GOD will: and what then will be the fate of

Her
LOVELACE.



LETTER LXXVIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTER LXV. OF THIS VOLUME.]
MONDAY, AUG. 7.


And so you have actually delivered to the fair implacable extracts of
letters written in the confidence of friendship!  Take care--take care,
Belford--I do indeed love you better than I love any man in the world:
but this is a very delicate point.  The matter is grown very serious to
me.  My heart is bent upon having her.  And have her I will, though I
marry her in the agonies of death.

She is very earnest, you say, that I will not offer to molest her.  That,
let me tell her, will absolutely depend upon herself, and the answer she
returns, whether by pen and ink, or the contemptuous one of silence,
which she bestowed upon my last four to her: and I will write it in such
humble, and in such reasonable terms, that, if she be not a true Harlowe,
she shall forgive me.  But as to the executorship which she is for
conferring upon thee--thou shalt not be her executor: let me perish if
thou shalt.--Nor shall she die.  Nobody shall be any thing, nobody shall
dare to be any thing, to her, but I--thy happiness is already too great,
to be admitted daily to her presence; to look upon her, to talk to her,
to hear her talk, while I am forbid to come within view of her window--
What a reprobation is this, of the man who was once more dear to her than
all the men in the world!--And now to be able to look down upon me, while
her exalted head is hid from me among the stars, sometimes with scorn, at
other times with pity; I cannot bear it.

This I tell thee, that if I have not success in my effort by letter, I
will overcome the creeping folly that has found its way to my heart, or I
will tear it out in her presence, and throw it at her's, that she may see
how much more tender than her own that organ is, which she, and you, and
every one else, have taken the liberty to call callous.

Give notice of the people who live back and edge, and on either hand, of
the cursed mother, to remove their best effects, if I am rejected: for
the first vengeance I shall take will be to set fire to that den of
serpents.  Nor will there be any fear of taking them when they are in any
act that has the relish of salvation in it, as Shakspeare says--so that
my revenge, if they perish in the flames I shall light up, will be
complete as to them.



LETTER LXXIX

MR. LOVELACE TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, AUG. 7.


Little as I have reason to expect either your patient ear, or forgiving
heart, yet cannot I forbear to write to you once more, (as a more
pardonable intrusion, perhaps, than a visit would be,) to beg of you to
put it in my power to atone, as far as it is possible to atone, for the
injuries I have done you.

Your angelic purity, and my awakened conscience, are standing records of
your exalted merit, and of my detestable baseness: but your forgiveness
will lay me under an eternal obligation to you.--Forgive me then, my
dearest life, my earthly good, the visible anchor of my future hope!--As
you, (who believe you have something to be forgiven for,) hope for pardon
yourself, forgive me, and consent to meet me, upon your own conditions,
and in whose company you please, at the holy altar, and to give yourself
a title to the most repentant and affectionate heart that ever beat in a
human bosom.

But, perhaps, a time of probation may be required.  It may be impossible
for you, as well from indisposition as doubt, so soon to receive me to
absolute favour as my heart wishes to be received.  In this case, I will
submit to your pleasure; and there shall be no penance which you can
impose that I will not cheerfully undergo, if you will be pleased to give
me hope that, after an expiation, suppose of months, wherein the
regularity of my future life and actions shall convince you of my
reformation, you will at last be mine.

Let me beg then the favour of a few lines, encouraging me in this
conditional hope, if it must not be a still nearer hope, and a more
generous encouragement.

If you refuse me this, you will make me desperate.  But even then I must,
at all events, throw myself at your feet, that I may not charge myself
with the omission of any earnest, any humble effort, to move you in my
favour: for in YOU, Madam, in YOUR forgiveness, are centred my hopes as
to both worlds: since to be reprobated finally by you, will leave me
without expectation of mercy from above!  For I am now awakened enough to
think that to be forgiven by injured innocents is necessary to the Divine
pardon; the Almighty putting into the power of such, (as is reasonable to
believe,) the wretch who causelessly and capitally offends them.  And who
can be entitled to this power, if YOU are not?

Your cause, Madam, in a word, I look upon to be the cause of virtue, and,
as such, the cause of God.  And may I not expect that He will assert it
in the perdition of a man, who has acted by a person of the most spotless
purity as I have done, if you, by rejecting me, show that I have offended
beyond the possibility of forgiveness.

I do most solemnly assure you that no temporal or worldly views induce me
to this earnest address.  I deserve not forgiveness from you.  Nor do my
Lord M. and his sisters from me.  I despise them from my heart for
presuming to imagine that I will be controuled by the prospect of any
benefits in their power to confer.  There is not a person breathing, but
yourself, who shall prescribe to me.  Your whole conduct, Madam, has been
so nobly principled, and your resentments are so admirably just, that you
appear to me even in a divine light; and in an infinitely more amiable
one at the same time than you could have appeared in, had you not
suffered the barbarous wrongs, that now fill my mind with anguish and
horror at my own recollected villany to the most excellent of women.

I repeat, that all I beg for the present is a few lines to guide my
doubtful steps; and, if possible for you so far to condescend, to
encourage me to hope that, if I can justify my present vows by my future
conduct, I may be permitted the honour to style myself,

Eternally your's,
R. LOVELACE.



LETTER LXXX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO LORD M. AND TO THE LADIES OF HIS HOUSE
[IN REPLY TO MISS MONTAGUE'S OF AUG. 7.  SEE LETTER LXXVI. OF THIS VOLUME.]
TUESDAY, AUG. 8.


Excuse me, my good Lord, and my ever-honoured Ladies, from accepting of
your noble quarterly bounty; and allow me to return, with all grateful
acknowledgement, and true humility, the enclosed earnest of your goodness
to me.  Indeed I have no need of the one, and cannot possibly want the
other: but, nevertheless have such a sense of your generous favour, that,
to my last hour, I shall have pleasure in contemplating upon it, and be
proud of the place I hold in the esteem of such venerable persons, to
whom I once had the ambition to hope to be related.

But give me leave to express my concern that you have banished your
kinsman from your presence and favour: since now, perhaps, he will be
under less restraint than ever; and since I in particular, who had hoped
by your influence to remain unmolested for the remainder of my days, may
again be subjected to his persecutions.

He has not, my good Lord, and my dear Ladies, offended against you, as he
has against me; yet you could all very generously intercede for him with
me: and shall I be very improper, if I desire, for my own peace-sake; for
the sake of other poor creatures, who may still be injured by him, if he
be made quite desperate; and for the sake of all your worthy family; that
you will extend to him that forgiveness which you hope for from me? and
this the rather, as I presume to think, that his daring and impetuous
spirit will not be subdued by violent methods; since I have no doubt that
the gratifying of a present passion will be always more prevalent with
him than any future prospects, however unwarrantable the one, or
beneficial the other.

Your resentments on my account are extremely generous, as your goodness
to me is truly noble: but I am not without hope that he will be properly
affected by the evils he has made me suffer; and that, when I am laid low
and forgotten, your whole honourable family will be enabled to rejoice in
his reformation; and see many of those happy years together, which, my
good Lord, and my dear Ladies, you so kindly wish to

Your ever-grateful and obliged
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LXXXI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT, AUG. 10.


You have been informed by Tourville, how much Belton's illness and
affairs have engaged me, as well as Mowbray and him, since my former.
I called at Smith's on Monday, in my way to Epsom.

The lady was gone to chapel: but I had the satisfaction to hear she was
not worse; and left my compliments, and an intimation that I should be
out of town for three or four days.

I refer myself to Tourville, who will let you know the difficulty we had
to drive out this meek mistress, and frugal manager, with her cubs, and
to give the poor fellow's sister possession for him of his own house; he
skulking mean while at an inn at Croydon, too dispirited to appear in his
own cause.

But I must observe that we were probably but just in time to save the
shattered remains of his fortune from this rapacious woman, and her
accomplices: for, as he cannot live long, and she thinks so, we found she
had certainly taken measures to set up a marriage, and keep possession of
all for herself and her sons.

Tourville will tell you how I was forced to chastise the quondam hostler
in her sight, before I could drive him out of the house.  He had the
insolence to lay hands on me: and I made him take but one step from the
top to the bottom of a pair of stairs.  I thought his neck and all his
bones had been broken.  And then, he being carried out neck-and-heels,
Thomasine thought fit to walk out after him.

Charming consequences of keeping; the state we have been so fond of
extolling!--Whatever it may be thought of in strong health, sickness and
declining spirits in the keeper will bring him to see the difference.

She should soon have him, she told a confidant, in the space of six foot
by five; meaning his bed: and then she would let nobody come near him but
whom she pleased.  This hostler-fellow, I suppose, would then have been
his physician; his will ready made for him; and widows' weeds probably
ready provided; who knows, but she to appear in them in his own sight? as
once I knew an instance in a wicked wife; insulting a husband she hated,
when she thought him past recovery: though it gave the man such spirits,
and such a turn, that he got over it, and lived to see her in her coffin,
dressed out in the very weeds she had insulted him in.

So much, for the present, for Belton and his Thomasine.


***


I begin to pity thee heartily, now I see thee in earnest in the fruitless
love thou expressest to this angel of a woman; and the rather, as, say
what thou wilt, it is impossible she should get over her illness, and her
friends' implacableness, of which she has had fresh instances.

I hope thou art not indeed displeased with the extracts I have made from
thy letters for her.  The letting her know the justice thou hast done to
her virtue in them, is so much in favour of thy ingenuousness, (a
quality, let me repeat, that gives thee a superiority over common
libertines,) that I think in my heart I was right; though to any other
woman, and to one who had not known the worst of thee that she could
know, it might have been wrong.

If the end will justify the means, it is plain, that I have done well
with regard to ye both; since I have made her easier, and thee appear in
a better light to her, than otherwise thou wouldst have done.

But if, nevertheless, thou art dissatisfied with my having obliged her in
a point, which I acknowledge to be delicate, let us canvas this matter at
our first meeting: and then I will show thee what the extracts were, and
what connections I gave them in thy favour.

But surely thou dost not pretend to say what I shall, or shall not do, as
to the executorship.

I am my own man, I hope.  I think thou shouldst be glad to have the
justification of her memory left to one, who, at the same time, thou
mayest be assured, will treat thee, and thy actions, with all the lenity
the case will admit.

I cannot help expressing my surprise at one instance of thy
self-partiality; and that is, where thou sayest she has need, indeed, to
cry out for mercy herself from her friends, who knows not how to show
any.

Surely thou canst not think the cases alike--for she, as I understand,
desires but a last blessing, and a last forgiveness, for a fault in a
manner involuntary, if a fault at all; and does not so much as hope to be
received; thou, to be forgiven premeditated wrongs, (which, nevertheless,
she forgives, on condition to be no more molested by thee;) and hopest to
be received into favour, and to make the finest jewel in the world thy
absolute property in consequence of that forgiveness.

I will now briefly proceed to relate what has passed since my last, as to
the excellent lady.  By the account I shall give thee, thou wilt see that
she has troubles enough upon her, all springing originally from thyself,
without needing to add more to them by new vexations.  And as long as
thou canst exert thyself so very cavalierly at M. Hall, where every one
is thy prisoner, I see not but the bravery of thy spirit may be as well
gratified in domineering there over half a dozen persons of rank and
distinction, as it could be over an helpless orphan, as I may call this
lady, since she has not a single friend to stand by her, if I do not; and
who will think herself happy, if she can refuge herself from thee, and
from all the world, in the arms of death.

My last was dated on Saturday.

On Sunday, in compliance with her doctor's advice, she took a little
airing.  Mrs. Lovick, and Mr. Smith and his wife, were with her.  After
being at Highgate chapel at divine service, she treated them with a
little repast; and in the afternoon was at Islington church, in her way
home; returning tolerably cheerful.

She had received several letters in my absence, as Mrs. Lovick acquainted
me, besides your's.  Your's, it seems, much distressed her; but she
ordered the messenger, who pressed for an answer, to be told that it did
not require an immediate one.

On Wednesday she received a letter from her uncle Harlowe,* in answer to
one she had written to her mother on Saturday on her knees.  It must be a
very cruel one, Mrs. Lovick says, by the effects it had upon her: for,
when she received it, she was intending to take an afternoon airing in a
coach: but was thrown into so violent a fit of hysterics upon it, that
she was forced to lie down; and (being not recovered by it) to go to bed
about eight o'clock.


* See Letter LXXXIV. of this volume.


On Thursday morning she was up very early; and had recourse to the
Scriptures to calm her mind, as she told Mrs. Lovick: and, weak as she
was, would go in a chair to Lincoln's-inn chapel, about eleven.  She was
brought home a little better; and then sat down to write to her uncle.
But was obliged to leave off several times--to struggle, as she told Mrs.
Lovick, for an humble temper.  'My heart, said she to the good woman, is
a proud heart, and not yet, I find, enough mortified to my condition;
but, do what I can, will be for prescribing resenting things to my pen.'

I arrived in town from Belton's this Thursday evening; and went directly
to Smith's.  She was too ill to receive my visit.  But, on sending up my
compliments, she sent me down word that she should be glad to see me in
the morning.

Mrs. Lovick obliged me with the copy of a meditation collected by the
lady from the Scriptures.  She has entitled it Poor mortals the cause of
their own misery; so entitled, I presume, with intention to take off the
edge of her repinings at hardships so disproportioned to her fault, were
her fault even as great as she is inclined to think it.  We may see, by
this, the method she takes to fortify her mind, and to which she owes, in
a great measure, the magnanimity with which she bears her undeserved
persecutions.


MEDITATION


POOR MORTALS THE CAUSE OF THEIR OWN MISERY.

Say not thou, it is through the Lord that I fell away; for thou oughtest
not to do the thing that he hateth.

Say not thou, he hath caused me to err; for he hath no need of the sinful
man.

He himself made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his
own counsel;

If thou wilt, to keep the commandments, and to perform acceptable
faithfulness.

He hath set fire and water before thee: stretch forth thine hand to
whither thou wilt.

He hath commanded no man to do wickedly: neither hath he given any man
license to sin.

And now, Lord, what is my hope?  Truly my hope is only in thee.

Deliver me from all my offences: and make me not a rebuke unto the
foolish.

When thou with rebuke dost chasten man for sin, thou makest his beauty
to consume away, like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man,
therefore, is vanity.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and
afflicted.

The troubles of my heart are enlarged.  O bring thou me out of my
distresses!


***


Mrs. Smith gave me the following particulars of a conversation that
passed between herself and a young clergyman, on Tuesday afternoon, who,
as it appears, was employed to make inquiries about the lady by her
friends.

He came into the shop in a riding-habit, and asked for some Spanish
snuff; and finding only Mrs. Smith there, he desired to have a little
talk with her in the back-shop.

He beat about the bush in several distant questions, and at last began to
talk more directly about Miss Harlowe.

He said he knew her before her fall, [that was his impudent word;] and
gave the substance of the following account of her, as I collected it
from Mrs. Smith:

'She was then, he said, the admiration and delight of every body: he
lamented, with great solemnity, her backsliding; another of his phrases.
Mrs. Smith said, he was a fine scholar; for he spoke several things she
understood not; and either in Latin or Greek, she could not tell which;
but was so good as to give her the English of them without asking.  A
fine thing, she said, for a scholar to be so condescending!'

He said, 'Her going off with so vile a rake had given great scandal and
offence to all the neighbouring ladies, as well as to her friends.'

He told Mrs. Smith 'how much she used to be followed by every one's eye,
whenever she went abroad, or to church; and praised and blessed by every
tongue, as she passed; especially by the poor: that she gave the fashion
to the fashionable, without seeming herself to intend it, or to know she
did: that, however, it was pleasant to see ladies imitate her in dress
and behaviour, who being unable to come up to her in grace and ease,
exposed but their own affectation and awkwardness, at the time that they
thought themselves secure of general approbation, because they wore the
same things, and put them on in the same manner, that she did, who had
every body's admiration; little considering, that were her person like
their's, or if she had their defects, she would have brought up a very
different fashion; for that nature was her guide in every thing, and ease
her study; which, joined with a mingled dignity and condescension in her
air and manner, whether she received or paid a compliment, distinguished
her above all her sex.

'He spoke not, he said, his own sentiments only on this occasion, but
those of every body: for that the praises of Miss Clarissa Harlowe were
such a favourite topic, that a person who could not speak well upon any
other subject, was sure to speak well upon that; because he could say
nothing but what he had heard repeated and applauded twenty times over.'

Hence it was, perhaps, that this novice accounted for the best things he
said himself; though I must own that the personal knowledge of the lady,
which I am favoured with, made it easy to me to lick into shape what the
good woman reported to me, as the character given her by the young
Levite: For who, even now, in her decline of health, sees not that all
these attributes belong to her?

I suppose he has not been long come from college, and now thinks he has
nothing to do but to blaze away for a scholar among the ignorant; as such
young fellows are apt to think those who cannot cap verses with them, and
tell us how an antient author expressed himself in Latin on a subject,
upon which, however, they may know how, as well as that author, to express
themselves in English.

Mrs. Smith was so taken with him, that she would fain have introduced him
to the lady, not questioning but it would be very acceptable to her to
see one who knew her and her friends so well.  But this he declined for
several reasons, as he call them; which he gave.  One was, that persons
of his cloth should be very cautious of the company they were in,
especially where sex was concerned, and where a woman had slurred her
reputation--[I wish I had been there when he gave himself these airs.]
Another, that he was desired to inform himself of her present way of
life, and who her visiters were; for, as to the praises Mrs. Smith gave
the lady, he hinted, that she seemed to be a good-natured woman, and
might (though for the lady's sake he hoped not) be too partial and
short-sighted to be trusted to, absolutely, in a concern of so high a
nature as he intimated the task was which he had undertaken; nodding out
words of doubtful import, and assuming airs of great significance (as I
could gather) throughout the whole conversation.  And when Mrs. Smith
told him that the lady was in a very bad state of health, he gave a
careless shrug--She may be very ill, says he: her disappointments must
have touched her to the quick: but she is not bad enough, I dare say,
yet, to atone for her very great lapse, and to expect to be forgiven by
those whom she has so much disgraced.

A starched, conceited coxcomb! what would I give he had fallen in my way!

He departed, highly satisfied with himself, no doubt, and assured of Mrs.
Smith's great opinion of his sagacity and learning: but bid her not say
any thing to the lady about him or his inquiries.  And I, for very
different reasons, enjoined the same thing.

I am glad, however, for her peace of mind's sake, that they begin to
think it behoves them to inquire about her.



LETTER LXXXII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, AUG. 11.


[Mr. Belford acquaints his friend with the generosity of Lord M. and the
      Ladies of his family; and with the Lady's grateful sentiments upon
      the occasion.

He says, that in hopes to avoid the pain of seeing him, (Mr. Lovelace,)
      she intends to answer his letter of the 7th, though much against
      her inclination.]

'She took great notice,' says Mr. Belford, 'of that passage in your's,
which makes necessary to the Divine pardon, the forgiveness of a person
causelessly injured.

'Her grandfather, I find, has enabled her at eighteen years of age to
make her will, and to devise great part of his estate to whom she pleases
of the family, and the rest out of it (if she die single) at her own
discretion; and this to create respect to her! as he apprehended that she
would be envied: and she now resolves to set about making her will out of
hand.'


[Mr. Belford insists upon the promise he had made him, not to molest the
      Lady: and gives him the contents of her answer to Lord M. and the
      Ladies of his Lordship's family, declining their generous offers.
        See Letter LXXX. of this volume.



LETTER LXXXIII

MISS CL. HARLOWE, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, AUG. 11.


It is a cruel alternative to be either forced to see you, or to write to
you.  But a will of my own has been long denied me; and to avoid a
greater evil, nay, now I may say, the greatest, I write.

Were I capable of disguising or concealing my real sentiments, I might
safely, I dare say, give you the remote hope you request, and yet keep
all my resolutions.  But I must tell you, Sir, (it becomes my character
to tell you, that, were I to live more years than perhaps I may weeks,
and there were not another man in the world, I could not, I would not, be
your's.

There is no merit in performing a duty.

Religion enjoins me not only to forgive injuries, but to return good for
evil.  It is all my consolation, and I bless God for giving me that, that
I am now in such a state of mind, with regard to you, that I can
cheerfully obey its dictates.  And accordingly I tell you, that, wherever
you go, I wish you happy.  And in this I mean to include every good wish.

And now having, with great reluctance I own, complied with one of your
compulsatory alternatives, I expect the fruits of it.

CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LXXXIV

MR. JOHN HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S TO HER MOTHER.  SEE LETTER LXXV. OF THIS VOLUME.]
MONDAY, AUG. 7.


POOR UNGRATEFUL, NAUGHTY KINSWOMAN!

Your mother neither caring, nor being permitted, to write, I am desired
to set pen to paper, though I had resolved against it.

And so I am to tell you, that your letters, joined to the occasion of
them, almost break the hearts of us all.

Were we sure you had seen your folly, and were truly penitent, and, at
the same time, that you were so very ill as you pretend, I know not what
might be done for you.  But we are all acquainted with your moving ways
when you want to carry a point.

Unhappy girl! how miserable have you made us all!  We, who used to visit
with so much pleasure, now cannot endure to look upon one another.

If you had not know, upon an hundred occasions, how dear you once was to
us, you might judge of it now, were you to know how much your folly has
unhinged us all.

Naughty, naughty girl!  You see the fruits of preferring a rake and
libertine to a man of sobriety and morals, against full warning, against
better knowledge.  And such a modest creature, too, as you were!  How
could you think of such an unworthy preference!

Your mother can't ask, and your sister knows not in modesty how to ask;
and so I ask you, if you have any reason to think yourself with child by
this villain?--You must answer this, and answer it truly, before any
thing can be resolved upon about you.

You may well be touched with a deep remorse for your misdeeds.  Could I
ever have thought that my doting-piece, as every one called you, would
have done thus?  To be sure I loved you too well.  But that is over now.
Yet, though I will not pretend to answer for any body but myself, for my
own part I say God forgive you! and this is all from

Your afflicted uncle,
JOHN HARLOWE.


***


The following MEDITATION was stitched to the bottom of this letter with
black silk.


MEDITATION

O that thou wouldst hide me in the grave! that thou wouldst keep me
secret, till thy wrath be past!

My face is foul with weeping; and on my eye-lid is the shadow of death.

My friends scorn me; but mine eye poureth out tears unto God.

A dreadful sound is in my ears; in prosperity the destroyer came upon me!

I have sinned! what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men! why
hast thou set me as a mark against thee; so that I am a burden to myself!

When I say my bed shall comfort me; my couch shall ease my complaint;

Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.

So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than life.

I loath it!  I would not live always!--Let me alone; for my days are
vanity!

He hath made me a bye-word of the people; and aforetime I was as a
tabret.

My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my
heart.

When I looked for good, then evil came unto me; and when I waited for
light, then came darkness.

And where now is my hope?--

Yet all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.



LETTER LXXXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, AUG. 10.


HONOURED SIR,

It was an act of charity I begged: only for a last blessing, that I might
die in peace.  I ask not to be received again, as my severe sister [Oh!
that I had not written to her!] is pleased to say, is my view.  Let that
grace be denied me when I do.

I could not look forward to my last scene with comfort, without seeking,
at least, to obtain the blessing I petitioned for; and that with a
contrition so deep, that I deserved not, were it known, to be turned over
from the tender nature of a mother, to the upbraiding pen of an uncle!
and to be wounded by a cruel question, put by him in a shocking manner:
and which a little, a very little time, will better answer than I can:
for I am not either a hardened or shameless creature: if I were, I should
not have been so solicitous to obtain the favour I sued for.

And permit me to say that I asked it as well for my father and mother's
sake, as for my own; for I am sure they at least will be uneasy, after I
am gone, that they refused it to me.

I should still be glad to have theirs, and your's, Sir, and all your
blessings, and your prayers: but, denied in such a manner, I will not
presume again to ask it: relying entirely on the Almighty's; which is
never denied, when supplicated for with such true penitence as I hope
mine is.

God preserve my dear uncle, and all my honoured friends! prays

Your unhappy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.

END OF VOL. 7.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Clarissa, Volume 7, by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 7 ***

***** This file should be named 11889.txt or 11889.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/8/8/11889/

Produced by Julie C. Sparks.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Clarissa, Or The History Of A Young Lady,
Volume 8, by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Clarissa, Or The History Of A Young Lady, Volume 8

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: April 27, 2004 [EBook #12180]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOL. 8 ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks.




CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

Nine Volumes
Volume VIII.



CONTENTS OF VOLUME VIII


LETTER I.  Miss Howe, from the Isle of Wight.--
In answer to her's, No. LXI. of Vol. VII.  Approves not of her choice of
Belford for her executor; yet thinks she cannot appoint for that office
any of her own family.  Hopes she will live any years.

LETTER II.  Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Sends her a large packet of letters; but (for her relations' sake) not
all she has received.  Must now abide by the choice of Mr. Belford for
executor; but farther refers to the papers she sends her, for her
justification on this head.

LETTER III.  Antony Harlowe to Clarissa.--
A letter more taunting and reproachful than that of her other uncle.  To
what owing.

LETTER IV.  Clarissa.  In answer.--
Wishes that the circumstances of her case had been inquired into.
Concludes with a solemn and pathetic prayer for the happiness of the
whole family.

LETTER V.  Mrs. Norton to Clarissa.--
Her friends, through Brand's reports, as she imagines, intent upon her
going to the plantations.  Wishes her to discourage improper visiters.
Difficult situations the tests of prudence as well as virtue.  Dr.
Lewen's solicitude for her welfare.  Her cousin Morden arrived in
England.  Farther pious consolations.

LETTER VI.  Clarissa.  In answer.--
Sends her a packet of letters, which, for her relations' sake, she cannot
communicate to Miss Howe.  From these she will collect a good deal of her
story.  Defends, yet gently blames her mother.  Afraid that her cousin
Morden will be set against her; or, what is worse, that he will seek to
avenge her.  Her affecting conclusion on her Norton's divine
consolations.

LETTER VII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Is very ill.  The lady, if he die, will repent her refusal of him.  One
of the greatest felicities that can befal a woman, what.  Extremely ill.
His ludicrous behaviour on awaking, and finding a clergyman and his
friends praying for him by his bedside.

LETTER VIII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Concerned at his illness.  Wishes that he had died before last April.
The lady, he tells him, generously pities him; and prays that he may meet
with the mercy he has not shown.

LETTER IX.  Lovelace to Belford.--
In raptures on her goodness to him.  His deep regrets for his treatment
of her.  Blesses her.

LETTER X.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Congratulates him on his amendment.  The lady's exalted charity to him.
Her story a fine subject for tragedy.  Compares with it, and censures,
the play of the Fair Penitent.  She is very ill; the worse for some new
instances of the implacableness of her relations.  A meditation on the
subject.  Poor Belton, he tells him, is at death's door; and desirous to
see him.

LETTER XI.  Belford to Clarissa.--
Acquaints her with the obligation he is under to go to Belton, and (lest
she should be surprised) with Lovelace's resolution (as signified in the
next letter) to visit her.

LETTER XII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Resolves to throw himself at the lady's feet.  Lord M. of opinion that
she ought to admit of one interview.

LETTER XIII.  From the same.--
Arrived in London, he finds the lady gone abroad.  Suspects Belford.  His
unaccountable freaks at Smith's.  His motives for behaving so ludicrously
there.  The vile Sally Martin entertains him with her mimicry of the
divine lady.

LETTER XIV.  From the same.--
His frightful dream.  How affected by it.  Sleeping or waking, his
Clarissa always present with him.  Hears she is returned to her lodgings.
Is hastening to her.

LETTER XV.  From the same.--
Disappointed again.  Is affected by Mrs. Lovick's expostulations.  Is
shown a meditation on being hunted after by the enemy of her soul, as it
is entitled.  His light comments upon it.  Leaves word that he resolves
to see her.  Makes several other efforts for that purpose.

LETTER XVI.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Reproaches him that he has not kept his honour with him.  Inveighs
against, and severely censures him for his light behaviour at Smith's.
Belton's terrors and despondency.  Mowbray's impenetrable behaviour.

LETTER XVII.  From the same.--
Mowbray's impatience to run from a dying Belton to a too-lively Lovelace.
Mowbray abuses Mr. Belton's servant in the language of a rake of the
common class.  Reflection on the brevity of life.

LETTER XVIII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Receives a letter from Clarissa, written by way of allegory to induce him
to forbear hunting after her.  Copy of it.  He takes it in a literal
sense.  Exults upon it.  Will now hasten down to Lord M. and receive the
gratulations of all his family on her returning favour.  Gives an
interpretation of his frightful dream to his own liking.

LETTER XIX. XX.  From the same.--
Pities Belton.  Rakishly defends him on the issue of a duel, which now
adds to the poor man's terrors.  His opinion of death, and the fear of
it.  Reflections upon the conduct of play-writers with regard
servants.  He cannot account for the turn his Clarissa has taken in his
favour.  Hints at one hopeful cause of it.  Now matrimony seems to be in
his power, he has some retrograde motions.

LETTER XXI.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Continuation of his narrative of Belton's last illness and impatience.
The poor man abuses the gentlemen of the faculty.  Belford censures some
of them for their greediness after fees.  Belton dies.  Serious
reflections on the occasion.

LETTER XXII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Hopes Belton is happy; and why.  He is setting out for Berks.

LETTER XXIII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Attends the lady.  She is extremely ill, and receives the sacrament.
Complains of the harasses his friend had given her.  Two different
persons (from her relations, he supposes) inquire after her.  Her
affecting address to the doctor, apothecary, and himself.  Disposes of
some more of her apparel for a very affecting purpose.

LETTER XXIV.  Dr. Lewen to Clarissa.--
Writes on his pillow, to prevail upon her to prosecute Lovelace for his
life.

LETTER XXV.  Her pathetic and noble answer.

LETTER XXVI.  Miss Arabella Harlowe to Clarissa.--
Proposes, in a most taunting and cruel manner, the prosecution of
Lovelace; or, if not, her going to Pensylvania.

LETTER XXVII.  Clarissa's affecting answer.

LETTER XXVIII. XXIX.  Mrs. Norton to Clarissa.--
Her uncle's cruel letter to what owing.  Colonel Morden resolved on a
visit to Lovelace.--Mrs. Hervey, in a private conversation with her,
accounts for, yet blames, the cruelty of her family.  Miss Dolly Hervey
wishes to attend her.

LETTER XXX. Clarissa.  In answer.--
Thinks she has been treated with great rigour by her relations.
Expresses more warmth than usual on this subject.  Yet soon checks
herself.  Grieves that Colonel Morden resolves on a visit to Lovelace.
Touches upon her sister's taunting letter.  Requests Mrs. Norton's
prayers for patience and resignation.

LETTER XXXI.  Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Approves now of her appointment of Belford for an executor.  Admires her
greatness of mind in despising Lovelace.  Every body she is with taken
with Hickman; yet she cannot help wantoning with the power his obsequious
love gives her over him.

LETTER XXXII. XXXIII.  Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Instructive lessons and observations on her treatment of Hickman.--
Acquaints her with all that has happened since her last.  Fears that all
her allegorical letter is not strictly right.  Is forced by illness to
break off.  Resumes.  Wishes her married.

LETTER XXXIV.  Mr. Wyerley to Clarissa.--
A generous renewal of his address to her now in her calamity; and a
tender of his best services.

LETTER XXXV.  Her open, kind, and instructive answer.

LETTER XXXVI.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Uneasy, on a suspicion that her letter to him was a stratagem only.  What
he will do, if he find it so.

LETTER XXXVII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Brief account of his proceedings in Belton's affairs.  The lady extremely
ill.  Thought to be near her end.  Has a low-spirited day.  Recovers her
spirits; and thinks herself above this world.  She bespeaks her coffin.
Confesses that her letter to Lovelace was allegorical only.  The light in
which Belford beholds her.

LETTER XXXVIII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
An affecting conversation that passed between the lady and Dr. H.  She
talks of death, he says, and prepares for it, as if it were an occurrence
as familiar to her as dressing and undressing.  Worthy behaviour of the
doctor.  She makes observations on the vanity of life, on the wisdom of
an early preparation for death, and on the last behaviour of Belton.

LETTER XXXIX. XL. XLI.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Particulars of what passed between himself, Colonel Morden, Lord M., and
Mowbray, on the visit made him by the Colonel.  Proposes Belford to Miss
Charlotte Montague, by way of raillery, for an husband.--He encloses
Brand's letter, which misrepresents (from credulity and officiousness,
rather than ill-will) the lady's conduct.

LETTER XLII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Expatiates on the baseness of deluding young creatures, whose confidence
has been obtained by oaths, vows, promises.  Evil of censoriousness.
People deemed good too much addicted to it.  Desires to know what he
means my his ridicule with regard to his charming cousin.

LETTER XLIII.  From the same.--
A proper test of the purity of writing.  The lady again makes excuses for
her allegorical letter.  Her calm behaviour, and generous and useful
reflections, on his communicating to her Brand's misrepresentations of
her conduct.

LETTER XLIV.  Colonel Morden to Clarissa.--
Offers his assistance and service to make the best of what has happened.
Advises her to marry Lovelace, as the only means to bring about a general
reconciliation.  Has no doubt of his resolution to do her justice.
Desires to know if she has.

LETTER XLV.  Clarissa.  In answer.

LETTER XLVI.  Lovelace to Belford.--
His reasonings and ravings on finding the lady's letter to him only an
allegorical one.  In the midst of these, the natural gayety of his heart
runs him into ridicule on Belford.  His ludicrous image drawn from a
monument in Westminster Abbey.  Resumes his serious disposition.  If the
worst happen, (the Lord of Heaven and Earth, says he, avert that worst!)
he bids him only write that he advises him to take a trip to Paris; and
that will stab him to the heart.

LETTER XLVII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The lady's coffin brought up stairs.  He is extremely shocked and
discomposed at it.  Her intrepidity.  Great minds, he observes, cannot
avoid doing uncommon things.  Reflections on the curiosity of women.

LETTER XLVIII.  From the same.--
Description of the coffin, and devices on the lid.  It is placed in her
bed-chamber.  His serious application to Lovelace on her great behaviour.

LETTER XLIX.  From the same.--
Astonished at his levity in the Abbey-instance.  The lady extremely ill.

LETTER L.  Lovelace to Belford.--
All he has done to the lady a jest to die for; since her triumph has ever
been greater than her sufferings.  He will make over all his possessions
and all his reversions to the doctor, if he will but prolong her life for
one twelvemonth.  How, but for her calamities, could her equanimity blaze
out as it does!  He would now love her with an intellectual flame.  He
cannot bear to think that the last time she so triumphantly left him
should be the last.  His conscience, he says, tears him.  He is sick of
the remembrance of his vile plots.

LETTER LI.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The lady alive, serene, and calm.  The more serene for having finished,
signed, and sealed her last will; deferred till now for reasons of filial
duty.

LETTER LII.  Miss Howe to Clarissa.--
Pathetically laments the illness of her own mother, and of her dear
friend.  Now all her pertness to the former, she says, fly in her face.
She lays down her pen; and resumes it, to tell her, with great joy, that
her mother is better.  She has had a visit form her cousin Morden.  What
passed in it.

LETTER LIII.  From the same.--
Displeased with the Colonel for thinking too freely of the sex.  Never
knew a man that had a slight notion of the virtue of women in general,
who deserved to be valued for his morals.  Why women must either be more
or less virtuous than men.  Useful hints to young ladies.  Is out of
humour with Mr. Hickman.  Resolves to see her soon in town.

LETTER LIV.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The lady writes and reads upon her coffin, as upon a desk.  The doctor
resolves to write to her father.  Her intense, yet cheerful devotion.

LETTER LV.  Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
A letter full of pious reflections, and good advice, both general and
particular; and breathing the true spirit of charity, forgiveness,
patience, and resignation.  A just reflection, to her dear friend, upon
the mortifying nature of pride.

LETTER LVI.  Mrs. Norton to Clarissa.--
Her account of an interesting conversation at Harlowe-place between the
family and Colonel Morden; and of another between her mother and self.
The Colonel incensed against them all.  Her advice concerning Belford,
and other matters.  Miss Howe has obtained leave, she hears, to visit
her.  Praises Mr. Hickman.  Gently censures Miss Howe on his account.
Her truly maternal and pious comfortings.

LETTER LVII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The lady's sight begins to fail her.  She blesses God for the serenity
she enjoys.  It is what, she says, she had prayed for.  What a blessing,
so near to her dissolution, to have her prayers answered!  Gives
particular directions to him about her papers, about her last will and
apparel.  Comforts the women and him on their concern for her.  Another
letter brought her from Colonel Morden.  The substance of it.  Belford
writes to hasten up the Colonel.  Dr. H. has also written to her father;
and Brand to Mr. John Harlowe a letter recanting his officious one.

LETTER LVIII.  Dr. H. to James Harlowe, Senior, Esq.

LETTER LIX.  Copy of Mr. Belford's letter to Colonel Morden,
to hasten him up.

LETTER LX.  Lovelace to Belford.--
He feels the torments of the damned, in the remorse that wrings his
heart, on looking back on his past actions by this lady.  Gives him what
he calls a faint picture of his horrible uneasiness, riding up and down,
expecting the return of his servant as soon as he had dispatched him.
Woe be to the man who brings him the fatal news!

LETTER LXI.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Farther particulars of the lady's pious and exemplary behaviour.  She
rejoices in the gradual death afforded her.  Her thankful acknowledgments
to Mr. Belford, Mrs. Smith, and Mrs. Lovick, for their kindness to her.
Her edifying address to Mr. Belford.

LETTER LXII.  Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.  In answer to her's, No. LVI.--
Afflicted only for her friends.  Desires not now to see her cousin
Morden, nor even herself, or Miss Howe.  God will have no rivals, she
says, in the hearts of those whom HE sanctifies.  Advice to Miss Howe.
To Mr. Hickman.  Blesses all her relations and friends.

LETTER LXIII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
A letter of deep distress, remorse, and impatience.  Yet would he fain
lighten his own guilt by reflections on the cruelty of her relations.

LETTER LXIV.  Belford to Lovelace
The lady is disappointed at the Doctor's telling her that she may yet
live two or three days.  Death from grief the slowest of deaths.  Her
solemn forgiveness of Lovelace, and prayer for him.  Owns that once she
could have loved him.  Her generous concern for his future happiness.
Belford's good resolutions.

LETTER LXV.  Mr. Brand to Mr. John Walton.

LETTER LXVI.  Mr. Brand to John Harlowe, Esq.;
in excuse of his credulity, and of the misreports founded upon it.

LETTER LXVII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Blesses him for sending him word the lady is better.  Her charity towards
him cuts him to the heart.  He cannot bear it.  His vehement self
reproaches.  Curses his contriving genius, and his disbelief that there
could be such virtue in woman.  The world never saw such an husband as he
will make, if she recover, and will be his.

LETTER LXVIII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The lady's pious frame.  The approaches of death how supportable to her;
and why.  She has no reason, she says, to grieve for any thing but the
sorrow she has given to her friends.

LETTER LXIX.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Never prayed in his life, put all the years of it together, as he has
done for this fortnight.  Has repented of all his baseness: And will
nothing do?  Conjures him to send him good news in his next, as he would
not be answerable for consequences.

LETTER LXX.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Solemn leave taken of her by the doctor and apothecary; who tell her she
will hardly see the next night.  The pleasure with which she receives the
intimation.  How unlike poor Belton's behaviour her's!  A letter from
Miss Howe.  Copy of it.  She cannot see to read it.  Her exalted
expressions on hearing it read.  Tries to write an answer to it; but
cannot.  Dictates to Mrs. Lovick.  Writes the superscriptive part herself
on her knees.  Colonel Morden arrives in town.

LETTER LXXI.  From the same.--
What passes on Colonel Morden's visit to his cousin.  She enjoins the
Colonel not to avenge her.




THE HISTORY

OF

CLARISSA HARLOWE



LETTER I

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
YARMOUTH, ISLE OF WIGHT, MONDAY, AUG. 7.


MY DEAREST CREATURE,

I can write but just now a few lines.  I cannot tell how to bear the
sound of that Mr. Belford for your executor, cogent as your reasons for
that measure are: and yet I am firmly of opinion, that none of your
relations should be named for the trust.  But I dwell the less on this
subject, as I hope (and cannot bear to apprehend the contrary) that you
will still live many, many years.

Mr. Hickman, indeed, speaks very handsomely of Mr. Belford.  But he, poor
man! has not much penetration.--If he had, he would hardly think so well
of me as he does.

I have a particular opportunity of sending this by a friend of my aunt
Harman's; who is ready to set out for London, (and this occasions my
hurry,) and is to return out of hand.  I expect therefore, by him a large
packet from you; and hope and long for news of your amended health: which
Heaven grant to the prayers of

Your ever-affectionate
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER II

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 11.


I will send you a large packet, as you desire and expect; since I can do
it by so safe a conveyance: but not all that is come to my hand--for I
must own that my friends are very severe; too severe for any body, who
loves them not, to see their letters.  You, my dear, would not call them
my friends, you said, long ago; but my relations: indeed I cannot call
them my relations, I think!----But I am ill; and therefore perhaps more
peevish than I should be.  It is difficult to go out of ourselves to give
a judgment against ourselves; and yet, oftentimes, to pass a just
judgment, we ought.

I thought I should alarm you in the choice of my executor.  But the sad
necessity I am reduced to must excuse me.

I shall not repeat any thing I have said before on that subject: but if
your objections will not be answered to your satisfaction by the papers
and letters I shall enclose, marked 1, 2, 3, 4, to 9, I must think myself
in another instance unhappy; since I am engaged too far (and with my own
judgment too) to recede.

As Mr. Belford has transcribed for me, in confidence, from his friend's
letters, the passages which accompany this, I must insist that you suffer
no soul but yourself to peruse them; and that you return them by the very
first opportunity; that so no use may be made of them that may do hurt
either to the original writer or to the communicator.  You'll observe I
am bound by promise to this care.  If through my means any mischief
should arise, between this humane and that inhuman libertine, I should
think myself utterly inexcusable.

I subjoin a list of the papers or letters I shall enclose.  You must
return them all when perused.*


* 1. A letter from Miss Montague, dated . . . .  Aug. 1.
  2. A copy of my answer  . . . . . . . . . . .  Aug. 3.
  3. Mr. Belford's Letter to me, which will show
      you what my request was to him, and his
      compliance with it; and the desired ex-
      tracts from his friend's letters  . . . .  Aug. 3, 4.
  4. A copy of my answer, with thanks; and re-
      questing him to undertake the executor-
      ship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Aug. 4.
  5. Mr. Belford's acceptance of the trust  . .  Aug. 4.
  6. Miss Montague's letter, with a generous
      offer from Lord M. and the Ladies of that
      family  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Aug. 7.
  7. Mr. Lovelace's to me . . . . . . . . . . .  Aug. 7.
  8. Copy of mine to Miss Montague, in answer
      to her's of the day before  . . . . . . .  Aug. 8.
  9. Copy of my answer to Mr. Lovelace  . . . .  Aug. 11.

You will see by these several Letters, written and received in so little
a space of time (to say nothing of what I have received and written which
I cannot show you,) how little opportunity or leisure I can have for
writing my own story.


I am very much tired and fatigued--with--I don't know what--with writing,
I think--but most with myself, and with a situation I cannot help
aspiring to get out of, and above!

O my dear, the world we live in is a sad, a very sad world!----While
under our parents' protecting wings, we know nothing at all of it.
Book-learned and a scribbler, and looking at people as I saw them as
visiters or visiting, I thought I knew a great deal of it.  Pitiable
ignorance!--Alas! I knew nothing at all!

With zealous wishes for your happiness, and the happiness of every one
dear to you, I am, and will ever be,

Your gratefully-affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER III

MR. ANTONY HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
[IN REPLY TO HER'S TO HER UNCLE HARLOWE, OF THURSDAY, AUG. 10.]
AUG. 12.


UNHAPPY GIRL!

As your uncle Harlowe chooses not to answer your pert letter to him;
and as mine, written to you before,* was written as if it were in the
spirit of prophecy, as you have found to your sorrow; and as you are now
making yourself worse than you are in your health, and better than you
are in your penitence, as we are very well assured, in order to move
compassion; which you do not deserve, having had so much warning: for all
these reasons, I take up my pen once more; though I had told your
brother, at his going to Edinburgh, that I would not write to you, even
were you to write to me, without letting him know.  So indeed had we all;
for he prognosticated what would happen, as to your applying to us, when
you knew not how to help it.


* See Vol. I. Letter XXXII.


Brother John has hurt your niceness, it seems, by asking you a plain
question, which your mother's heart is too full of grief to let her ask;
and modesty will not let your sister ask; though but the consequence of
your actions--and yet it must be answered, before you'll obtain from your
father and mother, and us, the notice you hope for, I can tell you that.

You lived several guilty weeks with one of the vilest fellows that ever
drew breath, at bed, as well as at board, no doubt, (for is not his
character known?) and pray don't be ashamed to be asked after what may
naturally come of such free living.  This modesty indeed would have
become you for eighteen years of your life--you'll be pleased to mark
that--but makes no good figure compared with your behaviour since the
beginning of April last.  So pray don't take it up, and wipe your mouth
upon it, as if nothing had happened.

But, may be, I likewise am to shocking to your niceness!--O girl, girl!
your modesty had better been shown at the right time and place--Every
body but you believed what the rake was: but you would believe nothing
bad of him--What think you now?

Your folly has ruined all our peace.  And who knows where it may yet end?
--Your poor father but yesterday showed me this text: With bitter grief
he showed it me, poor man! and do you lay it to your heart:

'A father waketh for his daughter, when no man knoweth; and the care for
her taketh away his sleep--When she is young, lest she pass away the
flower of her age--[and you know what proposals were made to you at
different times.]  And, being married, lest she should be hated.  In her
virginity, lest she should be defiled, and gotten with child in her
father's house--[and I don't make the words, mind that.]  And, having an
husband, lest she should misbehave herself.'  And what follows?  'Keep
a sure watch over a shameless daughter--[yet no watch could hold you!]
lest she make thee a laughing stock to thine enemies--[as you have made
us all to this cursed Lovelace,] and a bye-word in the city, and a
reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude.'
Ecclus. xlii. 9, 10, &c.

Now will you wish you had not written pertly.  Your sister's severities!
--Never, girl, say that is severe that is deserved.  You know the meaning
of words.  No body better.  Would to the Lord you had acted up but to one
half of what you know! then had we not been disappointed and grieved, as
we all have been: and nobody more than him who was

Your loving uncle,
ANTONY HARLOWE.

This will be with you to-morrow.  Perhaps you may be suffered to have
      some part of your estate, after you have smarted a little more.
      Your pertly-answered uncle John, who is your trustee, will not have
      you be destitute.  But we hope all is not true that we hear of you.
      --Only take care, I advise you, that, bad as you have acted, you
      act not still worse, if it be possible to act worse.  Improve upon
      the hint.



LETTER IV

MISS CL. HARLOWE, TO ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQ.
SUNDAY, AUG. 13.


HONOURED SIR,

I am very sorry for my pert letter to my uncle Harlowe.  Yet I did not
intend it to be pert.  People new to misfortune may be too easily moved
to impatience.

The fall of a regular person, no doubt, is dreadful and inexcusable.
is like the sin of apostacy.  Would to Heaven, however, that I had had
the circumstances of mine inquired into!

If, Sir, I make myself worse than I am in my health, and better than I am
in my penitence, it is fit I should be punished for my double
dissimulation: and you have the pleasure of being one of my punishers.
My sincerity in both respects will, however, be best justified by the
event.  To that I refer.--May Heaven give you always as much comfort in
reflecting upon the reprobation I have met with, as you seem to have
pleasure in mortifying a young creature, extremely mortified; and that
from a right sense, as she presumes to hope, of her own fault!

What you heard of me I cannot tell.  When the nearest and dearest
relations give up an unhappy wretch, it is not to be wondered at that
those who are not related to her are ready to take up and propagate
slanders against her.  Yet I think I may defy calumny itself, and
(excepting the fatal, though involuntary step of April 10) wrap myself in
my own innocence, and be easy.  I thank you, Sir, nevertheless, for your
caution, mean it what it will.

As to the question required of me to answer, and which is allowed to be
too shocking either for a mother to put to a daughter, or a sister to a
sister; and which, however, you say I must answer;--O Sir!--And must I
answer?--This then be my answer:--'A little time, a much less time than
is imagined, will afford a more satisfactory answer to my whole family,
and even to my brother and sister, than I can give in words.'

Nevertheless, be pleased to let it be remembered, that I did not petition
for a restoration to favour.  I could not hope for that.  Nor yet to be
put in possession of any part of my own estate.  Nor even for means of
necessary subsistence from the produce of that estate--but only for a
blessing; for a last blessing!

And this I will farther add, because it is true, that I have no wilful
crime to charge against myself: no free living at bed and at board, as
you phrase it!

Why, why, Sir, were not other inquiries made of me, as well as this
shocking one?--inquiries that modesty would have permitted a mother or
sister to make; and which, if I may be excused to say so, would have been
still less improper, and more charitable, to have been made by uncles,
(were the mother forbidden, or the sister not inclined, to make them,)
than those they have made.

Although my humble application has brought upon me so much severe
reproach, I repent not that I have written to my mother, (although I
cannot but wish that I had not written to my sister;) because I have
satisfied a dutiful consciousness by it, however unanswered by the
wished-for success.  Nevertheless, I cannot help saying, that mine is
indeed a hard fate, that I cannot beg pardon for my capital errors
without doing it in such terms as shall be an aggravation of the offence.

But I had best leave off, lest, as my full mind, I find, is rising to my
pen, I have other pardons to beg as I multiply lines, where none at all
will be given.

God Almighty bless, preserve, and comfort my dear sorrowing and
grievously offended father and mother!--and continue in honour, favour,
and merit, my happy sister!--May God forgive my brother, and protect him
from the violence of his own temper, as well as from the destroyer of his
sister's honour!--And may you, my dear uncle, and your no less now than
ever dear brother, my second papa, as he used to bid me call him, be
blessed and happy in them, and in each other!--And, in order to this, may
you all speedily banish from your remembrance, for ever,

The unhappy
CLARISSA HARLOWE!



LETTER V

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, AUG. 14.


All your friends here, my dear young lady, now seem set upon proposing to
you to go to one of the plantations.  This, I believe, is owing to some
misrepresentations of Mr. Brand; from whom they have received a letter.

I wish, with all my heart, that you could, consistently with your own
notions of honour, yield to the pressing requests of all Mr. Lovelace's
family in his behalf.  This, I think, would stop every mouth; and, in
time, reconcile every body to you.  For your own friends will not believe
that he is in earnest to marry you; and the hatred between the families
is such, that they will not condescend to inform themselves better; nor
would believe him, if he were ever so solemnly to avow that he is.

I should be very glad to have in readiness, upon occasion, some brief
particulars of your sad story under your own hand.  But let me tell you,
at the same time, that no misrepresentations, nor even your own
confession, shall lessen my opinion either of your piety, or of your
prudence in essential points; because I know it was always your humble
way to make light faults heavy against yourself: and well might you, my
dearest young lady, aggravate your own failings, who have ever had so
few; and those few so slight, that your ingenuousness has turned most of
them into excellencies.

Nevertheless, let me advise you, my dear Miss Clary, to discountenance
any visits, which, with the censorious, may affect your character.  As
that has not hitherto suffered by your wilful default, I hope you will
not, in a desponding negligence (satisfying yourself with a consciousness
of your own innocence) permit it to suffer.  Difficult situations, you
know, my dear young lady, are the tests not only of prudence but of
virtue.

I think, I must own to you, that, since Mr. Brand's letter has been
received, I have a renewed prohibition to attend you.  However, if you
will give me leave, that shall not detain me from you.  Nor would I stay
for that leave, if I were not in hopes that, in this critical situation,
I may be able to do you service here.

I have often had messages and inquiries after your health from the
truly-reverend Dr. Lewen, who has always expressed, and still expresses,
infinite concern for you.  He entirely disapproves of the measures of the
family with regard to you.  He is too much indisposed to go abroad.  But,
were he in good health, he would not, as I understand, visit at
Harlowe-place, having some time since been unhandsomely treated by your
brother, on his offering to mediate for you with your family.


***


I am just now informed that your cousin Morden is arrived in England.  He
is at Canterbury, it seems, looking after some concerns he has there; and
is soon expected in these parts.  Who knows what may arise from his
arrival?  God be with you, my dearest Miss Clary, and be your comforter
and sustainer.  And never fear but He will; for I am sure, I am very
sure, that you put your whole trust in Him.

And what, after all, is this world, on which we so much depend for
durable good, poor creatures that we are!--When all the joys of it, and
(what is a balancing comfort) all the troubles of it, are but momentary,
and vanish like a morning dream!

And be this remembered, my dearest young lady, that worldly joy claims no
kindred with the joys we are bid to aspire after.  These latter we must
be fitted for by affliction and disappointment.  You are therefore in the
direct road to glory, however thorny the path you are in.  And I had
almost said, that it depends upon yourself, by your patience, and by your
resignedness to the dispensation, (God enabling you, who never fails the
true penitent, and sincere invoker,) to be an heir of a blessed
immortality.

But this glory, I humbly pray, that you may not be permitted to enter
into, ripe as you are so soon to be for it, till, with your gentle hand,
(a pleasure I have so often, as you now, promised to myself,) you have
closed the eyes of

Your maternally-affectionate
JUDITH NORTON.



LETTER VI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MRS. NORTON
THURSDAY, AUG. 27.


What Mr. Brand, or any body, can have written or said to my prejudice, I
cannot imagine; and yet some evil reports have gone out against me; as I
find by some hints in a very severe letter written to me by my uncle
Antony.  Such a letter as I believe was never written to any poor
creature, who, by ill health of body, as well as of mind, was before
tottering on the brink of the grave.  But my friends may possibly be
better justified than the reporters--For who knows what they may have
heard?

You give me a kind caution, which seems to imply more than you express,
when you advise me against countenancing visiters that may discredit me.
You have spoken quite out.  Surely, I have had afflictions enow to
strengthen my mind, and to enable it to bear the worst that can now
happen.  But I will not puzzle myself by conjectural evils; as I might
perhaps do, if I had not enow that were certain.  I shall hear all, when
it is thought proper that I should.  Mean time, let me say, for your
satisfaction, that I know not that I have any thing criminal or
disreputable to answer for either in word or deed, since the fatal 10th
of April last.

You desire an account of what passes between me and my friends; and also
particulars or brief heads of my sad story, in order to serve me as
occasion shall offer.  My dear good Mrs. Norton, you shall have a whole
packet of papers, which I have sent to my Miss Howe, when she returns
them; and you shall have likewise another packet, (and that with this
letter,) which I cannot at present think of sending to that dear friend
for the sake of my own relations; whom, without seeing that packet, she
is but too ready to censure heavily.  From these you will be able to
collect a great deal of my story.  But for what is previous to these
papers, and which more particularly relates to what I have suffered from
Mr. Lovelace, you must have patience; for at present I have neither head
nor heart for such subjects.  The papers I send you with this will be
those mentioned in the margin.*  You must restore them to me as soon as
perused; and upon your honour make no use of them, or of any intelligence
you have from me, but by my previous consent.


* 1. A copy of mine to my sister, begging
      off my father's malediction . . . . . .  dated July 21.
  2. My sister's answer . . . . . . . . . . .  dated July 27.
  3. Copy of my second letter to my sister. .  dated July 29.
  4. My sister's answer . . . . . . . . . . .  dated Aug. 3.
  5. Copy of my Letter to my mother . . . . .  dated Aug. 5.
  6. My uncle Harlowe's letter  . . . . . . .  dated Aug. 7.
  7. Copy of my answer to it  . . . . . . . .  dated the 1oth.
  8. Letter from my uncle Antony  . . . . . .  dated the 12th.
  9. And lastly, the copy of my answer to it.  dated the 13th.


These communications you must not, my good Mrs. Norton, look upon as
appeals against my relations.  On the contrary, I am heartily sorry that
they have incurred the displeasure of so excellent a divine as Dr. Lewen.
But you desire to have every thing before you: and I think you ought; for
who knows, as you say, but you may be applied to at last to administer
comfort from their conceding hearts, to one that wants it; and who
sometimes, judging by what she knows of her own heart, thinks herself
entitled to it?

I know that I have a most indulgent and sweet-tempered mother; but,
having to deal with violent spirits, she has too often forfeited that
peace of mind which she so much prefers, by her over concern to preserve
it.

I am sure she would not have turned me over for an answer to a letter
written with so contrite and fervent a spirit, as was mine to her, to a
masculine spirit, had she been left to herself.

But, my dear Mrs. Norton, might not, think you, the revered lady have
favoured me with one private line?----If not, might not you have written
by her order, or connivance, one softening, one motherly line, when she
saw her poor girl, whom once she dearly loved, borne so hard upon?

O no, she might not!--because her heart, to be sure, is in their
measures! and if she think them right, perhaps they must be right!--at
least, knowing only what they know, they must!--and yet they might know
all, if they would!--and possibly, in their own good time, they think to
make proper inquiry.--My application was made to them but lately.--Yet
how deeply will it afflict them, if their time should be out of time!

When you have before you the letters I have sent to Miss Howe, you will
see that Lord M. and the Ladies of his family, jealous as they are of the
honour of their house, (to express myself in their language,) think
better of me than my own relations do.  You will see an instance of their
generosity to me, which at the time extremely affected me, and indeed
still affects me.  Unhappy man! gay, inconsiderate, and cruel! what has
been his gain by making unhappy a creature who hoped to make him happy!
and who was determined to deserve the love of all to whom he is related!
--Poor man!--but you will mistake a compassionate and placable nature for
love!--he took care, great care, that I should rein-in betimes any
passion that I might have had for him, had he known how to be but
commonly grateful or generous!--But the Almighty knows what is best for
his poor creatures.

Some of the letters in the same packet will also let you into the
knowledge of a strange step which I have taken, (strange you will think
it); and, at the same time, give you my reasons for taking it.*


* She means that of making Mr. Belford her executor.


It must be expected, that situations uncommonly difficult will make
necessary some extraordinary steps, which, but for those situations,
would be hardly excusable.  It will be very happy indeed, and somewhat
wonderful, if all the measures I have been driven to take should be
right.  A pure intention, void of all undutiful resentment, is what must
be my consolation, whatever others may think of those measures, when they
come to know them: which, however, will hardly be till it is out of my
power to justify them, or to answer for myself.

I am glad to hear of my cousin Morden's safe arrival.  I should wish to
see him methinks: but I am afraid that he will sail with the stream; as
it must be expected, that he will hear what they have to say first.--But
what I most fear is, that he will take upon himself to avenge me.  Rather
than he should do so, I would have him look upon me as a creature utterly
unworthy of his concern; at least of his vindictive concern.

How soothing to the wounded heart of your Clarissa, how balmy are the
assurances of your continued love and favour;--love me, my dear mamma
Norton, continue to love me, to the end!--I now think that I may, without
presumption, promise to deserve your love to the end.  And, when I am
gone, cherish my memory in your worthy heart; for in so doing you will
cherish the memory of one who loves and honours you more than she can
express.

But when I am no more, I charge you, as soon as you can, the smarting
pangs of grief that will attend a recent loss; and let all be early
turned into that sweetly melancholy regard to MEMORY, which, engaging us
to forget all faults, and to remember nothing but what was thought
amiable, gives more pleasure than pain to survivors--especially if they
can comfort themselves with the humble hope, that the Divine mercy has
taken the dear departed to itself.

And what is the space of time to look backward upon, between an early
departure and the longest survivance!--and what the consolation attending
the sweet hope of meeting again, never more to be separated, never more
to be pained, grieved, or aspersed;--but mutually blessing, and being
blessed, to all eternity!

In the contemplation of this happy state, in which I hope, in God's good
time, to rejoice with you, my beloved Mrs. Norton, and also with my dear
relations, all reconciled to, and blessing the child against whom they
are now so much incensed, I conclude myself

Your ever dutiful and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER VII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY, AUG. 13.


I don't know what a devil ails me; but I never was so much indisposed in
my life.  At first, I thought some of my blessed relations here had got a
dose administered to me, in order to get the whole house to themselves.
But, as I am the hopes of the family, I believe they would not be so
wicked.

I must lay down my pen.  I cannot write with any spirit at all.  What a
plague can be the matter with me!


***


Lord M. paid me just now a cursed gloomy visit, to ask how I do after
bleeding.  His sisters both drove away yesterday, God be thanked.  But
they asked not my leave; and hardly bid me good-bye.  My Lord was more
tender, and more dutiful, than I expected.  Men are less unforgiving than
women.  I have reason to say so, I am sure.  For, besides implacable Miss
Harlowe, and the old Ladies, the two Montague apes han't been near me
yet.


***


Neither eat, drink, nor sleep!--a piteous case, Jack!  If I should die
like a fool now, people would say Miss Harlowe had broken my heart.--That
she vexes me to the heart, is certain.

Confounded squeamish!  I would fain write it off.  But must lay down my
pen again.  It won't do.  Poor Lovelace!----What a devil ails thee?


***


Well, but now let's try for't--Hoy--Hoy--Hoy!  Confound me for a gaping
puppy, how I yawn!--Where shall I begin? at thy executorship--thou shalt
have a double office of it: for I really think thou mayest send me a
coffin and a shroud.  I shall be ready for them by the time they can come
down.

What a little fool is this Miss Harlowe!  I warrant she'll now repent
that she refused me.  Such a lovely young widow--What a charming widow
would she have made! how would she have adorned the weeds! to be a widow
in the first twelve months is one of the greatest felicities that can
befal a fine woman.  Such pretty employment in new dismals, when she had
hardly worn round her blazing joyfuls!  Such lights, and such shades! how
would they set off one another, and be adorned by the wearer!--

Go to the devil!--I will write!--Can I do anything else?

They would not have me write, Belford.--I must be ill indeed, when I
can't write.


***


But thou seemest nettled, Jack!  Is it because I was stung?  It is not
for two friends, any more than for man and wife, to be out of patience
at one time.--What must be the consequence if they are?--I am in no
fighting mood just now: but as patient and passive as the chickens that
are brought me in broth--for I am come to that already.

But I can tell thee, for all this, be thy own man, if thou wilt, as to
the executorship, I will never suffer thee to expose my letters.  They
are too ingenuous by half to be seen.  And I absolutely insist upon it,
that, on receipt of this, thou burn them all.

I will never forgive thee that impudent and unfriendly reflection, of my
cavaliering it here over half a dozen persons of distinction: remember,
too, thy words poor helpless orphan--these reflections are too serious,
and thou art also too serious, for me to let these things go off as
jesting; notwithstanding the Roman style* is preserved; and, indeed, but
just preserved.  By my soul, Jack, if I had not been taken thus
egregiously cropsick, I would have been up with thee, and the lady too,
before now.


* For what these gentlemen mean by the Roman style, see Vol. I. Letter
XXXI. in the first note.


But write on, however: and send me copies, if thou canst, of all that
passes between our Charlotte and Miss Harlowe.  I'll take no notice of
what thou communicatest of that sort.  I like not the people here the
worse for their generous offer to the lady.  But you see she is as proud
as implacable.  There's no obliging her.  She'd rather sell her clothes
than be beholden to any body, although she would oblige by permitting the
obligation.

O Lord! O Lord!--Mortal ill!--Adieu, Jack!


***


I was forced to leave off, I was so ill, at this place.  And what dost
think! why Lord M. brought the parson of the parish to pray by me; for
his chaplain is at Oxford.  I was lain down in my night-gown over my
waistcoat, and in a doze: and, when I opened my eyes, who should I see,
but the parson kneeling on one side the bed; Lord M. on the other; Mrs.
Greme, who had been sent for to tend me, as they call it, at the feet!
God be thanked, my Lord, said I in an ecstasy!--Where's Miss?--for I
supposed they were going to marry me.

They thought me delirious at first; and prayed louder and louder.

This roused me: off the bed I started; slid my feet into my slippers;
put my hand in my waistcoat pocket, and pulled out thy letter with my
beloved's meditation in it!  My Lord, Dr. Wright, Mrs. Greme, you have
thought me a very wicked fellow: but, see! I can read you as good as you
can read me.

They stared at one another.  I gaped, and read, Poor mo--or--tals the
cau--o--ause of their own--their own mi--ser--ry.

It is as suitable to my case, as to the lady's, as thou'lt observe, if
thou readest it again.*  At the passage where it is said, That when a man
is chastened for sin, his beauty consumes away, I stept to the glass: A
poor figure, by Jupiter, cried I!--And they all praised and admired me;
lifted up their hands and their eyes; and the doctor said, he always
thought it impossible, that a man of my sense could be so wild as the
world said I was.  My Lord chuckled for joy; congratulated me; and, thank
my dear Miss Harlowe, I got high reputation among good, bad, and
indifferent.  In short, I have established myself for ever with all here.
--But, O Belford, even this will not do--I must leave off again.


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.


***


A visit from the Montague sisters, led in by the hobbling Peer, to
congratulate my amendment and reformation both in one.  What a lucky
event this illness with this meditation in my pocket; for we were all to
pieces before!  Thus, when a boy, have I joined with a crowd coming out
of church, and have been thought to have been there myself.

I am incensed at the insolence of the young Levite.  Thou wilt highly
oblige me, if thou'lt find him out, and send me his ears in the next
letter.

My beloved mistakes me, if she thinks I proposed her writing to me as an
alternative that should dispense with my attendance upon her.  That it
shall not do, nor did I intend it should, unless she pleased me better in
the contents of her letter than she has done.  Bid her read again.  I
gave no such hopes.  I would have been with her in spite of you both, by
to-morrow, at farthest, had I not been laid by the heels thus, like a
helpless miscreant.

But I grow better and better every hour, I say: the doctor says not: but
I am sure I know best: and I will soon be in London, depend on't.  But
say nothing of this to my dear, cruel, and implacable Miss Harlowe.

A--dieu--u, Ja--aack--What a gaping puppy (yaw--n! yaw--n! yaw--n!)

Thy
LOVELACE.



LETTER VIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, AUG. 15.


I am extremely concerned for thy illness.  I should be very sorry to lose
thee.  Yet, if thou diest so soon, I could wish, from my soul, it had
been before the beginning of last April: and this as well for thy sake,
as for the sake of the most excellent woman in the world: for then thou
wouldst not have had the most crying sin of thy life to answer for.

I was told on Saturday that thou wert very much out of order; and this
made me forbear writing till I heard farther.  Harry, on his return from
thee, confirmed the bad way thou art in.  But I hope Lord M. in his
unmerited tenderness for thee, thinks the worst of thee.  What can it be,
Bob.?  A violent fever, they say; but attended with odd and severe
symptoms.

I will not trouble thee in the way thou art in, with what passes here
with Miss Harlowe.  I wish thy repentance as swift as thy illness; and as
efficacious, if thou diest; for it is else to be feared, that she and you
will never meet in one place.

I told her how ill you are.  Poor man! said she.  Dangerously ill, say
you?

Dangerously indeed, Madam!--So Lord M. sends me word!

God be merciful to him, if he die!--said the admirable creature.--Then,
after a pause, Poor wretch!--may he meet with the mercy he has not shown!

I send this by a special messenger: for I am impatient to hear how it
goes with thee.--If I have received thy last letter, what melancholy
reflections will that last, so full of shocking levity, give to

Thy true friend,
JOHN BELFORD.



LETTER IX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 15.*


* Text error: should be Aug. 16.


Thank thee, Jack; most heartily I thank thee, for the sober conclusion of
thy last!--I have a good mind, for the sake of it, to forgive thy till
now absolutely unpardonable extracts.

But dost think I will lose such an angel, such a forgiving angel, as
this?--By my soul, I will not!--To pray for mercy for such an ungrateful
miscreant!--how she wounds me, how she cuts me to the soul, by her
exalted generosity!--But SHE must have mercy upon me first!--then will
she teach me a reliance for the sake of which her prayer for me will be
answered.

But hasten, hasten to me particulars of her health, of her employments,
of her conversation.

I am sick only of love!  Oh! that I could have called her mine!--it would
then have been worth while to be sick!--to have sent for her down to me
from town; and to have had her, with healing in her dove-like wings,
flying to my comfort; her duty and her choice to pray for me, and to bid
me live for her sake!--O Jack! what an angel have I--

But I have not lost her!--I will not lose her!  I am almost well; should
be quite well but for these prescribing rascals, who, to do credit to
their skill, will make the disease of importance.--And I will make her
mine!--and be sick again, to entitle myself to her dutiful tenderness,
and pious as well as personal concern!

God for ever bless her!--Hasten, hasten particulars of her!--I am sick
of love!--such generous goodness!--By all that's great and good, I will
not lose her!--so tell her!--She says, that she could not pity me, if she
thought of being mine!  This, according to Miss Howe's transcriptions to
Charlotte.--But bid her hate me, and have me: and my behaviour to her
shall soon turn that hate to love! for, body and mind, I will be wholly
her's.



LETTER X

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, AUG. 17.


I am sincerely rejoiced to hear that thou art already so much amended, as
thy servant tells me thou art.  Thy letter looks as if thy morals were
mending with thy health.  This was a letter I could show, as I did, to
the lady.

She is very ill: (cursed letters received from her implacable family!) so
I could not have much conversation with her, in thy favour, upon it.--But
what passed will make thee more and more adore her.

She was very attentive to me, as I read it; and, when I had done, Poor
man! said she; what a letter is this!  He had timely instances that my
temper was not ungenerous, if generosity could have obliged him!  But his
remorse, and that for his own sake, is all the punishment I wish him.--
Yet I must be more reserved, if you write to him every thing I say!

I extolled her unbounded goodness--how could I help it, though to her
face!

No goodness in it! she said--it was a frame of mind she had endeavoured
after for her own sake.  She suffered too much in want of mercy, not to
wish it to a penitent heart.  He seems to be penitent, said she; and it
is not for me to judge beyond appearances.--If he be not, he deceives
himself more than any body else.

She was so ill that this was all that passed on the occasion.

What a fine subject for tragedy, would the injuries of this lady, and her
behaviour under them, both with regard to her implacable friends, and to
her persecutor, make!  With a grand objection as to the moral,
nevertheless;* for here virtue is punished!  Except indeed we look
forward to the rewards of HEREAFTER, which, morally, she must be sure of,
or who can?  Yet, after all, I know not, so sad a fellow art thou, and so
vile an husband mightest thou have made, whether her virtue is not
rewarded in missing thee: for things the most grievous to human nature,
when they happen, as this charming creature once observed, are often the
happiest for us in the event.


* Mr. Belford's objections, That virtue ought not to suffer in a tragedy,
is not well considered: Monimia in the Orphean, Belvidera in Venice
Preserved, Athenais in Theodosius, Cordelia in Shakespeare's King Lear,
Desdemona in Othello, Hamlet, (to name no more,) are instances that a
tragedy could hardly be justly called a tragedy, if virtue did not
temporarily suffer, and vice for a while triumph.  But he recovers
himself in the same paragraph; and leads us to look up to the FUTURE for
the reward of virtue, and for the punishment of guilt: and observes not
amiss, when he says, He knows not but that the virtue of such a woman as
Clarissa is rewarded in missing such a man as Lovelace.


I have frequently thought, in my attendance on this lady, that if
Belton's admired author, Nic. Rowe, had had such a character before him,
he would have drawn another sort of penitent than he has done, or given
his play, which he calls The Fair Penitent, a fitter title.  Miss Harlowe
is a penitent indeed!  I think, if I am not guilty of a contradiction in
terms; a penitent without a fault; her parents' conduct towards her from
the first considered.

The whole story of the other is a pack of d----d stuff.  Lothario, 'tis
true, seems such another wicked ungenerous varlet as thou knowest who:
the author knew how to draw a rake; but not to paint a penitent.  Calista
is a desiring luscious wench, and her penitence is nothing else but rage,
insolence, and scorn.  Her passions are all storm and tumult; nothing of
the finer passions of the sex, which, if naturally drawn, will
distinguish themselves from the masculine passions, by a softness that
will even shine through rage and despair.  Her character is made up of
deceit and disguise.  She has no virtue; is all pride; and her devil is
as much within her, as without her.

How then can the fall of such a one create a proper distress, when all
the circumstances of it are considered?  For does she not brazen out her
crime, even after detection?  Knowing her own guilt, she calls for
Altamont's vengeance on his best friend, as if he had traduced her;
yields to marry Altamont, though criminal with another; and actually beds
that whining puppy, when she had given up herself, body and soul, to
Lothario; who, nevertheless, refused to marry her.

Her penitence, when begun, she justly styles the phrensy of her soul;
and, as I said, after having, as long as she could, most audaciously
brazened out her crime, and done all the mischief she could do,
(occasioning the death of Lothario, of her father, and others,) she stabs
herself.

And can this be the act of penitence?

But, indeed, our poets hardly know how to create a distress without
horror, murder, and suicide; and must shock your soul, to bring tears
from your eyes.

Altamont indeed, who is an amorous blockhead, a credulous cuckold, and,
(though painted as a brave fellow, and a soldier,) a mere Tom. Essence,
and a quarreler with his best friend, dies like a fool, (as we are led to
suppose at the conclusion of the play,) without either sword or pop-gun,
of mere grief and nonsense for one of the vilest of her sex: but the Fair
Penitent, as she is called, perishes by her own hand; and, having no
title by her past crimes to laudable pity, forfeits all claim to true
penitence, and, in all probability, to future mercy.

But here is Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, a virtuous, noble, wise, and pious
young lady; who being ill used by her friends, and unhappily ensnared by
a vile libertine, whom she believes to be a man of honour, is in a manner
forced to throw herself upon his protection.  And he, in order to obtain
her confidence, never scruples the deepest and most solemn protestations
of honour.

After a series of plots and contrivances, al baffled by her virtue and
vigilance, he basely has recourse to the vilest of arts, and, to rob her
of her honour, is forced first to rob her of her senses.

Unable to bring her, notwithstanding, to his ungenerous views of
cohabitation, she over-awes him in the very entrance of a fresh act of
premeditated guilt, in presence of the most abandoned of women assembled
to assist his devilish purpose; triumphs over them all, by virtue only of
her innocence; and escapes from the vile hands he had put her into.

She nobly, not franticly, resents: refuses to see or to marry the wretch;
who, repenting his usage of so divine a creature, would fain move her to
forgive his baseness, and make him her husband: and this, though
persecuted by all her friends, and abandoned to the deepest distress,
being obliged, from ample fortunes, to make away with her apparel for
subsistence; surrounded also by strangers, and forced (in want of others)
to make a friend of the friend of her seducer.

Though longing for death, and making all proper preparations for it,
convinced that grief and ill usage have broken her noble heart, she
abhors the impious thought of shortening her allotted period; and, as
much a stranger to revenge as despair, is able to forgive the author of
her ruin; wishes his repentance, and that she may be the last victim to
his barbarous perfidy: and is solicitous for nothing so much in this
life, as to prevent vindictive mischief to and from the man who used her
so basely.

This is penitence!  This is piety!  And hence distress naturally arises,
that must worthily effect every heart.

Whatever the ill usage of this excellent woman is from her relations, she
breaks not out into excesses: she strives, on the contrary, to find
reason to justify them at her own expense; and seems more concerned for
their cruelty to her for their sakes hereafter, when she shall be no
more, than for her own: for, as to herself, she is sure, she says, God
will forgive her, though no one on earth will.

On every extraordinary provocation she has recourse to the Scriptures,
and endeavours to regulate her vehemence by sacred precedents.  'Better
people, she says, have been more afflicted than she, grievous as she
sometimes thinks her afflictions: and shall she not bear what less faulty
persons have borne?'  On the very occasion I have mentioned, (some new
instances of implacableness from her friends,) the enclosed meditation
will show how mildly, and yet how forcibly, she complains.  See if thou,
in the wicked levity of thy heart, canst apply it to thy cause, as thou
didst the other.  If thou canst not, give way to thy conscience, and that
will make the properest application.


MEDITATION

How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words!

Be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.

To her that is afflicted, pity should be shown from her friend.

But she that is ready to slip with her feet, is as a lamp despised in the
thought of them that are at ease.

There is a shame which bringeth sin, and there is a shame which bringeth
glory and grace.

Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye, my friends! for the hand of
God hath touched me.

If your soul were in my soul's stead, I also could speak as ye do: I
could heap up words against you--

But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips
should assuage your grief.

Why will ye break a leaf driven to and fro?  Why will ye pursue the dry
stubble?  Why will ye write bitter words against me, and make me possess
the iniquities of my youth?

Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of rain in the
time of drought.

Are not my days few?  Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take
comfort a little--before I go whence I shall not return; even to the land
of darkness, and shadow of death!


Let me add, that the excellent lady is informed, by a letter from Mrs.
Norton, that Colonel Morden is just arrived in England.  He is now the
only person she wishes to see.

I expressed some jealousy upon it, lest he should have place given over
me in the executorship.  She said, That she had no thoughts to do so now;
because such a trust, were he to accept of it, (which she doubted,)
might, from the nature of some of the papers which in that case would
necessarily pass through his hands, occasion mischiefs between my friend
and him, that would be worse than death for her to think of.

Poor Belton, I hear, is at death's door.  A messenger is just come from
him, who tells me he cannot die till he sees me.  I hope the poor fellow
will not go off yet; since neither his affairs of this world, nor for the
other, are in tolerable order.  I cannot avoid going to the poor man.
Yet am unwilling to stir, till I have an assurance from you that you will
not disturb the lady: for I know he will be very loth to part with me,
when he gets me to him.

Tourville tells me how fast thou mendest: let me conjure thee not to
think of molesting this incomparable woman.  For thy own sake I request
this, as well as for her's, and for the sake of thy given promise: for,
should she die within a few weeks, as I fear she will, it will be said,
and perhaps too justly, that thy visit has hastened her end.

In hopes thou wilt not, I wish thy perfect recovery: else that thou
mayest relapse, and be confined to thy bed.



LETTER XI

MR. BELFORD, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. MORN. AUG. 19.


MADAM,

I think myself obliged in honour to acquaint you that I am afraid Mr.
Lovelace will try his fate by an interview with you.

I wish to Heaven you could prevail upon yourself to receive his visit.
All that is respectful, even to veneration, and all that is penitent,
will you see in his behaviour, if you can admit of it.  But as I am
obliged to set out directly for Epsom, (to perform, as I apprehend, the
last friendly offices for poor Mr. Belton, whom once you saw,) and as I
think it more likely that Mr. Lovelace will not be prevailed upon, than
that he will, I thought fit to give you this intimation, lest, if he
should come, you should be too much surprised.

He flatters himself that you are not so ill as I represent you to be.
When he sees you, he will be convinced that the most obliging things he
can do, will be as proper to be done for the sake of his own future peace
of mind, as for your health-sake; and, I dare say, in fear of hurting the
latter, he will forbear the thoughts of any farther intrusion; at least
while you are so much indisposed: so that one half-hour's shock, if it
will be a shock to see the unhappy man, (but just got up himself from a
dangerous fever,) will be all you will have occasion to stand.

I beg you will not too much hurry and discompose yourself.  It is
impossible he can be in town till Monday, at soonest.  And if he resolve
to come, I hope to be at Mr. Smith's before him.

I am, Madam, with the profoundest veneration,

Your most faithful and most obedient servant,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XII
MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO HIS OF AUG. 17.  SEE LETTER X. OF THIS VOLUME.]
SUNDAY, AUG. 20.


What an unmerciful fellow art thou!  A man has no need of a conscience,
who has such an impertinent monitor.  But if Nic. Rowe wrote a play that
answers not his title, am I to be reflected upon for that?--I have
sinned; I repent; I would repair--she forgives my sin: she accepts my
repentance: but she won't let me repair--What wouldst thou have me do?

But get thee gone to Belton, as soon as thou canst.  Yet whether thou
goest or not, up I must go, and see what I can do with the sweet oddity
myself.  The moment these prescribing varlets will let me, depend
upon it, I go.  Nay, Lord M. thinks she ought to permit me one interview.
His opinion has great authority with me--when it squares with my own: and
I have assured him, and my two cousins, that I will behave with all the
decency and respect that man can behave with to the person whom he most
respects.  And so I will.  Of this, if thou choosest not to go to Belton
mean time, thou shalt be witness.

Colonel Morden, thou hast heard me say, is a man of honour and bravery:--
but Colonel Morden has had his girls, as well as you or I.  And indeed,
either openly or secretly, who has not?  The devil always baits with a
pretty wench, when he angles for a man, be his age, rank, or degree, what
it will.

I have often heard my beloved speak of the Colonel with great distinction
and esteem.  I wish he could make matters a little easier, for her mind's
sake, between the rest of the implacables and herself.

Methinks I am sorry for honest Belton.  But a man cannot be ill, or
vapourish, but thou liftest up thy shriek-owl note, and killest him
immediately.  None but a fellow, who is for a drummer in death's
forlorn-hope, could take so much delight, as thou dost, in beating a
dead-march with thy goose-quills.  Whereas, didst thou but know thine own
talents, thou art formed to give mirth by thy very appearance; and
wouldst make a better figure by half, leading up thy brother-bears at
Hockley in the Hole, to the music of a Scot's bagpipe.  Methinks I see
thy clumsy sides shaking, (and shaking the sides of all beholders,) in
these attitudes; thy fat head archly beating time on thy porterly
shoulders, right and left by turns, as I once beheld thee practising to
the horn-pipe at Preston.  Thou remembrest the frolick, as I have done
an hundred times; for I never before saw thee appear so much in
character.

But I know what I shall get by this--only that notable observation
repeated, That thy outside is the worst of thee, and mine the best of me.
And so let it be.  Nothing thou writest of this sort can I take amiss.

But I shall call thee seriously to account, when I see thee, for the
extracts thou hast given the lady from my letters, notwithstanding what I
said in my last; especially if she continue to refuse me.  An hundred
times have I myself known a woman deny, yet comply at last: but, by these
extracts, thou hast, I doubt, made her bar up the door of her heart, as
she used to do her chamber-door, against me.--This therefore is a
disloyalty that friendship cannot bear, nor honour allow me to forgive.



LETTER XIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
LONDON, AUG. 21, MONDAY.


I believe I am bound to curse thee, Jack.  Nevertheless I won't
anticipate, but proceed to write thee a longer letter than thou hast had
from me for some time past.  So here goes.

That thou mightest have as little notice as possible of the time I was
resolved to be in town, I set out in my Lord's chariot-and-six yesterday,
as soon as I had dispatched my letter to thee, and arrived in town last
night: for I knew I could have no dependence on thy friendship where Miss
Harlowe's humour was concerned.

I had no other place so ready, and so was forced to go to my old
lodgings, where also my wardrobe is; and there I poured out millions of
curses upon the whole crew, and refused to see either Sally or Polly; and
this not only for suffering the lady to escape, but for the villanous
arrest, and for their detestable insolence to her at the officer's house.

I dressed myself in a never-worn suit, which I had intended for one of my
wedding-suits; and liked myself so well, that I began to think, with
thee, that my outside was the best of me:

I took a chair to Smith's, my heart bounding in almost audible thumps to
my throat, with the assured expectations of seeing my beloved.  I clasped
my fingers, as I was danced along: I charged my eyes to languish and
sparkle by turns: I talked to my knees, telling them how they must bend;
and, in the language of a charming describer, acted my part in fancy, as
well as spoke it to myself.

      Tenderly kneeling, thus will I complain:
      Thus court her pity; and thus plead my pain:
      Thus sigh for fancy'd frowns, if frowns should rise;
      And thus meet favour in her soft'ning eyes.

In this manner entertained I myself till I arrived at Smith's; and there
the fellows set down their gay burden.  Off went their hats; Will. ready
at hand in a new livery; up went the head; out rushed my honour; the
woman behind the counter all in flutters, respect and fear giving due
solemnity to her features, and her knees, I doubt not, knocking against
the inside of her wainscot-fence.

Your servant, Madam--Will. let the fellows move to some distance, and
wait.

You have a young lady lodges here; Miss Harlowe, Madam: Is she above?

Sir, Sir, and please your Honour: [the woman is struck with my figure,
thought I:] Miss Harlowe, Sir!  There is, indeed, such a young lady
lodges here--But, but--

But, what, Madam?--I must see her.--One pair of stairs; is it not?--
Don't trouble yourself--I shall find her apartment.  And was making
towards the stairs.

Sir, Sir, the lady, the lady is not at home--she is abroad--she is in the
country--

In the country!  Not at home!--Impossible!  You will not pass this story
upon me, good woman.  I must see her.  I have business of life and death
with her.

Indeed, Sir, the lady is not at home!  Indeed, Sir, she is abroad!--

She then rung a bell: John, cried she, pray step down!--Indeed, Sir, the
lady is not at home.

Down came John, the good man of the house, when I expected one of his
journeymen, by her saucy familiarity.

My dear, said she, the gentleman will not believe Miss Harlowe is abroad.

John bowed to my fine clothes: Your servant, Sir,--indeed the lady is
abroad.  She went out of town this morning by six o'clock--into the
country--by the doctor's advice.

Still I would not believe either John or his wife.  I am sure, said I,
she cannot be abroad.  I heard she was very ill--she is not able to go
out in a coach.  Do you know Mr. Belford, friend?

Yes, Sir; I have the honour to know 'Squire Belford.  He is gone into the
country to visit a sick friend.  He went on Saturday, Sir.

This had also been told from thy lodgings to Will. whom I sent to desire
to see thee on my first coming to town.

Well, and Mr. Belford wrote me word that she was exceeding ill.  How then
can she be gone out?

O Sir, she is very ill; very ill, indeed--she could hardly walk to the
coach.

Belford, thought I, himself knew nothing of the time of my coming;
neither can he have received my letter of yesterday: and so ill, 'tis
impossible she would go out.

Where is her servant?  Call her servant to me.

Her servant, Sir, is her nurse: she has no other.  And she is gone with
her.

Well, friend, I must not believe you.  You'll excuse me; but I must go up
stairs myself.  And was stepping up.

John hereupon put on a serious, and a less respectful face--Sir, this
house is mine; and--

And what, friend? not doubting then but she was above.--I must and will
see her.  I have authority for it.  I am a justice of the peace.  I have
a search warrant.

And up I went; they following me, muttering, and in a plaguy flutter.

The first door I came to was locked.  I tapped at it.

The lady, Sir, has the key of her own apartment.

On the inside, I question not, my honest friend; tapping again.  And
being assured, if she heard my voice, that her timorous and soft temper
would make her betray herself, by some flutters, to my listning ear, I
said aloud, I am confident Miss Harlowe is here: dearest Madam, open the
door: admit me but for one moment to your presence.

But neither answer nor fluttering saluted my ear; and, the people being
very quiet, I led on to the next apartment; and, the key being on the
outside, I opened it, and looked all around it, and into the closet.

The mans said he never saw so uncivil a gentleman in his life.

Hark thee, friend, said I; let me advise thee to be a little decent; or
I shall teach thee a lesson thou never learnedst in all thy life.

Sir, said he, 'tis not like a gentleman, to affront a man in his own
house.

Then prythee, man, replied I, don't crow upon thine own dunghil.

I stept back to the locked door: My dear Miss Harlowe, I beg of you to
open the door, or I'll break it open;--pushing hard against it, that it
cracked again.

The man looked pale: and, trembling with his fright, made a plaguy long
face; and called to one of his bodice-makers above, Joseph, come down
quickly.

Joseph came down: a lion's-face grinning fellow; thick, and short, and
bushy-headed, like an old oak-pollard.  Then did master John put on a
sturdier look.  But I only hummed a tune, traversed all the other
apartments, sounded the passages with my knuckles, to find whether there
were private doors, and walked up the next pair of stairs, singing all
the way; John and Joseph, and Mrs. Smith, following me up, trembling.

I looked round me there, and went into two open-door bed-chambers;
searched the closets, and the passages, and peeped through the key-hole
of another: no Miss Harlowe, by Jupiter!  What shall I do!--what shall I
do! as the girls say.--Now will she be grieved that she is out of the
way.

I said this on purpose to find out whether these people knew the lady's
story; and had the answer I expected from Mrs. Smith--I believe not, Sir.

Why so, Mrs. Smith?  Do you know who I am?

I can guess, Sir.

Whom do you guess me to be?

Your name is Mr. Lovelace, Sir, I make no doubt.

The very same.  But how came you to guess so well, dame Smith!  You never
saw me before, did you?

Here, Jack, I laid out for a compliment, and missed it.

'Tis easy to guess, Sir; for there cannot be two such gentlemen as you.

Well said, dame Smith--but mean you good or bad?--Handsome was the least
I thought she would have said.

I leave you to guess, Sir.

Condemned, thought I, by myself, on this appeal.

Why, father Smith, thy wife is a wit, man!--Didst thou ever find that out
before?--But where is widow Lovick, dame Smith?  My cousin John Belford
says she is a very good woman.  Is she within? or is she gone with Miss
Harlowe too?

She will be within by-and-by, Sir.  She is not with the lady.

Well, but my good dear Mrs. Smith, where is the lady gone? and when will
she return?

I can't tell, Sir.

Don't tell fibs, dame Smith; don't tell fibs, chucking her under the
chin: which made John's upper-lip, with chin shortened, rise to his nose.
--I am sure you know!--But here's another pair of stairs: let us see: Who
lives up there?--but hold, here's another room locked up, tapping at the
door--Who's at home? cried I.

That's Mrs. Lovick's apartment.  She is gone out, and has the key with
her.

Widow Lovick! rapping again, I believe you are at home: pray open the
door.

John and Joseph muttered and whispered together.

No whispering, honest friends: 'tis not manners to whisper.  Joseph, what
said John to thee?

JOHN! Sir, disdainfully repeated the good woman.

I beg pardon, Mrs. Smith: but you see the force of example.  Had you
showed your honest man more respect, I should.  Let me give you a piece
of advice--women who treat their husbands irreverently, teach strangers
to use them with contempt.  There, honest master John; why dost not pull
off thy hat to me?--Oh! so thou wouldst, if thou hadst it on: but thou
never wearest thy hat in thy wife's presence, I believe; dost thou?

None of your fleers and your jeers, Sir, cried John.  I wish every
married pair lived as happily as we do.

I wish so too, honest friend.  But I'll be hanged if thou hast any
children.

Why so, Sir?

Hast thou?--Answer me, man: Hast thou, or not?

Perhaps not, Sir.  But what of that?

What of that?--Why I'll tell thee: The man who has no children by his
wife must put up with plain John.  Hadst thou a child or two, thou'dst be
called Mr. Smith, with a courtesy, or a smile at least, at every word.

You are very pleasant, Sir, replied my dame.  I fancy, if either my
husband or I had as much to answer for as I know whom, we should not be
so merry.

Why then, dame Smith, so much the worse for those who were obliged to
keep you company.  But I am not merry--I am sad!--Hey-ho!--Where shall I
find my dear Miss Harlowe?

My beloved Miss Harlowe! [calling at the foot of the third pair of
stairs,] if you are above, for Heaven's sake answer me.  I am coming up.

Sir, said the good man, I wish you'd walk down.  The servants' rooms, and
the working-rooms, are up those stairs, and another pair; and nobody's
there that you want.

Shall I go up, and see if Miss Harlowe be there, Mrs. Smith?

You may, Sir, if you please.

Then I won't; for, if she was, you would not be so obliging.

I am ashamed to give you all this attendance: you are the politest
traders I ever knew.  Honest Joseph, slapping him upon the shoulders on
a sudden, which made him jump, didst ever grin for a wager, man?--for the
rascal seemed not displeased with me; and, cracking his flat face from
ear to ear, with a distended mouth, showed his teeth, as broad and as
black as his thumb-nails.--But don't I hinder thee?  What canst earn
a-day, man?

Half-a-crown I can earn a-day; with an air of pride and petulance, at
being startled.

There then is a day's wages for thee.  But thou needest not attend me
farther.

Come, Mrs. Smith, come John, (Master Smith I should say,) let's walk
down, and give me an account where the lady is gone, and when she will
return.

So down stairs led I.  John and Joseph (thought I had discharged the
latter,) and my dame, following me, to show their complaisance to a
stranger.

I re-entered one of the first-floor rooms.  I have a great mind to be
your lodger: for I never saw such obliging folks in my life.  What rooms
have you to let?

None at all, Sir.

I am sorry for that.  But whose is this?

Mine, Sir, chuffily said John.

Thine, man! why then I will take it of thee.  This, and a bed-chamber,
and a garret for one servant, will content me.  I will give thee thine
own price, and half a guinea a day over, for those conveniencies.

For ten guineas a day, Sir--

Hold, John! (Master Smith I should say)--Before thou speakest, consider--
I won't be affronted, man.

Sir, I wish you'd walk down, said the good woman.  Really, Sir, you
take--

Great liberties I hope you would not say, Mrs. Smith?

Indeed, Sir, I was going to say something like it.

Well, then, I am glad I prevented you; for such words better become my
mouth than yours.  But I must lodge with you till the lady returns.  I
believe I must.  However, you may be wanted in the shop; so we'll talk
that over there.

Down I went, they paying diligent attendance on my steps.

When I came into the shop, seeing no chair or stool, I went behind the
compter, and sat down under an arched kind of canopy of carved work,
which these proud traders, emulating the royal niche-fillers, often give
themselves, while a joint-stool, perhaps, serves those by whom they get
their bread: such is the dignity of trade in this mercantile nation!

I looked about me, and above me; and told them I was very proud of my
seat; asking, if John were ever permitted to fill this superb niche?

Perhaps he was, he said, very surlily.

That is it that makes thee looks so like a statue, man.

John looked plaguy glum upon me.  But his man Joseph and my man Will.
turned round with their backs to us, to hide their grinning, with each
his fist in his mouth.

I asked, what it was they sold?

Powder, and wash-balls, and snuff, they said; and gloves and stockings.

O come, I'll be your customer.  Will. do I want wash-balls?

Yes, and please your Honour, you can dispense with one or two.

Give him half a dozen, dame Smith.

She told me she must come where I was, to serve them.  Pray, Sir, walk
from behind the compter.

Indeed but I won't.  The shop shall be mine.  Where are they, if a
customer shall come in?

She pointed over my head, with a purse mouth, as if she would not have
simpered, could she have helped it.  I reached down the glass, and gave
Will. six.  There--put 'em up, Sirrah.

He did, grinning with his teeth out before; which touching my conscience,
as the loss of them was owing to me, Joseph, said I, come hither.  Come
hither, man, when I bid thee.

He stalked towards me, his hands behind him, half willing, and half
unwilling.

I suddenly wrapt my arm round his neck.  Will. thy penknife, this moment.
D----n the fellow, where's thy penknife?

O Lord! said the pollard-headed dog, struggling to get his head loose
from under my arm, while my other hand was muzzling about his cursed
chaps, as if I would take his teeth out.

I will pay thee a good price, man: don't struggle thus?  The penknife,
Will.!

O Lord, cried Joseph, struggling still more and more: and out comes
Will.'s pruning-knife; for the rascal is a gardener in the country.  I
have only this, Sir.

The best in the world to launch a gum.  D----n the fellow, why dost
struggle thus?

Master and Mistress Smith being afraid, I suppose, that I had a design
upon Joseph's throat, because he was their champion, (and this, indeed,
made me take the more notice of him,) coming towards me with countenances
tragic-comical, I let him go.

I only wanted, said I, to take out two or three of this rascal's broad
teeth, to put them into my servant's jaws--and I would have paid him his
price for them.--I would by my soul, Joseph.

Joseph shook his ears; and with both hands stroked down, smooth as it
would lie, his bushy hair; and looked at me as if he knew not whether he
should laugh or be angry: but, after a stupid stare or two, stalked off
to the other end of the shop, nodding his head at me as he went, still
stroking down his hair; and took his stand by his master, facing about
and muttering, that I was plaguy strong in the arms, and he thought would
have throttled him.  Then folding his arms, and shaking his bristled
head, added, 'twas well I was a gentleman, or he would not have taken
such an affront.

I demanded where their rappee was? the good woman pointed to the place;
and I took up a scollop-shell of it, refusing to let her weight it, and
filled my box.  And now, Mrs. Smith, said I, where are your gloves?

She showed me; and I chose four pair of them, and set Joseph, who looked
as if he wanted to be taken notice of again, to open the fingers.

A female customer, who had been gaping at the door, came in for some
Scots sniff; and I would serve her.  The wench was plaguy homely; and I
told her so; or else, I said, I would have treated her.  She, in anger,
[no woman is homely in her own opinion,] threw down her penny; and I put
it in my pocket.

Just then, turning my eye to the door, I saw a pretty, genteel lady, with
a footman after her, peeping in with a What's the matter, good folks? to
the starers; and I ran to her from behind the compter, and, as she was
making off, took her hand, and drew her into the shop; begging that she
would be my customer; for that I had but just begun trade.

What do you sell, Sir? said she, smiling; but a little surprised.

Tapes, ribbands, silk laces, pins, and needles; for I am a pedlar:
powder, patches, wash-balls, stockings, garters, snuffs, and pin
cushions--Don't we, goody Smith?

So in I gently drew her to the compter, running behind it myself, with an
air of great dilingence and obligingness.  I have excellent gloves and
wash-balls, Madam: rappee, Scots, Portugal, and all sorts of snuff.

Well, said she, in a very good humour, I'll encourage a young beginner
for once.  Here, Andrew, [to her footman,] you want a pair of gloves,
don't you?

I took down a parcel of gloves, which Mrs. Smith pointed to, and came
round to the fellow to fit them on myself.

No matter for opening them, said I: thy fingers, friend, are as stiff as
drum-sticks.  Push!--Thou'rt an awkward dog!  I wonder such a pretty lady
will be followed by such a clumsy varlet.

The fellow had no strength for laughing: and Joseph was mightily pleased,
in hopes, I suppose, I would borrow a few of Andrew's teeth, to keep him
in countenance: and, father and mother Smith, like all the world, as the
jest was turned from themselves, seemed diverted with the humour.

The fellow said the gloves were too little.

Thrust, and be d----d to thee, said I: why, fellow, thou hast not the
strength of a cat.

Sir, Sir, said he, laughing, I shall hurt your Honour's side.

D----n thee, thrust I say.

He did; and burst out the sides of the glove.

Will. said I, where's thy pruning-knife?  By my soul, friend, I had a
good mind to pare thy cursed paws.  But come, here's a larger pair: try
them, when thou gettest home; and let thy sweetheart, if thou hast one,
mend the other, so take both.

The lady laughed at the humour; as did my fellow, and Mrs. Smith, and
Joseph: even John laughed, though he seemed by the force put upon his
countenance to be but half pleased with me neither.

Madam, said I, and stepped behind the compter, bowing over it, now I hope
you will buy something for yourself.  Nobody shall use you better, nor
sell you cheaper.

Come, said she, give me six-penny worth of Portugal snuff.

They showed me where it was, and I served her; and said, when she would
have paid me, I took nothing at my opening.

If I treated her footman, she told me, I should not treat her.

Well, with all my heart, said I: 'tis not for us tradesmen to be saucy--
Is it, Mrs. Smith?

I put her sixpence in my pocket; and, seizing her hand, took notice to
her of the crowd that had gathered about the door, and besought her to
walk into the back-shop with me.

She struggled her hand out of mine, and would stay no longer.

So I bowed, and bid her kindly welcome, and thanked her, and hoped I
should have her custom another time.

She went away smiling; and Andrew after her; who made me a fine bow.

I began to be out of countenance at the crowd, which thickened apace; and
bid Will. order the chair to the door.

Well, Mrs. Smith, with a grave air, I am heartily sorry Miss Harlowe is
abroad.  You don't tell me where she is?

Indeed, Sir, I cannot.

You will not, you mean.--She could have no notion of my coming.  I came
to town but last night.  I have been very ill.  She has almost broken my
heart by her cruelty.  You know my story, I doubt not.  Tell her, I must
go out of town to-morrow morning.  But I will send my servant, to know if
she will favour me with one half-hour's conversation; for, as soon as I
get down, I shall set out for Dover, in my way to France, if I have not a
countermand from her, who has the sole disposal of my fate.

And so flinging down a Portugal six-and-thirty, I took Mr. Smith by the
hand, telling him, I was sorry we had not more time to be better
acquainted; and bidding farewell to honest Joseph, (who pursed up his
mouth as I passed by him, as if he thought his teeth still in jeopardy,)
and Mrs. Smith adieu, and to recommend me to her fair lodger, hummed an
air, and, the chair being come, whipt into it; the people about the door
seeming to be in good humour with me; one crying, a pleasant gentleman, I
warrant him! and away I was carried to White's, according to direction.

As soon as I came thither, I ordered Will. to go and change his clothes,
and to disguise himself by putting on his black wig, and keeping his
mouth shut; and then to dodge about Smith's, to inform himself of the
lady's motions.


***


I give thee this impudent account of myself, that thou mayest rave at me,
and call me hardened, and what thou wilt.  For, in the first place, I,
who had been so lately ill, was glad I was alive; and then I was so
balked by my charmer's unexpected absence, and so ruffled by that, and by
the bluff treatment of father John, that I had no other way to avoid
being out of humour with all I met with.  Moreover I was rejoiced to
find, by the lady's absence, and by her going out at six in the morning,
that it was impossible she should be so ill as thou representest her to
be; and this gave me still higher spirits.  Then I know the sex always
love cheerful and humourous fellows.  The dear creature herself used to
be pleased with my gay temper and lively manner; and had she been told
that I was blubbering for her in the back-shop, she would have despised
me still more than she does.

Furthermore, I was sensible that the people of the house must needs have
a terrible notion of me, as a savage, bloody-minded, obdurate fellow; a
perfect woman-eater; and, no doubt, expected to see me with the claws of
a lion, and the fangs of a tiger; and it was but policy to show them what
a harmless pleasant fellow I am, in order to familiarize the Johns and
the Josephs to me.  For it was evident to me, by the good woman's calling
them down, that she thought me a dangerous man.  Whereas now, John and I
have shaken hands together, and dame Smith having seen that I have the
face, and hands, and looks of a man, and walk upright, and prate, and
laugh, and joke, like other people; and Joseph, that I can talk of taking
his teeth out of his head, without doing him the least hurt; they will
all, at my next visit, be much more easy and pleasant to me than Andrew's
gloves were to him; and we shall be as thoroughly acquainted, as if we
had known one another a twelvemonth.

When I returned to our mother's, I again cursed her and all her nymphs
together; and still refused to see either Sally or Polly!  I raved at the
horrid arrest; and told the old dragon that it was owing to her and her's
that the fairest virtue in the world was ruined; my reputation for ever
blasted; and that I was not married and perfectly happy in the love of
the most excellent of her sex.

She, to pacify me, said she would show me a new face that would please
me; since I would not see my Sally, who was dying with grief.

Where is this new face? cried I: let me see her, though I shall never see
any face with pleasure but Miss Harlowe's.

She won't come down, replied she.  She will not be at the word of command
yet.  She is but just in the trammels; and must be waited upon, I'll
assure you; and courted much besides.

Ay! said I, that looks well.  Lead me to her this instant.

I followed her up: and who should she be, but that little toad Sally!

O curse you, said I, for a devil!  Is it you? is your's the new face?

O my dear, dear Mr. Lovelace! cried she, I am glad any thing will bring
you to me!--and so the little beast threw herself about my neck, and
there clung like a cat.  Come, said she, what will you give me, and I'll
be as virtuous for a quarter of an hour, and mimic your Clarissa to the
life?

I was Belforded all over.  I could not bear such an insult upon the dear
creature, (for I have a soft and generous nature in the main, whatever
thou thinkest;) and cursed her most devoutly, for taking my beloved's
name in her mouth in such a way.  But the little devil was not to be
balked; but fell a crying, sobbing, praying, begging, exclaiming,
fainting, that I never saw my lovely girl so well aped.  Indeed I was
almost taken in; for I could have fancied I had her before me once more.

O this sex! this artful sex! there's no minding them.  At first, indeed,
their grief and their concern may be real: but, give way to the
hurricane, and it will soon die away in soft murmurs, thrilling upon your
ears like the notes of a well-tuned viol.  And, by Sally, one sees that
art will generally so well supply the place of nature, that you shall not
easily know the difference.  Miss Clarisa Harlowe, indeed, is the only
woman in the world I believe that can say, in the words of her favourite
Job, (for I can quote a text as well as she,) But it is not so with me.

They were very inquisitive about my fair-one.  They told me that you
seldom came near them; that, when you did, you put on plaguy grave airs;
would hardly stay five minutes; and did nothing but praise Miss Harlowe,
and lament her hard fate.  In short, that you despised them; was full of
sentences; and they doubted not, in a little while, would be a lost man,
and marry.

A pretty character for thee, is it not? thou art in a blessed way; yet
hast nothing to do but to go on in it: and then what work hast thou to go
through!  If thou turnest back, these sorceresses will be like the czar's
cossacks, [at Pultowa, I think it was,] who were planted with ready
primed and cocked pieces behind the regulars, in order to shoot them
dead, if they did not push on and conquer; and then wilt thou be most
lamentably despised by every harlot thou hast made--and, O Jack, how
formidable, in that case, will be the number of thy enemies!

I intend to regulate my motions by Will.'s intelligence; for see this
dear creature I must and will.  Yet I have promised Lord M. to be down in
two or three days at farthest; for he is grown plaguy fond of me since I
was ill.

I am in hopes that the word I left, that I am to go out of town to-morrow
morning, will soon bring the lady back again.

Mean time, I thought I would write to divert thee, while thou art of such
importance about the dying; and as thy servant, it seems, comes backward
and forward every day, perhaps I may send thee another letter to-morrow,
with the particulars of the interview between the dear creature and me;
after which my soul thirsteth.



LETTER XIV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.


I must write on, to divert myself: for I can get no rest; no refreshing
rest.  I awaked just now in a cursed fright.  How a man may be affected
by dreams!

'Methought I had an interview with my beloved.  I found her all goodness,
condescension, and forgiveness.  She suffered herself to be overcome in
my favour by the joint intercessions of Lord M., Lady Sarah, Lady Betty,
and my two cousins Montague, who waited upon her in deep mourning; the
ladies in long trains sweeping after them; Lord M. in a long black mantle
trailing after him.  They told her they came in these robs to express
their sorrow for my sins against her, and to implore her to forgive me.

'I myself, I thought, was upon my knees, with a sword in my hand,
offering either to put it up in the scabbard, or to thrust it into my
heart, as she should command the one or the other.

'At that moment her cousin Morden, I thought, all of a sudden, flashed in
through a window, with his drawn sword--Die, Lovelace! said he; this
instant die, and be d----d, if in earnest thou repairest not by marriage
my cousin's wrongs!

'I was rising to resent this insult, I thought, when Lord M. ran between
us with his great black mantle, and threw it over my face: and instantly
my charmer, with that sweet voice which has so often played upon my
ravished ears, wrapped her arms around me, muffled as I was in my Lord's
mantle: O spare, spare my Lovelace! and spare, O Lovelace, my beloved
cousin Morden!  Let me not have my distresses augmented by the fall of
either or both of those who are so dear to me!

'At this, charmed with her sweet mediation, I thought I would have
clasped her in my arms: when immediately the most angelic form I had ever
beheld, all clad in transparent white, descended in a cloud, which,
opening, discovered a firmament above it, crowded with golden cherubs and
glittering seraphs, all addressing her with Welcome, welcome, welcome!
and, encircling my charmer, ascended with her to the region of seraphims;
and instantly, the opened cloud closing, I lost sight of her, and of the
bright form together, and found wrapt in my arms her azure robe (all
stuck thick with stars of embossed silver) which I had caught hold of in
hopes of detaining her; but was all that was left me of my beloved
Clarissa.  And then, (horrid to relate!) the floor sinking under me, as
the firmament had opened for her, I dropt into a hole more frightful than
that of Elden; and, tumbling over and over down it, without view of a
bottom, I awaked in a panic; and was as effectually disordered for half
an hour, as if my dream had been a reality.'

Wilt thou forgive my troubling thee with such visionary stuff?  Thou wilt
see by it only that, sleeping or waking, my Clarissa is always present
with me.

But here this moment is Will. come running hither to tell me that his
lady actually returned to her lodgings last night between eleven and
twelve; and is now there, though very ill.

I hasten to her.  But, that I may not add to her indisposition, by any
rough or boisterous behaviour, I will be as soft and gentle as the dove
herself in my addresses to her.

      That I do love her, I all ye host of Heaven,
      Be witness.--That she is dear to me!
      Dearer than day, to one whom sight must leave;
      Dearer than life, to one who fears to die!

The chair is come.  I fly to my beloved.



LETTER XV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


Curse upon my stars!--Disappointed again!  It was about eight when I
arrived at Smith's.--The woman was in the shop.

So, old acquaintance, how do you now?  I know my love is above.--Let her
be acquainted that I am here, waiting for admission to her presence, and
can take no denial.  Tell her, that I will approach her with the most
respectful duty, and in whose company she pleases; and I will not touch
the hem of her garment, without her leave.

Indeed, Sir, you are mistaken.  The lady is not in this house, nor near
it.

I'll see that.--Will.! beckoning him to me, and whispering, see if thou
canst any way find out (without losing sight of the door, lest she should
be below stairs) if she be in the neighbourhood, if not within.

Will. bowed, and went off.  Up went I, without further ceremony; attended
now only by the good woman.

I went into each apartment, except that which was locked before, and was
now also locked: and I called to my Clarissa in the voice of love; but,
by the still silence, was convinced she was not there.  Yet, on the
strength of my intelligence, I doubted not but she was in the house.

I then went up two pairs of stairs, and looked round the first room: but
no Miss Harlowe.

And who, pray, is in this room? stopping at the door of another.

A widow gentlewoman, Sir.--Mrs. Lovick.

O my dear Mrs. Lovick! said I.--I am intimately acquainted with Mrs.
Lovick's character, from my cousin John Belford.  I must see Mrs. Lovick
by all means.--Good Mrs. Lovick, open the door.

She did.

Your servant, Madam.  Be so good as to excuse me.--You have heard my
story.  You are an admirer of the most excellent woman in the world.
Dear Mrs. Lovick, tell me what is become of her?

The poor lady, Sir, went out yesterday, on purpose to avoid you.

How so? she knew not that I would be here.

She was afraid you would come, when she heard you were recovered from
your illness.  Ah! Sir, what pity it is that so fine a gentleman should
make such ill returns for God's goodness to him!

You are an excellent woman, Mrs. Lovick: I know that, by my cousin John
Belford's account of you: and Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an angel.

Miss Harlowe is indeed an angel, replied she; and soon will be company
for angels.

No jesting with such a woman as this, Jack.

Tell me of a truth, good Mrs. Lovick, where I may see this dear lady.
Upon my soul, I will neither fright for offend her.  I will only beg of
her to hear me speak for one half-quarter of an hour; and, if she will
have it so, I will never trouble her more.

Sir, said the widow, it would be death for her to see you.  She was at
home last night; I'll tell you truth: but fitter to be in bed all day.
She came home, she said, to die; and, if she could not avoid your visit,
she was unable to fly from you; and believed she should die in your
presence.

And yet go out again this morning early?  How can that be, widow?

Why, Sir, she rested not two hours, for fear of you.  Her fear gave her
strength, which she'll suffer for, when that fear is over.  And finding
herself, the more she thought of your visit, the less able to stay to
receive it, she took chair, and is gone nobody knows whither.  But, I
believe, she intended to be carried to the waterside, in order to take
boat; for she cannot bear a coach.  It extremely incommoded her
yesterday.

But before we talk any further, said I, if she be gone abroad, you can
have no objection to my looking into every apartment above and below;
because I am told she is actually in the house.

Indeed, Sir, she is not.  You may satisfy yourself, if you please: but
Mrs. Smith and I waited on her to her chair.  We were forced to support
her, she was so weak.  She said, Whither can I go, Mrs. Lovick?  whither
can I go, Mrs. Smith?--Cruel, cruel man!--tell him I called him so, if he
come again!--God give him that peace which he denies me!

Sweet creature! cried I; and looked down, and took out my handkerchief.

The widow wept.  I wish, said she, I had never known so excellent a lady,
and so great a sufferer!  I love her as my own child!

Mrs. Smith wept.

I then gave over the hope of seeing her for this time, I was extremely
chagrined at my disappointment, and at the account they gave of her ill
health.

Would to Heaven, said I, she would put it in my power to repair her
wrongs!  I have been an ungrateful wretch to her.  I need not tell you,
Mrs. Lovick, how much I have injured her, nor how much she suffers by her
relations' implacableness, Mrs. Smith, that cuts her to the heart.  Her
family is the most implacable family on earth; and the dear creature, in
refusing to see me, and to be reconciled to me, shows her relation to
them a little too plainly.

O Sir, said the widow, not one syllable of what you say belongs to this
lady.  I never saw so sweet a temper! she is always accusing herself, and
excusing her relations.  And, as to you, Sir, she forgives you: she
wishes you well; and happier than you will let her die in peace? 'tis all
she wishes for.  You don't look like a hard-hearted gentleman!--How can
you thus hunt and persecute a poor lady, whom none of her relations will
look upon?  It makes my heart bleed for her.

And then she wept again.  Mrs. Smith wept also.  My seat grew uneasy to
me. I shifted to another several times; and what Mrs. Lovick farther
said, and showed me, made me still more uneasy.

Bad as the poor lady was last night, said she, she transcribed into her
book a meditation on your persecuting her thus.  I have a copy of it.  If
I thought it would have any effect, I would read it to you.

Let me read it myself, Mrs. Lovick.

She gave it to me.  It has an Harlowe-spirited title: and, from a
forgiving spirit, intolerable.  I desired to take it with me.  She
consented, on condition  that I showed it to 'Squire Belford.  So here,
Mr. 'Squire Belford, thou mayest read it, if thou wilt.


ON BEING HUNTED AFTER BY THE ENEMY OF MY SOUL.

MONDAY, AUG. 21.

Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man.

Preserve me from the violent man.

Who imagines mischief in his heart.

He hath sharpened his tongue like a serpent.  Adders' poison is under his
lips.

Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked.  Preserve me from the
violent man, who hath purposed to overthrow my goings.

He hath hid a snare for me.  He hath spread a net by the way-side.  He
hath set gins for me in the way wherein I walked.

Keep me from the snares which he hath laid for me, and the gins of this
worker of iniquity.

The enemy hath persecuted my soul.  He hath smitten my life down to the
ground.  He hath made me dwell in darkness, as those that have been long
dead.

Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me.  My heart within me is
desolate.

Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble.

For my days are consumed like smoke: and my bones are burnt as the
hearth.

My heart is smitten and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat my
bread.

By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin.

I am like a pelican of the wilderness.  I am like an owl of the desart.

I watch; and am as a sparrow alone upon the house-top.

I have eaten ashes like bread; and mingled my drink with weeping:

Because of thine indignation, and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up,
and cast me down.

My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am withered like grass.

Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his devices,
lest he exalt himself.


Why now, Mrs. Lovick, said I, when I had read this meditation, as she
called it, I think I am very severely treated by the lady, if she mean me
in all this.  For how is it that I am the enemy of her soul, when I love
her both soul and body?

She says, that I am a violent man, and a wicked man.--That I have been
so, I own: but I repent, and only wish to have it in my power to repair
the injuries I have done her.

The gin, the snare, the net, mean matrimony, I suppose--But is it a crime
in me to wish to marry her?  Would any other woman think it so? and
choose to become a pelican in the wilderness, or a lonely sparrow on the
house-top, rather than have a mate that would chirp about her all day and
all night?

She says, she has eaten ashes like bread--A sad mistake to be sure!--And
mingled her drink with weeping--Sweet maudlin soul! should I say of any
body confessing this, but Miss Harlowe.

She concludes with praying, that the desires of the wicked (meaning poor
me, I doubt) may not be granted; that my devices may not be furthered,
lest I exalt myself.  I should undoubtedly exalt myself, and with reason,
could I have the honour and the blessing of such a wife.  And if my
desires have so honourable an end, I know not why I should be called
wicked, and why I should not be allowed to hope, that my honest devices
may be furthered, that I MAY exalt myself.

But here, Mrs. Lovick, let me ask, as something is undoubtedly meant by
the lonely sparrow on the house-top, is not the dear creature at this
very instant (tell me truly) concealed in Mrs. Smith's cockloft?--What
say you, Mrs. Lovick?  What say you, Mrs. Smith, to this?

They assured me to the contrary; and that shew as actually abroad, and
they knew not where.

Thou seest, Jack, that I would fain have diverted the chagrin given me
not only by the women's talk, but by this collection of Scripture-texts
drawn up in array against me.  Several other whimsical and light things I
said [all I had for it!] with the same view.  But the widow would not let
me come off so.  She stuck to me; and gave me, as I told thee, a good
deal of uneasiness, by her sensible and serious expostulations.  Mrs.
Smith put in now-and-then; and the two Jack-pudding fellows, John and
Joseph, not being present, I had no provocation to turn the conversation
into a farce; and, at last, they both joined warmly to endeavour to
prevail upon me to give up all thoughts of seeing the lady.  But I could
not hear of that.  On the contrary, I besought Mrs. Smith to let me have
one of her rooms but till I could see her; and were it but for one, two,
or three days, I would pay a year's rent for it; and quit it the moment
the interview was over.  But they desired to be excused; and were sure
the lady would not come to the house till I was gone, were it for a
month.

This pleased me; for I found they did not think her so very ill as they
would have me believe her to be; but I took no notice of the slip,
because I would not guard them against more of the like.

In short, I told them, I must and would see her: but that it should be
with all the respect and veneration that heart could pay to excellence
like her's: and that I would go round to all the churches in London and
Westminster, where there were prayers or service, from sun-rise to
sun-set, and haunt their house like a ghost, till I had the opportunity
my soul panted after.

This I bid them tell her.  And thus ended our serious conversation.

I took leave of them; and went down; and, stepping into my chair, caused
myself to be carried to Lincoln's-Inn; and walked in the gardens till the
chapel was opened; and then I went in, and staid prayers, in hopes of
seeing the dear creature enter: but to no purpose; and yet I prayed most
devoutly that she might be conducted thither, either by my good angel, or
her own.  And indeed I burn more than ever with impatience to be once
more permitted to kneel at the feet of this adorable woman.  And had I
met her, or espied her in the chapel, it is my firm belief that I should
not have been able (though it had been in the midst of the sacred office,
and in the presence of thousands) to have forborne prostration to her,
and even clamorous supplication for her forgiveness: a christian act; the
exercise of it therefore worthy of the place.

After service was over, I stept into my chair again, and once more was
carried to Smith's, in hopes I might have surprised her there: but no
such happiness for thy friend.  I staid in the back-shop an hour and an
half, by my watch; and again underwent a good deal of preachment from the
women.  John was mainly civil to me now; won over a little by my serious
talk, and the honour I professed for the lady.  They all three wished
matters could be made up between us: but still insisted that she could
never get over her illness; and that her heart was broken.  A cue, I
suppose, they had from you.

While I was there a letter was brought by a particular hand.  They seemed
very solicitous to hide it from me; which made me suspect it was for her.
I desired to be suffered to cast an eye upon the seal, and the
superscription; promising to give it back to them unopened.

Looking upon it, I told them I knew the hand and seal.  It was from her
sister.*  And I hoped it would bring her news that she would be pleased
with.


* See Letter XXVI. of this volume.


They joined most heartily in the same hope: and, giving the letter to
them again, I civilly took leave, and went away.

But I will be there again presently; for I fancy my courteous behaviour
to these women will, on their report of it, procure me the favour I so
earnestly covet.  And so I will leave my letter unsealed, to tell thee
the event of my next visit at Smith's.


***


Thy servant just calling, I sent thee this: and will soon follow it by
another.  Mean time, I long to hear how poor Belton is: to whom my best
wishes.



LETTER XVI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.


I have been under such concern for the poor man, whose exit I almost
hourly expect, and at the shocking scenes his illness and his agonies
exhibit, that I have been only able to make memoranda of the melancholy
passages, from which to draw up a more perfect account, for the
instruction of us all, when the writing appetite shall return.


***


It is returned!  Indignation has revived it, on receipt of thy letters of
Sunday and yesterday; by which I have reason to reproach thee in very
serious terms, that thou hast not kept thy honour with me: and if thy
breach of it be attended with such effects as I fear it will be, I shall
let thee know more of my mind on this head.

If thou wouldst be thought in earnest in thy wishes to move the poor lady
in thy favour, thy ludicrous behaviour at Smith's, when it comes to be
represented to her, will have a very consistent appearance; will it
not?--I will, indeed, confirm in her opinion, that the grave is more to
be wished-for, by one of her serious and pious turn, than a husband
incapable either of reflection or remorse; just recovered, as thou art,
from a dangerous, at least a sharp turn.

I am extremely concerned for the poor unprotected lady.  She was so
excessively low and weak on Saturday, that I could not be admitted to her
speech: and to be driven out of her lodgings, when it was fitter for her
to be in bed, is such a piece of cruelty, as he only could be guilty of
who could act as thou hast done by such an angel.

Canst thou thyself say, on reflection, that it has not the look of a
wicked and hardened sportiveness, in thee, for the sake of a wanton
humour only, (since it can answer no end that thou proposest to thyself,
but the direct contrary,) to hunt from place to place a poor lady, who,
like a harmless deer, that has already a barbed shaft in her breast,
seeks only a refuge from thee in the shades of death.

But I will leave this matter upon thy own conscience, to paint thee such
a scene from my memoranda, as thou perhaps wilt be moved by more
effectually than by any other: because it is such a one as thou thyself
must one day be a principal actor in, and, as I thought, hadst very
lately in apprehension: and is the last scene of one of thy more intimate
friends, who has been for the four past days labouring in the agonies of
death.  For, Lovelace, let this truth, this undoubted truth, be engraved
on thy memory, in all thy gaieties, That the life we are so fond of is
hardly life; a mere breathing space only; and that, at the end of its
longest date,

      Thou must die, as well as Belton.

Thou knowest, by Tourville, what we had done as to the poor man's worldly
affairs; and that we had got his unhappy sister to come and live with him
(little did we think him so very near to his end): and so I will proceed
to tell thee, that when I arrived at his house on Saturday night, I found
him excessively ill: but just raised, and in his elbow-chair, held up by
his nurse and Mowbray (the roughest and most untouched creature that ever
entered a sick man's chamber); while the maid-servants were trying to
make that bed easier for him which he was to return to; his mind ten
times uneasier than that could be, and the true cause that the down was
no softer to him.

He had so much longed to see me, as I was told by his sister, (whom I
sent for down to inquire how he was,) that they all rejoiced when I
entered: Here, said Mowbray, here, Tommy, is honest Jack Belford!

Where, where? said the poor man.

I hear his voice, cried Mowbray: he is coming up stairs.

In a transport of joy, he would have raised himself at my entrance, but
had like to have pitched out of the chair: and when recovered, called me
his best friend! his kindest friend! but burst into a flood of tears: O
Jack! O Belford! said he, see the way I am in!  See how weak!  So much,
and so soon reduced!  Do you know me?  Do you know your poor friend
Belton?

You are not so much altered, my dear Belton, as you think you are.  But I
see you are weak; very weak--and I am sorry for it.

Weak, weak, indeed, my dearest Belford, said he, and weaker in mind, if
possible, than in body; and wept bitterly--or I should not thus unman
myself.  I, who never feared any thing, to be forced to show myself such
a nursling!--I am quite ashamed of myself!--But don't despise me; dear
Belford, don't despise me, I beseech thee.

I ever honoured a man that could weep for the distresses of others; and
ever shall, said I; and such a one cannot be insensible of his own.

However, I could not help being visibly moved at the poor fellow's emotion.

Now, said the brutal Mowbray, do I think thee insufferable, Jack.  Our
poor friend is already a peg too low; and here thou art letting him down
lower and lower still.  This soothing of him in his dejected moments, and
joining thy womanish tears with his, is not the way; I am sure it is not.
If our Lovelace were here, he'd tell thee so.

Thou art an impenetrable creature, replied I; unfit to be present at a
scene, the terrors of which thou wilt not be able to feel till thou
feelest them in thyself; and then, if thou hadst time for feeling, my
life for thine, thou behavest as pitifully as those thou thinkest most
pitiful.

Then turning to the poor sick man, Tears, my dear Belton, are no signs of
an unmanly, but, contrarily of a humane nature; they ease the
over-charged heart, which would burst but for that kindly and natural
relief.

      Give sorrow words (says Shakspeare)
      --The grief that does not speak,
      Whispers the o'er-fraught heart, and bids it break.

I know, my dear Belton, thou usedst to take pleasure in repetitions from
the poets; but thou must be tasteless of their beauties now: yet be not
discountenanced by this uncouth and unreflecting Mowbray, for, as Juvenal
says, Tears are the prerogative of manhood.

'Tis at least seasonably said, my dear Belford.  It is kind to keep me in
countenance for this womanish weakness, as Mowbray has been upbraidingly
calling it, ever since he has been with me: and in so doing, (whatever I
might have thought in such high health as he enjoys,) has convinced me,
that bottle-friends feel nothing but what moves in that little circle.

Well, well, proceed in your own way, Jack.  I love my friend Belton as
well as you can do; yet for the blood of me, I cannot but think, that
soothing a man's weakness is increasing it.

If it be a weakness, to be touched at great and concerning events, in
which our humanity is concerned, said I, thou mayest be right.

I have seen many a man, said the rough creature, going up Holborn-hill,
that has behaved more like a man than either of you.

Ay, but, Mowbray, replied the poor man, those wretches have not had their
minds enervated by such infirmities of body as I have long laboured
under.  Thou art a shocking fellow, and ever wert.--But to be able to
remember nothing in these moments but what reproaches me, and to know
that I cannot hold it long, and what may then be my lot, if--but
interrupting himself, and turning to me, Give me thy pity, Jack; 'tis
balm to my wounded soul; and let Mowbray sit indifferent enough to the
pangs of a dying friend, to laugh at us both.

The hardened fellow then retired, with the air of a Lovelace; only more
stupid; yawning and stretching, instead of humming a tune as thou didst
at Smith's.

I assisted to get the poor man into bed.  He was so weak and low, that he
could not bear the fatigue, and fainted away; and I verily thought was
quite gone.  But recovering, and his doctor coming, and advising to keep
him quiet, I retired, and joined Mowbray in the garden; who took more
delight to talk of the living Lovelace and levities, than of the dying
Belton and his repentance.

I just saw him again on Saturday night before I went to bed; which I did
early; for I was surfeited with Mowbray's frothy insensibility, and could
not bear him.

It is such a horrid thing to think of, that a man who had lived in such
strict terms of--what shall I call it? with another; the proof does not
come out so, as to say, friendship; who had pretended so much love for
him; could not bear to be out of his company; would ride an hundred miles
on end to enjoy it; and would fight for him, be the cause right or wrong:
yet now, could be so little moved to see him in such misery of body and
mind, as to be able to rebuke him, and rather ridicule than pity him,
because he was more affected by what he felt, than he had seen a
malefactor, (hardened perhaps by liquor, and not softened by previous
sickness,) on his going to execution.

This put me strongly in mind of what the divine Miss HARLOWE once said to
me, talking of friendship, and what my friendship to you required of me:
'Depend upon it, Mr. Belford,' said she, 'that one day you will be
convinced, that what you call friendship, is chaff and stubble; and that
nothing is worthy of that sacred name,

      'That has not virtue for its base.'


Sunday morning, I was called up at six o'clock, at the poor man's earnest
request, and found him in a terrible agony.  O Jack! Jack! said he,
looking wildly, as if he had seen a spectre--Come nearer me!--Dear, dear
Belford, save me!  Then clasping my arm with both his hands, and rearing
up his head towards me, his eyes strangely rolling, Save me! dear
Belford, save me! repeated he.

I put my other arm about him--Save you from what, my dear Belton! said I;
save you from what?  Nothing shall hurt you.  What must I save you from?

Recovering from his terror, he sunk down again, O save me from myself!
said he; save me from my own reflections.  O dear Jack! what a thing it
is to die; and not to have one comfortable reflection to revolve!  What
would I give for one year of my past life?--only one year--and to have
the same sense of things that I now have?

I tried to comfort him as well as I could: but free-livers to free-livers
are sorry death-bed comforters.  And he broke in upon me: O my dear
Belford, said he, I am told, (and I have heard you ridiculed for it,)
that the excellent Miss Harlowe has wrought a conversion in you.  May it
be so!  You are a man of sense: O may it be so!  Now is your time!  Now,
that you are in full vigour of mind and body!--But your poor Belton,
alas! your poor Belton kept his vices, till they left him--and see the
miserable effects in debility of mind and despondency!  Were Mowbray
here, and were he to laugh at me, I would own that this is the cause of
my despair--that God's justice cannot let his mercy operate for my
comfort: for, Oh! I have been very, very wicked; and have despised the
offers of his grace, till he has withdrawn it from me for ever.

I used all the arguments I could think of to give him consolation: and
what I said had such an effect upon him, as to quiet his mind for the
greatest part of the day; and in a lucid hour his memory served him to
repeat these lines of Dryden, grasping my hand, and looking wistfully
upon me:

      O that I less could fear to lose this being,
      Which, like a snow-ball, in my coward hand,
      The more 'tis grasped, the faster melts away!

In the afternoon of Sunday, he was inquisitive after you, and your
present behaviour to Miss Harlowe.  I told him how you had been, and how
light you made of it.  Mowbray was pleased with your impenetrable
hardness of heart, and said, Bob. Lovelace was a good edge-tool, and
steel to the back: and such coarse but hearty praises he gave you, as an
abandoned man might give, and only an abandoned man could wish to
deserve.

But hadst thou heard what the poor dying Belton said on this occasion,
perhaps it would have made thee serious an hour or two, at least.

'When poor Lovelace is brought,' said he, 'to a sick-bed, as I am now,
and his mind forebodes that it is impossible he should recover, (which
his could not do in his late illness: if it had, he could not have
behaved so lightly in it;) when he revolves his past mis-spent life; his
actions of offence to helpless innocents; in Miss Harlowe's case
particularly; what then will he think of himself, or of his past actions?
his mind debilitated; his strength turned into weakness; unable to stir
or to move without help; not one ray of hope darting in upon his
benighted soul; his conscience standing in the place of a thousand
witnesses; his pains excruciating; weary of the poor remnant of life he
drags, yet dreading, that, in a few short hours, his bad will be changed
to worse, nay, to worst of all; and that worst of all, to last beyond
time and to all eternity; O Jack! what will he then think of the poor
transitory gratifications of sense, which now engage all his attention?
Tell him, dear Belford, tell him, how happy he is if he know his own
dying happiness; how happy, compared to his poor dying friend, that he
has recovered from his illness, and has still an opportunity lent him,
for which I would give a thousand worlds, had I them to give!'

I approved exceedingly of his reflections, as suited to his present
circumstances; and inferred consolations to him from a mind so properly
touched.

He proceeded in the like penitent strain.  I have lived a very wicked
life; so have we all.  We have never made a conscience of doing whatever
mischief either force or fraud enabled us to do.  We have laid snares for
the innocent heart; and have not scrupled by the too-ready sword to
extend, as occasions offered, the wrongs we did to the persons whom we
had before injured in their dearest relations.  But yet, I flatter
myself, sometimes, that I have less to answer for than either Lovelace or
Mowbray; for I, by taking to myself that accursed deceiver from whom thou
hast freed me, (and who, for years, unknown to me, was retaliating upon
my own head some of the evils I had brought upon others,) and retiring,
and living with her as a wife, was not party to half the mischiefs, that
I doubt they, and Tourville, and even you, Belford, committed.  As to the
ungrateful Thomasine, I hope I have met with my punishment in her.  But
notwithstanding this, dost thou not think, that such an action--and such
an action--and such an action; [and then he recapitulated several
enormities, in the perpetration of which (led on by false bravery, and
the heat of youth and wine) we have all been concerned;] dost thou not
think that these villanies, (let me call them now by their proper name,)
joined to the wilful and gloried-in neglect of every duty that our better
sense and education gave us to know were required of us as men and
christians, are not enough to weigh down my soul into despondency?--
Indeed, indeed, they are! and now to hope for mercy; and to depend upon
the efficacy of that gracious attribute, when that no less shining one of
justice forbids me to hope; how can I!--I, who have despised all
warnings, and taken no advantage of the benefit I might have reaped from
the lingering consumptive illness I have laboured under, but left all to
the last stake; hoping for recovery against hope, and driving off
repentance, till that grace is denied me; for, oh! my dear Belford! I can
now neither repent, nor pray, as I ought; my heart is hardened, and I can
do nothing but despair!--

More he would have said; but, overwhelmed with grief and infirmity, he
bowed his head upon his pangful bosom, endeavouring to hide from the
sight of the hardened Mowbray, who just then entered the room, those
tears which he could not restrain.

Prefaced by a phlegmatic hem; sad, very sad, truly! cried Mowbray; who
sat himself down on one side of the bed, as I sat on the other: his eyes
half closed, and his lips pouting out to his turned-up nose, his chin
curdled [to use one of thy descriptions]; leaving one at a loss to know
whether stupid drowsiness or intense contemplation had got most hold of
him.

An excellent, however uneasy lesson, Mowbray! said I.--By my faith it is!
It may one day, who knows how soon? be our own case!

I thought of thy yawning-fit, as described in thy letter of Aug. 13.  For
up started Mowbray, writhing and shaking himself as in an ague-fit; his
hands stretched over his head--with thy hoy! hoy! hoy! yawning.  And then
recovering himself, with another stretch and a shake, What's o'clock?
cried he; pulling out his watch--and stalking by long tip-toe strides
through the room, down stairs he went; and meeting the maid in the
passage, I heard him say--Betty, bring me a bumper of claret; thy poor
master, and this d----d Belford, are enough to throw a Hercules into the
vapours.

Mowbray, after this, assuming himself in our friend's library, which is,
as thou knowest, chiefly classical and dramatical, found out a passage in
Lee's Oedipus, which he would needs have to be extremely apt; and in he
came full fraught with the notion of the courage it would give the dying
man, and read it to him.  'Tis poetical and pretty.  This is it:

      When the sun sets, shadows that show'd at noon
      But small, appear most long and terrible:
      So when we think fate hovers o'er our heads,
      Our apprehensions shoot beyond all bounds:
      Owls, ravens, crickets, seem the watch of death;
      Nature's worst vermin scare her godlike sons:
      Echoes, the very leavings of a voice,
      Grow babbling ghosts, and call us to our graves.
      Each mole-hill thought swells to a huge Olympus;
      While we, fantastic dreamers, heave and puff,
      And sweat with our imagination's weight.

He expected praises for finding this out.  But Belton turning his head
from him, Ah, Dick! (said he,) these are not the reflections of a dying
man!--What thou wilt one day feel, if it be what I now feel, will
convince thee that the evils before thee, and with thee, are more than
the effects of imagination.

I was called twice on Sunday night to him; for the poor fellow, when his
reflections on his past life annoy him most, is afraid of being left with
the women; and his eyes, they tell me, hunt and roll about for me.
Where's Mr. Belford?--But I shall tire him out, cries he--yet beg of him
to step to me--yet don't--yet do; were once the doubting and changeful
orders he gave: and they called me accordingly.

But, alas!  What could Belford do for him?  Belford, who had been but too
often the companion of his guilty hours; who wants mercy as much as he
does; and is unable to promise it to himself, though 'tis all he can bid
his poor friend rely upon!

What miscreants are we!  What figures shall we make in these terrible
hours!

If Miss HARLOWE'S glorious example, on one hand, and the terrors of this
poor man's last scene on the other, affect me not, I must be abandoned to
perdition; as I fear thou wilt be, if thou benefittest not thyself from
both.

Among the consolatory things I urged, when I was called up the last time
on Sunday night, I told him, that he must not absolutely give himself up
to despair: that many of the apprehensions he was under, were such as the
best men must have, on the dreadful uncertainty of what was to succeed to
this life.  'Tis well observed, said I, by a poetical divine, who was an
excellent christian,* That

        Death could not a more sad retinue find,
      Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.


* The Rev Mr. Norris, of Bremerton.


About eight o'clock yesterday (Monday) morning, I found him a little
calmer.  He asked me who was the author of the two lines I had repeated
to him; and made me speak them over again.  A sad retinue, indeed! said
the poor man.  And then expressing his hopelessness of life, and his
terrors at the thoughts of dying; and drawing from thence terrible
conclusions with regard to his future state; There is, said I, such a
natural aversion to death in human nature, that you are not to imagine,
that you, my dear Belton, are singular in the fear of it, and in the
apprehensions that fill the thoughtful mind upon its approach; but you
ought, as much as possible, to separate those natural fears which all men
must have on so solemn an occasion, from those particular ones which your
justly-apprehended unfitness fills you with.  Mr. Pomfret, in his
Prospect of Death, which I dipped into last night from a collection in
your closet, which I put into my pocket, says, [and I turned to the
place]

      Merely to die, no man of reason fears;
            For certainly we must,
            As we are born, return to dust;
      'Tis the last point of many ling-ring years;
            But whither then we go,
            Whither, we fain would know;
      But human understanding cannot show.
            This makes US tremble----

Mr. Pomfret, therefore, proceeded I, had such apprehensions of this dark
state as you have: and the excellent divine I hinted at last night, who
had very little else but human frailties to reproach himself with, and
whose miscellanies fell into my hands among my uncle's books in my
attendance upon him in his last hours, says,

      It must be done, my soul: but 'tis a strange,
         A dismal, and mysterious change,
      When thou shalt leave this tenement of clay,
         And to an unknown--somewhere--wing away;
      When time shall be eternity, and thou
         Shalt be--thou know'st not what--and live--
            thou know'st not how!
      Amazing state! no wonder that we dread
         To think of death, or view the dead;
      Thou'rt all wrapt up in clouds, as if to thee
            Our very knowledge had antipathy.

Then follows, what I repeated,

        Death could not a more sad retinue find,
      Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.

Alas! my dear Belford [inferred the unhappy deep-thinker] what poor
creatures does this convince me we mortals are at best!--But what then
must be the case of such a profligate as I, who by a past wicked life
have added greater force to these natural terrors?  If death be so
repugnant a thing to human nature, that good men will be startled at it,
what must it be to one who has lived a life of sense and appetite; nor
ever reflected upon the end which I now am within view of?

What could I say to an inference so fairly drawn?  Mercy, mercy,
unbounded mercy, was still my plea, though his repeated opposition of
justice to it, in a manner silenced that plea: and what would I have
given to have had rise in my mind, one good, eminently good action to
have remembered him of, in order to combat his fears with it?

I believe, Lovelace, I shall tire thee, and that more with the subject
of my letter, than even with the length of it.  But really, I think thy
spirits are so offensively up since thy recovery, that I ought, as the
melancholy subjects offer, to endeavour to reduce thee to the standard
of humanity, by expatiating upon them.  And then thou canst not but be
curious to know every thing that concerns the poor man, for whom thou
hast always expressed a great regard.  I will therefore proceed as I have
begun.  If thou likest not to read it now, lay it by, if thou wilt, till
the like circumstances befall thee, till like reflections from those
circumstances seize thee; and then take it up, and compare the two cases
together.


***


At his earnest request, I sat up with him last night; and, poor man! it
is impossible to tell thee, how easy and safe he thought himself in my
company, for the first part of the night: A drowning man will catch at a
straw, the proverb well says: and a straw was I, with respect to any real
help I could give him.  He often awaked in terrors; and once calling out
for me, Dear Belford, said he, Where are you!--Oh!  There you are!--Give
me your friendly hand!--Then grasping it, and putting his clammy,
half-cold lips to it--How kind!  I fear every thing when you are absent.
But the presence of a friend, a sympathising friend--Oh! how comfortable!

But, about four in the morning, he frighted me much: he waked with three
terrible groans; and endeavoured to speak, but could not presently--and
when he did,--Jack, Jack, Jack, five or six times repeated he as quick as
thought, now, now, now, save me, save me, save me--I am going--going
indeed!

I threw my arms about him, and raised him upon his pillow, as he was
sinking (as if to hide himself) in the bed-clothes--And staring wildly,
Where am I? said he, a little recovering.  Did you not see him? turning
his head this way and that; horror in his countenance; Did you not see
him?

See whom, see what, my dear Belton!

O lay me upon the bed again, cried he!--Let me not die upon the floor!--
Lay me down gently; and stand by me!--Leave me not!--All, all will soon
be over!

You are already, my dear Belton, upon the bed.  You have not been upon
the floor.  This is a strong delirium; you are faint for want of
refreshment [for he had refused several times to take any thing]: let me
persuade you to take some of this cordial julap.  I will leave you, if
you will not oblige me.

He then readily took it; but said he could have sworn that Tom. Metcalfe
had been in the room, and had drawn him out of bed by the throat,
upbraiding him with the injuries he had first done his sister, and then
him, in the duel to which he owed that fever which cost him his life.

Thou knowest the story, Lovelace, too well, to need my repeating it: but,
mercy on us, if in these terrible moments all the evils we do rise to our
frighted imaginations!--If so, what shocking scenes have I, but still
what more shocking ones hast thou, to go through, if, as the noble poet
says,

      If any sense at that sad time remains!

The doctor ordered him an opiate this morning early, which operated so
well, that he dosed and slept several hours more quietly than he had done
for the two past days and nights, though he had sleeping-draughts given
him before.  But it is more and more evident every hour that nature is
almost worn out in him.


***


Mowbray, quite tired with this house of mourning, intends to set out in
the morning to find you.  He was not a little rejoiced to hear you were
in town; I believe to have a pretence to leave us.


***


He has just taken leave of his poor friend, intending to go away early:
an everlasting leave, I may venture to say; for I think he will hardly
live till to-morrow night.

I believe the poor man would not have been sorry had he left him when I
arrived; for 'tis a shocking creature, and enjoys too strong health to
know how to pity the sick.  Then (to borrow an observation from thee) he
has, by nature, strong bodily organs, which those of his soul are not
likely to whet out; and he, as well as the wicked friend he is going to,
may last a great while from the strength of their constitutions, though
so greatly different in their talents, if neither the sword nor the
halter interpose.

I must repeat, That I cannot but be very uneasy for the poor lady whom
you so cruelly persecute; and that I do not think that you have kept your
honour with me.  I was apprehensive, indeed, that you would attempt to
see her, as soon as you got well enough to come up; and I told her as
much, making use of it as an argument to prepare her for your visit, and
to induce her to stand it.  But she could not, it is plain, bear the
shock of it: and indeed she told me that she would not see you, though
but for one half-hour, for the world.

Could she have prevailed upon herself, I know that the sight of her would
have been as affecting to you, as your visit could have been to her; when
you had seen to what a lovely skeleton (for she is really lovely still,
nor can she, with such a form and features, be otherwise) you have, in a
few weeks, reduced one of the most charming women in the world; and that
in the full bloom of her youth and beauty.

Mowbray undertakes to carry this, that he may be more welcome to you, he
says.  Were it to be sent unsealed, the characters we write in would be
Hebrew to the dunce.  I desire you to return it; and I'll give you a copy
of it upon demand; for I intend to keep it by me, as a guard against the
infection of your company, which might otherwise, perhaps, some time
hence, be apt to weaken the impressions I always desire to have of the
awful scene before me.  God convert us both!



LETTER XVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY MORN. 11 O'CLOCK.


I believe no man has two such servants as I have.  Because I treat them
with kindness, and do not lord it over my inferiors, and d--n and curse
them by looks and words like Mowbray; or beat their teeth out like
Lovelace; but cry, Pr'ythee, Harry, do this, and, Pr'ythee, Jonathan, do
that; the fellows pursue their own devices, and regard nothing I say, but
what falls in with these.

Here, this vile Harry, who might have brought your letter of yesterday in
good time, came not in with it till past eleven at night (drunk, I
suppose); and concluding that I was in bed, as he pretends (because he
was told I sat up the preceding night) brought it not to me; and having
overslept himself, just as I had sealed up my letter, in comes the
villain with the forgotten one, shaking his ears, and looking as if he
himself did not believe the excuses he was going to make.  I questioned
him about it, and heard his pitiful pleas; and though I never think it
becomes a gentleman to treat people insolently who by their stations are
humbled beneath his feet, yet could I not forbear to Lovelace and Mowbray
him most cordially.

And this detaining Mowbray (who was ready to set out to you before) while
I write a few lines upon it, the fierce fellow, who is impatient to
exchange the company of a dying Belton for that of a too-lively Lovelace,
affixed a supplement of curses upon the staring fellow, that was larger
than my book--nor did I offer to take off the bear from such a mongrel,
since, on this occasion, he deserved not of me the protection which every
master owes to a good servant.

He has not done cursing him yet; for stalking about the court-yard with
his boots on, (the poor fellow dressing his horse, and unable to get from
him,) he is at him without mercy; and I will heighten his impatience,
(since being just under the window where I am writing, he will not let me
attend to my pen,) by telling you how he fills my ears as well as the
fellow's, with his--Hay, Sir!  And G--d d--n ye, Sir!  And were ye my
servant, ye dog ye!  And must I stay here till the mid-day sun scorches
me to a parchment, for such a mangy dog's drunken neglect?--Ye lie,
Sirrah!--Ye lie, I tell you--[I hear the fellow's voice in an humble
excusatory tone, though not articulately] Ye lie, ye dog!--I'd a good
mind to thrust my whip down your drunken throat: d--n me, if I would not
flay the skin from the back of such a rascal, if thou wert mine, and have
dog's-skin gloves made of it, for thy brother scoundrels to wear in
remembrance of thy abuses of such a master.

The poor horse suffers for this, I doubt not; for, What now! and, Stand
still, and be d--d to ye, cries the fellow, with a kick, I suppose, which
he better deserves himself; for these varlets, where they can, are
Mowbrays and Lovelaces to man or beast; and not daring to answer him, is
flaying the poor horse.

I hear the fellow is just escaped, the horse, (better curried than
ordinary, I suppose, in half the usual time,) by his clanking shoes, and
Mowbray's silence, letting me know, that I may now write on: and so, I
will tell thee that, in the first place, (little as I, as well as you,
regard dreams,) I would have thee lay thine to heart; for I could give
thee such an interpretation of it, as would shock thee, perhaps; and if
thou askest me for it, I will.

Mowbray calls to me from the court-yard, that 'tis a cursed hot day, and
he shall be fried by riding in the noon of it: and that poor Belton longs
to see me.  So I will only add my earnest desire, that you will give over
all thoughts of seeing the lady, if, when this comes to your hand, you
have not seen her: and, that it would be kind, if you'd come, and, for
the last time you will ever see your poor friend, share my concern for
him; and, in him, see what, in a little time, will be your fate and mine,
and that of Mowbray, Tourville, and the rest of us--For what are ten,
fifteen, twenty, or thirty years, to look back to; in the longest of
which periods forward we shall all perhaps be mingled with the dust from
which we sprung?



LETTER XVIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY MORN. AUG. 23.


All alive, dear Jack, and in ecstacy!--Likely to be once more a happy
man!  For I have received a letter from my beloved Miss HARLOWE; in
consequence, I suppose, of that which I mentioned in my last to be left
for her from her sister.  And I am setting out for Berks directly, to
show the contents to my Lord M. and to receive the congratulations of all
my kindred upon it.

I went, last night, as I intended, to Smith's: but the dear creature was
not returned at near ten o'clock.  And, lighting upon Tourville, I took
him home with me, and made him sing me out of my megrims.  I went to bed
tolerably easy at two; had bright and pleasant dreams; (not such of a
frightful one as that I gave thee an account of;) and at eight this
morning, as I was dressing, to be in readiness against the return of my
fellow, whom I had sent to inquire after the lady, I had the following
letter brought to me by a chairman:


TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, 11 O'CLOCK (AUG. 22.)


SIR,

I have good news to tell you.  I am setting out with all diligence for my
father's house, I am bid to hope that he will receive his poor penitent
with a goodness peculiar to himself; for I am overjoyed with the
assurance of a thorough reconciliation, through the interposition of a
dear, blessed friend, whom I always loved and honoured.  I am so taken up
with my preparation for this joyful and long-wished-for journey, that I
cannot spare one moment for any other business, having several matters of
the last importance to settle first.  So, pray, Sir, don't disturb or
interrupt me--I beseech you don't.  You may possibly in time see me at my
father's; at least if it be not your own fault.

I will write a letter, which shall be sent you when I am got thither and
received: till when, I am, &c.

CLARISSA HARLOWE.


***


I dispatched instantly a letter to the dear creature, assuring her, with
the most thankful joy, 'That I would directly set out for Berks, and wait
the issue of the happy reconciliation, and the charming hopes she had
filled me with.  I poured out upon her a thousand blessings.  I declared
that it should be the study of my whole life to merit such transcendent
goodness: and that there was nothing which her father or friends should
require at my hands, that I would not for her sake comply with, in order
to promote and complete so desirable a reconciliation.'

I hurried it away without taking a copy of it; and I have ordered the
chariot-and-six to be got ready; and hey for M. Hall!  Let me but know
how Belton does.  I hope a letter from thee is on the road.  And if the
poor fellow can spare thee, make haste, I command thee, to attend this
truly divine lady.  Thou mayest not else see her of months perhaps; at
least, not while she is Miss HARLOWE.  And oblige me, if possible, with
one letter before she sets out, confirming to me and accounting for this
generous change.

But what accounting for it is necessary?  The dear creature cannot
receive consolation herself but she must communicate it to others.  How
noble!  She would not see me in her adversity; but no sooner does the sun
of prosperity begin to shine upon her than she forgives me.

I know to whose mediation all this is owing.  It is to Colonel Morden's.
She always, as she says, loved and honoured him!  And he loved her above
all his relations.

I shall now be convinced that there is something in dreams.  The opening
cloud is the reconciliation in view.  The bright form, lifting up my
charmer through it to a firmament stuck round with golden cherubims and
seraphims, indicates the charming little boys and girls, that will be the
fruits of this happy reconciliation.  The welcomes, thrice repeated, are
those of her family, now no more to be deemed implacable.  Yet are they
family, too, that my soul cannot mingle with.

But then what is my tumbling over and over through the floor into a
frightful hole, descending as she ascends?  Ho! only this! it alludes to
my disrelish to matrimony: Which is a bottomless pit, a gulph, and I know
not what.  And I suppose, had I not awoke in such a plaguy fright, I had
been soused into some river at the bottom of the hole, and then been
carried (mundified or purified from my past iniquities,) by the same
bright form (waiting for me upon the mossy banks,) to my beloved girl;
and we should have gone on cherubiming of it and caroling to the end of
the chapter.

But what are the black sweeping mantles and robes of Lord M. thrown over
my face?  And what are those of the ladies?  O Jack!  I have these too:
They indicate nothing in the world but that my Lord will be so good as to
die, and leave me all he has.  So, rest to thy good-natured soul, honest
Lord M.

Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance, will also die, and leave me
swinging legacies.

Miss Charlotte and her sister--what will become of the?--Oh! they will be
in mourning, of course, for their uncle and aunts--that's right!

As to Morden's flashing through the window, and crying, Die, Lovelace,
and be d----d, if thou wilt not repair my cousin's wrong!  That is only,
that he would have sent me a challenge, had I not been disposed to do the
lady justice.

All I dislike is this part of the dream: for, even in a dream, I would
not be thought to be threatened into any measure, though I liked it ever
so well.

And so much for my prophetic dream.

Dear charming creature!  What a meeting will there be between her and her
father and mother and uncles!  What transports, what pleasure, will this
happy, long-wished-for reconciliation give her dutiful heart!  And indeed
now methinks I am glad she is so dutiful to them; for her duty to her
parents is a conviction to me that she will be as dutiful to her husband:
since duty upon principle is an uniform thing.

Why pr'ythee, now, Jack, I have not been so much to blame as thou
thinkest: for had it not been for me, who have led her into so much
distress, she could neither have received nor given the joy that will now
overwhelm them all.  So here rises great and durable good out of
temporary evil.

I know they loved her (the pride and glory of their family,) too well to
hold out long!

I wish I could have seen Arabella's letter.  She has always been so much
eclipsed by her sister, that I dare say she has signified this
reconciliation to her with intermingled phlegm and wormwood; and her
invitation must certainly runs all in the rock-water style.

I shall long to see the promised letter too when she is got to her
father's, which I hope will give an account of the reception she will
meet with.

There is a solemnity, however, I think, in the style of her letter, which
pleases and affects me at the same time.  But as it is evident she loves
me still, and hopes soon to see me at her father's, she could not help
being a little solemn, and half-ashamed, [dear blushing pretty rogue!] to
own her love, after my usage of her.

And then her subscription: Till when, I am, CLARISSA HARLOWE: as much as
to say, after that, I shall be, if not to your own fault,
CLARISSA LOVELACE!

O my best love!  My ever-generous and adorable creature!  How much does
this thy forgiving goodness exalt us both!--Me, for the occasion given
thee!  Thee, for turning it so gloriously to thy advantage, and to the
honour of both!

And if, my beloved creature, you will but connive at the imperfections of
your adorer, and not play the wife with me: if, while the charms of
novelty have their force with me, I should happen to be drawn aside by
the love of intrigue, and of plots that my soul delights to form and
pursue; and if thou wilt not be open-eyed to the follies of my youth, [a
transitory state;] every excursion shall serve but the more to endear
thee to me, till in time, and in a very little time too, I shall get
above sense; and then, charmed by thy soul-attracting converse; and
brought to despise my former courses;  what I now, at distance, consider
as a painful duty, will be my joyful choice, and all my delight will
centre in thee!


***


Mowbray is just arrived with thy letters.  I therefore close my agreeable
subject, to attend to one which I doubt will be very shocking.

I have engaged the rough varlet to bear me company in the morning to
Berks; where I shall file off the rust he has contracted in his
attendance upon the poor fellow.

He tells me that, between the dying Belton and the preaching Belford, he
shan't be his own man these three days: and says that thou addest to the
unhappy fellow's weakness, instead of giving him courage to help him to
bear his destiny.

I am sorry he takes the unavoidable lot so heavily.  But he has been long
ill; and sickness enervates the mind as well as the body; as he himself
very significantly observed to thee.



LETTER XIX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDN. EVENING.


I have been reading thy shocking letter--Poor Belton! what a multitude of
lively hours have we passed together!  He was a fearless, cheerful
fellow: who'd have thought all that should end in such dejected
whimpering and terror?

But why didst thou not comfort the poor man about the rencounter between
him and that poltroon Metcalfe?  He acted in that affair like a man of
true honour, and as I should have acted in the same circumstances.  Tell
him I say so; and that what happened he could neither help nor foresee.

Some people are as sensible of a scratch from a pin's point, as others
from a push of a sword: and who can say any thing for the sensibility of
such fellows?  Metcalfe would resent for his sister, when his sister
resented not for herself.  Had she demanded her brother's protection and
resentment, that would have been another man's matte, to speak in Lord
M.'s phrase: but she herself thought her brother a coxcomb to busy
himself undesired in her affairs, and wished for nothing but to be
provided for decently and privately in her lying-in; and was willing to
take the chance of Maintenon-ing his conscience in her favour,* and
getting him to marry when the little stranger came; for she knew what
an easy, good-natured fellow he was.  And indeed if she had prevailed
upon him, it might have been happy for both; as then he would not have
fallen in with his cursed Thomasine.  But truly this officious brother of
her's must interpose.  This made a trifling affair important: And what
was the issue?  Metcalfe challenged; Belton met him; disarmed him; gave
him his life: but the fellow, more sensible in his skin than in his head,
having received a scratch, was frighted: it gave him first a puke, then
a fever, and then he died, that was all.  And how could Belton help that?
--But sickness, a long tedious sickness, will make a bugbear of any thing
to a languishing heart, I see that.  And so far was Mowbray a-propos in
the verses from Nat. Lee, which thou hast described.


* Madam Maintenon was reported to have prevailed upon Lewis XIV. of
France, in his old age, (sunk, as he was, by ill success in the field,)
to marry her, by way of compounding with his conscience for the freedoms
of his past life, to which she attributed his public losses.


Merely to die, no man of reason fears, is a mistake, say thou, or say
thy author, what ye will.  And thy solemn parading about the natural
repugnance between life and death, is a proof that it is.

Let me tell thee, Jack, that so much am I pleased with this world, in
the main; though, in some points too, the world (to make a person of it,)
has been a rascal to me; so delighted am I with the joys of youth; with
my worldly prospects as to fortune; and now, newly, with the charming
hopes given me by my dear, thrice dear, and for ever dear CLARISSA; that
were I even sure that nothing bad would come hereafter, I should be very
loth (very much afraid, if thou wilt have it so,) to lay down my life
and them together; and yet, upon a call of honour, no man fears death
less than myself.

But I have not either inclination or leisure to weigh thy leaden
arguments, except in the pig, or, as thou wouldst say, in the lump.

If I return thy letters, let me have them again some time hence, that is
to say, when I am married, or when poor Belton is half forgotten; or when
time has enrolled the honest fellow among those whom we have so long
lost, that we may remember them with more pleasure than pain; and then I
may give them a serious perusal, and enter with thee as deeply as thou
wilt into the subject.

When I am married, said I?--What a sound has that!

I must wait with patience for a sight of this charming creature, till she
is at her father's.  And yet, as the but blossoming beauty, as thou
tellest me, is reduced to a shadow, I should have been exceedingly
delighted to see her now, and every day till the happy one; that I might
have the pleasure of observing how sweetly, hour by hour, she will rise
to her pristine glories, by means of that state of ease and contentment,
which will take place of the stormy past, upon her reconciliation with
her friends, and our happy nuptials.



LETTER XX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


Well, but now my heart is a little at ease, I will condescend to take
brief notice of some other passages in thy letters.

I find I am to thank thee, that the dear creature has avoided my visit.
Things are now in so good a train that I must forgive thee; else thou
shouldst have heard more of this new instance of disloyalty to thy
general.

Thou art continually giving thyself high praise, by way of opposition, as
I may say, to others; gently and artfully blaming thyself for qualities
thou wouldst at the same time have to be thought, and which generally are
thought, praise-worthy.

Thus, in the airs thou assumest about thy servants, thou wouldst pass for
a mighty humane mortal; and that at the expense of Mowbray and me, whom
thou representest as kings and emperors to our menials.  Yet art thou
always unhappy in thy attempts of this kind, and never canst make us, who
know thee, believe that to be a virtue in thee, which is but the effect
of constitutional phlegm and absurdity.

Knowest thou not, that some men have a native dignity in their manner,
that makes them more regarded by a look, than either thou canst be in thy
low style, or Mowbray in his high?

I am fit to be a prince, I can tell thee, for I reward well, and I punish
seasonably and properly; and I am generally as well served by any man.

The art of governing these underbred varlets lies more in the dignity of
looks than in words; and thou art a sorry fellow, to think humanity
consists in acting by thy servants, as men must act who are not able to
pay them their wages; or had made them masters of secrets, which, if
divulged, would lay them at the mercy of such wretches.

Now to me, who never did any thing I was ashamed to own, and who have
more ingenuousness than ever man had; who can call a villany by its own
right name, though practised by myself, and (by my own readiness to
reproach myself) anticipate all reproach from others; who am not such a
hypocrite, as to wish the world to think me other or better than I am--
it is my part, to look a servant into his duty, if I can; nor will I keep
one who knows not how to take me by a nod, or a wink; and who, when I
smile, shall not be all transport; when I frown, all terror.  If, indeed,
I am out of the way a little, I always take care to rewards the varlets
for patiently bearing my displeasure.  But this I hardly ever am but when
a fellow is egregiously stupid in any plain point of duty, or will be
wiser than his master; and when he shall tell me, that he thought acting
contrary to my orders was the way to serve me best.

One time or other I will enter the lists with thee upon thy conduct and
mine to servants; and I will convince thee, that what thou wouldst have
pass for humanity, if it be indiscriminately practised to all tempers,
will perpetually subject thee to the evils thou complainest of; and
justly too; and that he only is fit to be a master of servants, who can
command their attention as much by a nod, as if he were to pr'ythee a
fellow to do his duty, on one hand, or to talk of flaying, and
horse-whipping, like Mowbray, on the other: for the servant who being
used to expect thy creeping style, will always be master of his master,
and he who deserves to be treated as the other, is not fit to be any
man's servant; nor would I keep such a fellow to rub my horse's heels.

I shall be the readier to enter the lists with thee upon this argument,
because I have presumption enough to think that we have not in any of our
dramatic poets, that I can at present call to mind, one character of a
servant of either sex, that is justly hit off.  So absurdly wise some,
and so sottishly foolish others; and both sometime in the same person.
Foils drawn from lees or dregs of the people to set off the characters of
their masters and mistresses; nay, sometimes, which is still more absurd,
introduced with more wit than the poet has to bestow upon their
principals.--Mere flints and steels to strike fire with--or, to vary the
metaphor, to serve for whetstones to wit, which, otherwise, could not be
made apparent; or, for engines to be made use of like the machinery of
the antient poets, (or the still more unnatural soliloquy,) to help on a
sorry plot, or to bring about a necessary eclaircissement, to save the
poet the trouble of thinking deeply for a better way to wind up his
bottoms.

Of this I am persuaded, (whatever my practice be to my own servants,)
that thou wilt be benefited by my theory, when we come to controvert the
point.  For then I shall convince thee, that the dramatic as well as
natural characteristics of a good servant ought to be fidelity, common
sense, cheerful obedience, and silent respect; that wit in his station,
except to his companions, would be sauciness; that he should never
presume to give his advice; that if he venture to expostulate upon any
unreasonable command, or such a one a appeared to him to be so, he should
do it with humility and respect, and take a proper season for it.  But
such lessons do most of the dramatic performances I have seen give, where
servants are introduced as characters essential to the play, or to act
very significant or long parts in it, (which, of itself, I think a
fault;) such lessons, I say, do they give to the footmen's gallery, that
I have not wondered we have so few modest or good men-servants among
those who often attend their masters or mistresses to plays.  Then how
miserably evident must that poet's conscious want of genius be, who can
stoop to raise or give force to a clap by the indiscriminate roar of the
party-coloured gallery!

But this subject I will suspend to a better opportunity; that is to say,
to the happy one, when my nuptials with my Clarissa will oblige me to
increase the number of my servants, and of consequence to enter more
nicely into their qualifications.


***


Although I have the highest opinion that man can have of the generosity
of my dear Miss Harlowe, yet I cannot for the heart of me account for
this agreeable change in her temper but one way.  Faith and troth,
Belford, I verily believe, laying all circumstances together, that the
dear creature unexpectedly finds herself in the way I have so ardently
wished her to be in; and that this makes her, at last, incline to favour
me, that she may set the better face upon her gestation, when at her
father's.

If this be the case, all her falling away, and her fainting fits, are
charmingly accounted for.  Nor is it surprising, that such a sweet novice
in these matters should not, for some time, have known to what to
attribute her frequent indispositions.  If this should be the case, how I
shall laugh at thee! and (when I am sure of her) at the dear novice
herself, that all her grievous distresses shall end in a man-child; which
I shall love better than all the cherubims and seraphims that may come
after; though there were to be as many of them as I beheld in my dream;
in which a vast expanse of firmament was stuck as full of them as it
could hold!

I shall be afraid to open thy next, lest it bring me the account of poor
Belton's death.  Yet, as there are no hopes of his recovery--but what
should I say, unless the poor man were better fitted--but thy heavy
sermon shall not affect me too much neither.

I enclose thy papers; and do thou transcribe them for me, or return them;
for there are some things in them, which, at a proper season, a mortal
man should not avoid attending to; and thou seemest to have entered
deeply into the shocking subject.--But here I will end, lest I grow too
serious.


***


Thy servant called here about an hour ago, to know if I had any commands;
I therefore hope that thou wilt have this early in the morning.  And if
thou canst let me hear from thee, do.  I'll stretch an hour or two in
expectation of it.  Yet I must be at Lord M.'s to-morrow night, if
possible, though ever so late.

Thy fellow tells me the poor man is much as he was when Mowbray left him.

Wouldst thou think that this varlet Mowbray is sorry that I am so near
being happy with Miss Harlowe?  And, 'egad, Jack, I know not what to say
to it, now the fruit seems to be within my reach--but let what will come,
I'll stand to't: for I find I can't live without her.



LETTER XXI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, THREE O'CLOCK.


I will proceed where I left off in my last.

As soon as I had seen Mowbray mounted, I went to attend upon poor Belton;
whom I found in dreadful agonies, in which he awoke, after he generally
does.

The doctor came in presently after, and I was concerned at the scene that
passed between them.

It opened with the dying man's asking him, with melancholy earnestness,
if nothing--if nothing at all could be done for him?

The doctor shook his head, and told him, he doubted not.

I cannot die, said the poor man--I cannot think of dying.  I am very
desirous of living a little longer, if I could but be free from these
horrible pains in my stomach and head.  Can you give me nothing to make
me pass one week--but one week, in tolerable ease, that I may die like a
man, if I must die!

But, Doctor, I am yet a young man; in the prime of my years--youth is a
good subject for a physician to work upon--Can you do nothing--nothing at
all for me, Doctor?

Alas! Sir, replied his physician, you have been long in a bad way.  I
fear, I fear, nothing in physic can help you!

He was then out of all patience: What, then, is your art, Sir?--I have
been a passive machine for a whole twelvemonth, to be wrought upon at the
pleasure of you people of the faculty.--I verily believe, had I not taken
such doses of nasty stuff, I had been now a well man--But who the plague
would regard physicians, whose art is to cheat us with hopes while they
help to destroy us?--And who, not one of you, know any thing but by
guess?

Sir, continued he, fiercely, (and with more strength of voice and
coherence, than he had shown for several hours before,) if you give me
over, I give you over.--The only honest and certain part of the art of
healing is surgery.  A good surgeon is worth a thousand of you.  I have
been in surgeons' hands often, and have always found reason to depend
upon their skill; but your art, Sir, what is it?--but to daub, daub,
daub; load, load, load; plaster, plaster, plaster; till ye utterly
destroy the appetite first, and the constitution afterwards, which you
are called in to help.  I had a companion once, my dear Belford, thou
knewest honest Blomer, as pretty a physician he would have made as any
in England, had he kept himself from excess in wine and women; and he
always used to say, there was nothing at all but the pick-pocket parade
in the physician's art; and that the best guesser was the best physician.
And I used to believe him too--and yet, fond of life, and fearful of
death, what do we do, when we are taken ill, but call ye in?  And what
do ye do, when called in, but nurse our distempers, till from pigmies you
make giants of them? and then ye come creeping with solemn faces, when ye
are ashamed to prescribe, or when the stomach won't bear its natural
food, by reason of your poisonous potions,--Alas, I am afraid physic can
do no more for him!--Nor need it, when it has brought to the brink of the
grave the poor wretch who placed all his reliance in your cursed slops,
and the flattering hopes you gave him.

The doctor was out of countenance; but said, if we could make mortal men
immortal, and would not, all this might be just.

I blamed the poor man; yet excused him to the physician.  To die, dear
Doctor, when, like my poor friend, we are so desirous of life, is a
melancholy thing.  We are apt to hope too much, not considering that the
seeds of death are sown in us when we begin to live, and grow up, till,
like rampant weeds, they choke the tender flower of life; which declines
in us as those weeds flourish.  We ought, therefore, to begin early to
study what our constitutions will bear, in order to root out, by
temperance, the weeds which the soil is most apt to produce; or, at
least, to keep them down as they rise; and not, when the flower or plant
is withered at the root, and the weed in its full vigour, expect, that
the medical art will restore the one, or destroy the other; when that
other, as I hinted, has been rooting itself in the habit from the time of
our birth.

This speech, Bob., thou wilt call a prettiness; but the allegory is just;
and thou hast not quite cured me of the metaphorical.

Very true, said the doctor; you have brought a good metaphor to
illustrate the thing.  I am sorry I can do nothing for the gentleman; and
can only recommend patience, and a better frame of mind.

Well, Sir, said the poor angry man, vexed at the doctor, but more at
death, you will perhaps recommend the next succession to the physician,
when he can do no more; and, I suppose, will send your brother to pray by
me for those virtues which you wish me.

It seems the physician's brother is a clergyman in the neighbourhood.

I was greatly concerned to see the gentleman thus treated; and so I told
poor Belton when he was gone; but he continued impatient, and would not
be denied, he said, the liberty of talking to a man, who had taken so
many guineas of him for doing nothing, or worse than nothing, and never
declined one, though he know all the time he could do him no good.

It seems the gentleman, though rich, is noted for being greedy after
fees! and poor Belton went on raving at the extravagant fees of English
physicians, compared with those of the most eminent foreign ones.  But,
poor man! he, like the Turks, who judge of a general by his success, (out
of patience to think he must die,) would have worshipped the doctor, and
not grudged thee times the sum, could he have given him hopes of
recovery.

But, nevertheless, I must needs say, that gentlemen of the faculty should
be more moderate in their fees, or take more pains to deserve them; for,
generally, they only come into a room, feel the sick man's pulse, ask the
nurse a few questions, inspect the patient's tongue, and, perhaps, his
water; then sit down, look plaguy wise, and write.  The golden fee finds
the ready hand, and they hurry away, as if the sick man's room were
infectious.  So to the next they troll, and to the next, if men of great
practice; valuing themselves upon the number of visits they make in a
morning, and the little time they make them in.  They go to dinner and
unload their pockets; and sally out again to refill them.  And thus, in a
little time, they raise vast estates; for, as Ratcliffe said, when first
told of a great loss which befell him, It was only going up and down one
hundred pairs of stairs to fetch it up.

Mrs. Sambre (Belton's sister) had several times proposed to him a
minister to pray by him, but the poor man could not, he said, bear the
thoughts of one; for that he should certainly die in an hour or two
after; and he was willing to hope still, against all probability, that he
might recover; and was often asking his sister if she had not seen people
as bad as he was, who, almost to a miracle, when every body gave them
over, had got up again?

She, shaking her head, told him she had; but, once saying, that their
disorders were of an acute kind, and such as had a crisis in them, he
called her Small-hopes, and Job's comforter; and bid her say nothing, if
she could not say more to the purpose, and what was fitter for a sick man
to hear.  And yet, poor fellow, he has no hopes himself, as is plain by
his desponding terrors; one of which he fell into, and a very dreadful
one, soon after the doctor went.


***


WEDNESDAY, NINE O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.

The poor man had been in convulsions, terrible convulsions! for an hour
past.  O Lord! Lovelace, death is a shocking thing! by my faith it is!--
I wish thou wert present on this occasion.  It is not merely the concern
a man has for his friend; but, as death is the common lot, we see, in his
agonies, how it will be one day with ourselves.  I am all over as if cold
water were poured down my back, or as if I had a strong ague-fit upon me.
I was obliged to come away.  And I write, hardly knowing what.--I wish
thou wert here.


***


Though I left him, because I could stay no longer, I can't be easy by
myself, but must go to him again.


ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

Poor Belton!--Drawing on apace!  Yet was he sensible when I went in--too
sensible, poor man!  He has something upon his mind to reveal, he tells
me, that is the worst action of his life; worse than ever you or I knew
of him, he says.  It must then be very bad!

He ordered every body out; but was seized with another convulsion-fit,
before he could reveal it; and in it he lies struggling between life and
death--but I'll go in again.


ONE O'CLOCK IN THE MORNING.

All now must soon be over with him: Poor, poor fellow!  He has given me
some hints of what he wanted to say; but all incoherent, interrupted by
dying hiccoughs and convulsions.

Bad enough it must be, Heaven knows, by what I can gather!--Alas!
Lovelace, I fear, I fear, he came too soon into his uncle's estate.

If a man were to live always, he might have some temptation to do base
things, in order to procure to himself, as it would then be, everlasting
ease, plenty, or affluence; but, for the sake of ten, twenty, thirty
years of poor life to be a villain--Can that be worth while? with a
conscience stinging him all the time too!  And when he comes to wind up
all, such agonizing reflections upon his past guilt!  All then appearing
as nothing!  What he most valued, most disgustful! and not one thing to
think of, as the poor fellow says twenty and twenty times over, but what
is attended with anguish and reproach!--

To hear the poor man wish he had never been born!--To hear him pray to be
nothing after death!  Good God! how shocking!

By his incoherent hints, I am afraid 'tis very bad with him.  No pardon,
no mercy, he repeats, can lie for him!

I hope I shall make a proper use of this lesson.  Laugh at me if thou
wilt; but never, never more, will I take the liberties I have taken; but
whenever I am tempted, will think of Belton's dying agonies, and what my
own may be.


***


THURSDAY, THREE IN THE MORNING.

He is now at the last gasp--rattles in the throat--has a new convulsion
every minute almost!  What horror is he in!  His eyes look like
breath-stained glass!  They roll ghastly no more; are quite set; his face
distorted, and drawn out, by his sinking jaws, and erected staring
eyebrows, with his lengthened furrowed forehead, to double its usual
length, as it seems.  It is not, it cannot be the face of Belton, thy
Belton, and my Belton, whom we have beheld with so much delight over the
social bottle, comparing notes, that one day may be brought against us,
and make us groan, as they very lately did him--that is to say, while he
had strength to groan; for now his voice is not to be heard; all inward,
lost; not so much as speaking by his eyes; yet, strange! how can it be?
the bed rocking under him like a cradle.

FOUR O'CLOCK.

      Alas: he's gone! that groan, that dreadful groan,
      Was the last farewell of the parting mind!
      The struggling soul has bid a long adieu
      To its late mansion--Fled!  Ah! whither fled?

Now is all indeed over!--Poor, poor Belton! by this time thou knowest if
thy crimes were above the size of God's mercies!  Now are every one's
cares and attendance at an end! now do we, thy friends,--poor Belton!--
know the worst of thee, as to this life!  Thou art released from
insufferable tortures both of body and mind! may those tortures, and thy
repentance, expiate for thy offences, and mayest thou be happy to all
eternity!

We are told, that God desires not the death, the spiritual death of a
sinner: And 'tis certain, that thou didst deeply repent!  I hope,
therefore, as thou wert not cut off in the midst of thy sins by the sword
of injured friendship, which more than once thou hadst braved, [the
dreadfullest of all deaths, next to suicide, because it gives no
opportunity for repentance] that this is a merciful earnest that thy
penitence is accepted; and that thy long illness, and dreadful agonies in
the last stages of it, were thy only punishment.

I wish indeed, I heartily wish, we could have seen one ray of comfort
darting in upon his benighted mind, before he departed.  But all, alas!
to the very last gasp, was horror and confusion.  And my only fear arises
from this, that, till within the four last days of his life, he could not
be brought to think he should die, though in a visible decline for
months; and, in that presumption, was too little inclined to set about a
serious preparation for a journey, which he hoped he should not be
obliged to take; and when he began to apprehend that he could not put it
off, his impatience, and terror, and apprehension, showed too little of
that reliance and resignation, which afford the most comfortable
reflections to the friends of the dying, as well as to the dying
themselves.

But we must leave poor Belton to that mercy, of which we have all so much
need; and, for my own part (do you, Lovelace, and the rest of the
fraternity, as ye will) I am resolved, I will endeavour to begin to
repent of my follies while my health is sound, my intellects untouched,
and while it is in my power to make some atonement, as near to
restitution or reparation, as is possible, to those I have wronged or
misled.  And do ye outwardly, and from a point of false bravery, make as
light as ye will of my resolution, as ye are none of ye of the class of
abandoned and stupid sots who endeavour to disbelieve the future
existence of which ye are afraid, I am sure you will justify me in your
hearts, if not by your practices; and one day you will wish you had
joined with me in the same resolution, and will confess there is more
good sense in it, than now perhaps you will own.


SEVEN O'CLOCK, THURSDAY MORNING.

You are very earnest, by your last letter, (just given me) to hear again
from me, before you set out for Berks.  I will therefore close with a few
words upon the only subject in your letter which I can at present touch
upon: and this is the letter of which you give me a copy from the lady.

Want of rest, and the sad scene I have before my eyes, have rendered me
altogether incapable of accounting for the contents of it in any shape.
You are in ecstacies upon it.  You have reason to be so, if it be as you
think.  Nor would I rob you of your joy: but I must say I am amazed at
it.

Surely, Lovelace, this surprising letter cannot be a forgery of thy own,
in order to carry on some view, and to impose upon me.  Yet, by the style
of it, it cannot though thou art a perfect Proteus too.

I will not, however, add another word, after I have desired the return of
this, and have told you that I am

Your true friend, and well-wisher,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XXII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
AUG. 24, THURSDAY MORNING.


I received thy letter in such good time, by thy fellow's dispatch, that
it gives me an opportunity of throwing in a few paragraphs upon it.  I
read a passage or two of it to Mowbray; and we both agree that thou art
an absolute master of the lamentable.

Poor Belton! what terrible conflicts were thy last conflicts!--I hope,
however, that he is happy: and I have the more hope, because the hardness
of his death is likely to be such a warning to thee.  If it have the
effect thou declarest it shall have, what a world of mischief will it
prevent! how much good will it do! how many poor wretches will rejoice at
the occasion, (if they know it,) however melancholy in itself, which
shall bring them in a compensation for injuries they had been forced to
sit down contented with!  But, Jack, though thy uncle's death has made
thee a rich fellow, art thou sure that the making good of such a vow will
not totally bankrupt thee?

Thou sayest I may laugh at thee, if I will.  Not I, Jack: I do not take
it to be a laughing subject: and I am heartily concerned at the loss we
all have in poor Belton: and when I get a little settled, and have
leisure to contemplate the vanity of all sublunary things (a subject that
will now-and-then, in my gayest hours, obtrude itself upon me) it is very
likely that I may talk seriously with thee upon these topics; and, if
thou hast not got too much the start of me in the repentance thou art
entering upon, will go hand-in-hand with thee in it.  If thou hast, thou
wilt let me just keep thee in my eye; for it is an up-hill work; and I
shall see thee, at setting out, at a great distance; but as thou art a
much heavier and clumsier fellow than myself, I hope that without much
puffing and sweating, only keeping on a good round dog-trot, I shall be
able to overtake thee.

Mean time, take back thy letter, as thou desirest.  I would not have it
in my pocket upon any account at present; nor read it once more.

I am going down without seeing my beloved.  I was a hasty fool to write
her a letter, promising that I would not come near her till I saw her at
her father's.  For as she is now actually at Smith's, and I so near her,
one short visit could have done no harm.

I sent Will., two hours ago, with my grateful compliments, and to know
how she does.

How must I adore this charming creature! for I am ready to think my
servant a happier fellow than myself, for having been within a pair of
stairs and an apartment of her.

Mowbray and I will drop a tear a-piece, as we ride along, to the memory
of poor Belton:--as we ride along, said I: for we shall have so much joy
when we arrive at Lord M.'s, and when I communicate to him and my cousins
the dear creature's letter, that we shall forget every thing grievous:
since now their family-hopes in my reformation (the point which lies so
near their hearts) will all revive; it being an article of their faith,
that if I marry, repentance and mortification will follow of course.

Neither Mowbray nor I shall accept of thy verbal invitation to the
funeral.  We like not these dismal formalities.  And as to the respect
that is supposed to be shown to the memory of a deceased friend in such
an attendance, why should we do any thing to reflect upon those who have
made it a fashion to leave this parade to people whom they hire for that
purpose?

Adieu, and be cheerful.  Thou canst now do no more for poor Belton, wert
thou to howl for him to the end of thy life.



LETTER XXIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. AUG. 26.


On Thursday afternoon I assisted at the opening of poor Belton's will, in
which he has left me his sole executor, and bequeathed me a legacy of an
hundred guineas; which I shall present to his unfortunate sister, to whom
he has not been so kind as I think he ought to have been.  He has also
left twenty pounds a-piece to Mowbray, Tourville, thyself, and me, for a
ring to be worn in remembrance of him.

After I had given some particular orders about the preparations to be
made for his funeral, I went to town; but having made it late before I
got in on Thursday night, and being fatigued for want of rest several
nights before, and now in my spirits, [I could not help it, Lovelace!] I
contented myself to send my compliments to the innocent sufferer, to
inquire after her health.

My servant saw Mrs. Smith, who told him, she was very glad I was come to
town; for that lady was worse than she had yet been.

It is impossible to account for the contents of her letter to you; or to
reconcile those contents to the facts I have to communicate.

I was at Smith's by seven yesterday (Friday) morning; and found that the
lady was just gone in a chair to St. Dunstan's to prayers: she was too
ill to get out by six to Covent-garden church; and was forced to be
supported to her chair by Mrs. Lovick.  They would have persuaded her
against going; but she said she knew not but it would be her last
opportunity.  Mrs. Lovick, dreading that she would be taken worse at
church, walked thither before her.

Mrs. Smith told me she was so ill on Wednesday night, that she had
desired to receive the sacrament; and accordingly it was administered to
her, by the parson of the parish: whom she besought to take all
opportunities of assisting her in her solemn preparation.

This the gentleman promised: and called in the morning to inquire after
her health; and was admitted at the first word.  He staid with her about
half an hour; and when he came down, with his face turned aside, and a
faltering accent, 'Mrs. Smith,' said he, 'you have an angel in your
house.--I will attend her again in the evening, as she desires, and as
often as I think it will be agreeable to her.'

Her increased weakness she attributed to the fatigues she had undergone
by your means; and to a letter she had received from her sister, which
she answered the same day.

Mrs. Smith told me that two different persons had called there, one on
Thursday morning, one in the evening, to inquire after her state of
health; and seemed as if commissioned from her relations for that
purpose; but asked not to see her, only were very inquisitive after her
visiters: (particularly, it seems, after me: What could they mean by
that?) after her way of life, and expenses; and one of them inquired
after her manner of supporting them; to the latter of which, Mrs. Smith
said, she had answered, as the truth was, that she had been obliged to
sell some of her clothes, and was actually about parting with more; at
which the inquirist (a grave old farmer-looking man) held up his hands,
and said, Good God!--this will be sad, sad news to somebody!  I believe
I must not mention it.  But Mrs. Smith says she desired he would, let him
come from whom he would.  He shook his head, and said if she died, the
flower of the world would be gone, and the family she belonged to would
be no more than a common family.*  I was pleased with the man's
expression.


* This man came from her cousin Morden; as will be seen hereafter,
Letters LII. and LVI. of this volume.


You may be curious to know how she passed her time, when she was obliged
to leave her lodging to avoid you.

Mrs. Smith tells me 'that she was very ill when she went out on Monday
morning, and sighed as if her heart would break as she came down stairs,
and as she went through the shop into the coach, her nurse with her, as
you had informed me before: that she ordered the coachman (whom she hired
for the day) to drive any where, so it was into the air: he accordingly
drove her to Hampstead, and thence to Highgate.  There at the
Bowling-green House, she alighted, extremely ill, and having breakfasted,
ordered the coachman to drive very slowly any where.  He crept along to
Muswell-hill, and put up at a public house there; where she employed
herself two hours in writing, though exceedingly weak and low, till the
dinner she had ordered was brought in: she endeavoured to eat, but could
not: her appetite was gone, quite gone, she said.  And then she wrote on
for three hours more: after which, being heavy, she dozed a little in an
elbow-chair.  When she awoke, she ordered the coachman to drive her very
slowly to town, to the house of a friend of Mrs. Lovick; whom, as agreed
upon, she met there: but, being extremely ill, she would venture home at
a late hour, although she heard from the widow that you had been there;
and had reason to be shocked at your behaviour.  She said she found there
was no avoiding you: she was apprehensive she should not live many hours,
and it was not impossible but the shock the sight of you must give her
would determine her fate in your presence.

'She accordingly went home.  She heard the relation of your astonishing
vagaries, with hands and eyes often lifted up; and with these words
intermingled, Shocking creature! incorrigible wretch!  And will nothing
make him serious?  And not being able to bear the thoughts of an
interview with a man so hardened, she took to her usual chair early in
the morning, and was carried to the Temple-stairs, where she had ordered
her nurse before her, to get a pair of oars in readiness (for her
fatigues the day before made her unable to bear a coach;) and then she
was rowed to Chelsea, where she breakfasted; and after rowing about, put
in at the Swan at Brentford-ait, where she dined; and would have written,
but had no conveniency either of tolerable pens, or ink, or private room;
and then proceeding to Richmond, they rowed her back to Mort-lake; where
she put in, and drank tea at a house her waterman recommended to her.
She wrote there for an hour; and returned to the Temple; and, when she
landed, made one of the watermen get her a chair, and so was carried to
the widow's friend, as the night before; where she again met the widow,
who informed her that you had been after her twice that day.

'Mrs. Lovick gave her there her sister's letter;* and she was so much
affected with the contents of it, that she was twice very nigh fainting
away; and wept bitterly, as Mrs. Lovick told Mrs. Smith; dropping some
warmer expressions than ever they had heard proceed from her lips, in
relation to her friends; calling them cruel, and complaining of ill
offices done her, and of vile reports raised against her.


* See Letter XXVI. of this volume.


'While she was thus disturbed, Mrs. Smith came to her, and told her, that
you had been there a third time, and was just gone, (at half an hour
after nine,) having left word how civil and respectful you would be; but
that you was determined to see her at all events.

'She said it was hard she could not be permitted to die in peace: that
her lot was a severe one: that she began to be afraid she should not
forbear repining, and to think her punishment greater than her fault:
but, recalling herself immediately, she comforted herself, that her life
would be short, and with the assurance of a better.'

By what I have mentioned, you will conclude with me, that the letter
brought her by Mrs. Lovick (the superscription of which you saw to be
written in her sister's hand) could not be the letter on the contents of
which she grounded that she wrote to you, on her return home.  And yet
neither Mrs. Lovick, nor Mrs. Smith, nor the servant of the latter, know
of any other brought her.  But as the women assured me, that she actually
did write to you, I was eased of a suspicion which I had begun to
entertain, that you (for some purpose I could not guess at) had forged
the letter from her of which you sent me a copy.

On Wednesday morning, when she received your letter, in answer to her's,
she said, Necessity may well be called the mother of invention--but
calamity is the test of integrity.--I hope I have not taken an
inexcusable step--And there she stopt a minute or two; and then said, I
shall now, perhaps, be allowed to die in peace.

I staid till she came in.  She was glad to see me; but, being very weak,
said, she must sit down before she could go up stairs: and so went into
the back-shop; leaning upon Mrs. Lovick: and when she had sat down, 'I am
glad to see you, Mr. Belford, said she; I must say so--let mis-reporters
say what they will.'

I wondered at this expression;* but would not interrupt her.


* Explained in Letter XXVIII. of this volume.


O Sir, said she, I have been grievously harassed.  Your friend, who would
not let me live with reputation, will not permit me to die in peace.  You
see how I am.  Is there not a great alteration in me within this week!
but 'tis all for the better.  Yet were I to wish for life, I must say
that your friend, your barbarous friend, has hurt me greatly.

She was so weak, so short breathed, and her words and actions so very
moving, that I was forced to walk from her; the two women and her nurse
turning away their faces also, weeping.

I have had, Madam, said I, since I saw you, a most shocking scene before
my eyes for days together.  My poor friend Belton is no more.  He quitted
the world yesterday morning in such dreadful agonies, that the impression
they have left upon me have so weakened my mind--

I was loth to have her think that my grief was owing to the weak state I
saw her in, for fear of dispiriting her.

That is only, Mr. Belford, interrupted she, in order to strengthen it, if
a proper use be made of the impression.  But I should be glad, since you
are so humanely affected with the solemn circumstance, that you could
have written an account of it to your gay friend, in the style and manner
you are master of.  Who knows, as it would have come from an associate,
and of an associate, it might have affected him?

That I had done, I told her, in such a manner as had, I believed, some
effect upon you.

His behaviour in this honest family so lately, said she, and his cruel
pursuit of me, give me but little hope that any thing serious or solemn
will affect him.

We had some talk about Belton's dying behaviour, and I gave her several
particulars of the poor man's impatience and despair; to which she was
very attentive; and made fine observations upon the subject of
procrastination.

A letter and packet were brought her by a man on horseback from Miss
Howe, while we were talking.  She retired up stairs to read it; and while
I was in discourse with Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick, the doctor and
apothecary both came in together.  They confirmed to me my fears, as to
the dangerous way she is in.  They had both been apprized of the new
instances of implacableness in her friends, and of your persecutions: and
the doctor said he would not for the world be either the unforgiving
father of that lady, or the man who had brought her to this distress.
Her heart's broken: she'll die, said he: there is no saving her.  But
how, were I either the one or the other of the people I have named, I
should support myself afterwards, I cannot tell.

When she was told we were all three together, she desired us to walk up.
She arose to receive us, and after answering two or three general
questions relating to her health, she addressed herself to us, to the
following effect:

As I may not, said she, see you three gentlemen together again, let me
take this opportunity to acknowledge my obligations to you all.  I am
inexpressibly obliged to you, Sir, and to you, Sir, [courtesying to the
doctor and to Mr. Goddard] for your more than friendly, your paternal
care and concern for me.  Humanity in your profession, I dare say, is far
from being a rare qualification, because you are gentlemen by your
profession: but so much kindness, so much humanity, did never desolate
creature meet with, as I have met with from you both.  But indeed I have
always observed, that where a person relies upon Providence, it never
fails to raise up a new friend for every old one that falls off.

This gentleman, [bowing to me,] who, some people think, should have been
one of the last I should have thought of for my executor--is,
nevertheless, (such is the strange turn that things have taken!) the only
one I can choose; and therefore I have chosen him for that charitable
office, and he has been so good as to accept of it: for, rich as I may
boast myself to be, I am rather so in right than in fact, at this
present.  I repeat, therefore, my humble thanks to you all three, and beg
of God to return to you and yours [looking to each] an hundred-fold, the
kindness and favour you have shown me; and that it may be in the power of
you and of yours, to the end of time, to confer benefits, rather than to
be obliged to receive them.  This is a godlike power, gentlemen: I once
rejoiced in it some little degree; and much more in the prospect I had of
its being enlarged to me; though I have had the mortification to
experience the reverse, and to be obliged almost to every body I have
seen or met with: but all, originally, through my own fault; so I ought
to bear the punishment without repining: and I hope I do.  Forgive these
impertinencies: a grateful heart, that wants the power it wishes for, to
express itself suitably to its own impulses, will be at a loss what
properly to dictate to the tongue; and yet, unable to restrain its
overflowings, will force the tongue to say weak and silly things, rather
than appear ungratefully silent.  Once more, then, I thank ye all three
for your kindness to me: and God Almighty make you that amends which at
present I cannot!

She retired from us to her closet with her eyes full; and left us looking
upon one another.

We had hardly recovered ourselves, when she, quite easy, cheerful, and
smiling, returned to us: Doctor, said she (seeing we had been moved) you
will excuse me for the concern I give you; and so will you, Mr. Goddard,
and you, Mr. Belford; for 'tis a concern that only generous natures can
show: and to such natures sweet is the pain, if I may say so, that
attends such a concern.  But as I have some few preparations still to
make, and would not (though in ease of Mr. Belford's future cares, which
is, and ought to be, part of my study) undertake more than it is likely I
shall have time lent me to perform, I would beg of you to give me your
opinions [you see my way of living, and you may be assured that I will do
nothing wilfully to shorten my life] how long it may possibly be, before
I may hope to be released from all my troubles.

They both hesitated, and looked upon each other.  Don't be afraid to
answer me, said she, each sweet hand pressing upon the arm of each
gentleman, with that mingled freedom and reserve, which virgin modesty,
mixed with conscious dignity, can only express, and with a look serenely
earnest, tell me how long you think I may hold it! and believe me,
gentlemen, the shorter you tell me my time is likely to be, the more
comfort you will give me.

With what pleasing woe, said the Doctor, do you fill the minds of those
who have the happiness to converse with you, and see the happy frame you
are in! what you have undergone within a few days past has much hurt you:
and should you have fresh troubles of those kinds, I could not be
answerable for your holding it--And there he paused.

How long, Doctor?--I believe I shall have a little more ruffling--I am
afraid I shall--but there can happen only one thing that I shall not be
tolerably easy under--How long then, Sir?--

He was silent.

A fortnight, Sir?

He was still silent.

Ten days?--A week?--How long, Sir? with smiling earnestness.

If I must speak, Madam, if you have not better treatment than you have
lately met with, I am afraid--There again he stopt.

Afraid of what, Doctor? don't be afraid--How long, Sir?

That a fortnight or three weeks may deprive the world of the finest
flower in it.

A fortnight or three weeks yet, Doctor?--But God's will be done!  I
shall, however, by this means, have full time, if I have but strength
and intellect, to do all that is now upon my mind to do.  And so, Sirs,
I can but once more thank you [turning to each of us] for all your
goodness to me; and, having letters to write, will take up no more of
your time--Only, Doctor, be pleased to order me some more of those drops:
they cheer me a little, when I am low; and putting a fee into his
unwilling hand--You know the terms, Sir!--Then, turning to Mr. Goddard,
you'll be so good, Sir, as to look in upon me to-night or to-morrow, as
you have opportunity: and you, Mr. Belford, I know, will be desirous to
set out to prepare for the last office for your late friend: so I wish
you a good journey, and hope to see you when that is performed.

She then retired with a cheerful and serene air.  The two gentlemen
went away together.  I went down to the women, and, inquiring, found,
that Mrs. Lovick was this day to bring her twenty guineas more, for some
other of her apparel.

The widow told me that she had taken the liberty to expostulate with her
upon the occasion she had for raising this money, to such great
disadvantage; and it produced the following short and affecting
conversation between them.

None of my friends will wear any thing of mine, said she.  I shall leave
a great many good things behind me.--And as to what I want the money for
--don't be surprised:--But suppose I want it to purchase a house?

You are all mystery, Madam.  I don't comprehend you.

Why, then, Mrs. Lovick, I will explain myself.--I have a man, not a
woman, for my executor: and think you that I will leave to his care any
thing that concerns my own person?--Now, Mrs. Lovick, smiling, do you
comprehend me?

Mrs. Lovick wept.

O fie! proceeded the Lady, drying up her tears with her own handkerchief,
and giving her a kiss--Why this kind weakness for one with whom you have
been so little while acquainted?  Dear, good Mrs. Lovick, don't be
concerned for me on a prospect with which I have occasion to be pleased;
but go to-morrow to your friends, and bring me the money they have agreed
to give you.

Thus, Lovelace, it is plain she means to bespeak her last house!  Here's
presence of mind; here's tranquillity of heart, on the most affecting
occasion--This is magnanimity indeed!--Couldst thou, or could I, with all
our boisterous bravery, and offensive false courage, act thus?--Poor
Belton! how unlike was thy behaviour!

Mrs. Lovick tells me that the lady spoke of a letter she had received
from her favourite divine Dr. Lewen, in the time of my absence; and of an
letter she had returned to it.  But Mrs. Lovick knows not the contents of
either.

When thou receivest the letter I am now writing, thou wilt see what will
soon be the end of all thy injuries to this divine lady.  I say when thou
receivest it; for I will delay it for some little time, lest thou
shouldest take it into thy head (under pretence of resenting the
disappointment her letter must give thee) to molest her again.

This letter having detained me by its length, I shall not now set out for
Epsom till to-morrow.

I should have mentioned that the lady explained to me what the one thing
was that she was afraid might happen to ruffle her.  It was the
apprehension of what may result from a visit which Col. Morden, as she is
informed, designs to make you.



LETTER XXIV

THE REV. DR. LEWEN, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 18.


Presuming, dearest and ever-respectable young lady, upon your former
favour, and upon your opinion of my judgment and sincerity, I cannot help
addressing you by a few lines on your present unhappy situation.

I will not look back upon the measures into which you have either been
led or driven.  But will only say as to those, that I think you are the
least to blame of any young lady that was ever reduced from happy to
unhappy circumstances; and I have not been wanting to say as much, where
I hoped my freedom would have been better received than I have had the
mortification to find it to be.

What I principally write for now is, to put you upon doing a piece of
justice to yourself, and to your sex, in the prosecuting for his life (I
am assured his life is in your power) the most profligate and abandoned
of men, as he must be, who could act so basely, as I understand Mr.
Lovelace has acted by you.

I am very ill; and am now forced to write upon my pillow; my thoughts
confused; and incapable of method: I shall not therefore aim at method:
but to give you in general my opinion--and that is, that your religion,
your duty to your family, the duty you owe to your honour, and even
charity to your sex, oblige you to give public evidence against this very
wicked man.

And let me add another consideration: The prevention, by this means, of
the mischiefs that may otherwise happen between your brother and Mr.
Lovelace, or between the latter and your cousin Morden, who is now, I
hear, arrived, and resolves to have justice done you.

A consideration which ought to affect your conscience, [forgive me,
dearest young lady, I think I am now in the way of my duty;] and to be
of more concern to you, than that hard pressure upon your modesty which
I know the appearance against him in an open court must be of to such a
lady as you; and which, I conceive, will be your great difficulty.  But I
know, Madam, that you have dignity enough to become the blushes of the
most naked truth, when necessity, justice, and honour, exact it from you.
Rakes and ravishers would meet with encouragement indeed, and most from
those who had the greatest abhorrence of their actions, if violated
modesty were never to complain of the injury it received from the
villanous attempters of it.

In a word, the reparation of your family dishonour now rests in your own
bosom: and which only one of these two alternatives can repair; to wit,
either to marry the offender, or to prosecute him at law.  Bitter
expedients for a soul so delicate as your's!

He, and all his friends, I understand, solicit you to the first: and it
is certainly, now, all the amends within his power to make.  But I am
assured that you have rejected their solicitations, and his, with the
indignation and contempt that his foul actions have deserved: but yet,
that you refuse not to extend to him the christian forgiveness he has so
little reason to expect, provided he will not disturb you farther.

But, Madam, the prosecution I advise, will not let your present and
future exemption from fresh disturbance from so vile a molester depend
upon his courtesy: I should think so noble and so rightly-guided a spirit
as your's would not permit that it should, if you could help it.

And can indignities of any kind be properly pardoned till we have it in
our power to punish them?  To pretend to pardon, while we are labouring
under the pain or dishonour of them, will be thought by some to be but
the vaunted mercy of a pusillanimous heart, trembling to resent them.
The remedy I propose is a severe one: But what pain can be more severe
than the injury?  Or how will injuries be believed to grieve us, that are
never honourably complained of?

I am sure Miss Clarissa Harlowe, however injured and oppressed, remains
unshaken in her sentiments of honour and virtue: and although she would
sooner die than deserve that her modesty should be drawn into question;
yet she will think no truth immodest that is to be uttered in the
vindicated cause of innocence and chastity.  Little, very little
difference is there, my dear young lady, between a suppressed evidence,
and a false one.

It is a terrible circumstance, I once more own, for a young lady of your
delicacy to be under the obligation of telling so shocking a story in
public court: but it is still a worse imputation, that she should pass
over so mortal an injury unresented.

Conscience, honour, justice, are on your side: and modesty would, by
some, be thought but an empty name, should you refuse to obey their
dictates.

I have been consulted, I own, on this subject.  I have given it as my
opinion, that you ought to prosecute the abandoned man--but without my
reasons.  These I reserved, with a resolution to lay them before you
unknown to any body, that the result, if what I wish, may be your own.

I will only add that the misfortunes which have befallen you, had they
been the lot of a child of my own, could not have affected me more than
your's have done.  My own child I love: but I both love and honour you:
since to love you, is to love virtue, good sense, prudence, and every
thing that is good and noble in woman.

Wounded as I think all these are by the injuries you have received, you
will believe that the knowledge of your distresses must have afflicted,
beyond what I am able to express,

Your sincere admirer, and humble servant,
ARTHUR LEWEN.


I just now understand that your sister will, by proper authority, propose
      this prosecution to you.  I humbly presume that the reason why you
      resolved not upon this step from the first, was, that you did not
      know that it would have the countenance and support of your
      relations.



LETTER XXV

MISS CL. HARLOWE, TO THE REV. DR. LEWEN
SAT. AUG. 19.


REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,

I thought, till I received your affectionate and welcome letter, that I
had neither father, uncle, brother left; nor hardly a friend among my
former favourers of your sex.  Yet, knowing you so well, and having no
reason to upbraid myself with a faulty will, I was to blame, (even
although I had doubted the continuance of your good opinion,) to decline
the trial whether I had forfeited it or not; and if I had, whether I
could not honourably reinstate myself in it.

But, Sir, it was owing to different causes that I did not; partly to
shame, to think how high, in my happier days, I stood in your esteem, and
how much I must be sunk in it, since those so much nearer in relation to
me gave me up; partly to deep distress, which makes the humbled heart
diffident; and made mine afraid to claim the kindred mind in your's,
which would have supplied to me in some measure all the dear and lost
relations I have named.

Then, so loth, as I sometimes was, to be thought to want to make a party
against those whom both duty and inclination bid me reverence: so long
trailed on between hope and doubt: so little my own mistress at one time;
so fearful of making or causing mischief at another; and not being
encouraged to hope, by your kind notice, that my application to you would
be acceptable:--apprehending that my relations had engaged your silence
at least*--THESE--But why these unavailing retrospections now?--I was to
be unhappy--in order to be happy; that is my hope!--Resigning therefore
to that hope, I will, without any further preamble, write a few lines,
(if writing to you, I can write but a few,) in answer to the subject of
your kind letter.


* The stiff visit this good divine was prevailed upon to make her, as
mentioned in Vol. II. Letter XXXI. (of which, however, she was too
generous to remind him) might warrant the lady to think that he had
rather inclined to their party, as to the parental side, than to her's.


Permit me, then, to say, That I believe your arguments would have been
unanswerable in almost every other case of this nature, but in that of
the unhappy Clarissa Harlowe.

It is certain that creatures who cannot stand the shock of public shame,
should be doubly careful how they expose themselves to the danger of
incurring private guilt, which may possibly bring them to it.  But as to
myself, suppose there were no objections from the declining way I am in
as to my health; and supposing I could have prevailed upon myself to
appear against this man; were there not room to apprehend that the end so
much wished for by my friends, (to wit, his condign punishment,) would
not have been obtained, when it came to be seen that I had consented to
give him a clandestine meeting; and, in consequence of that, had been
weakly tricked out of living under one roof with him for several weeks;
which I did, (not only without complaint, but) without cause of
complaint?

Little advantage in a court, (perhaps, bandied about, and jested
profligately with,) would some of those pleas in my favour have been,
which out of court, and to a private and serious audience, would have
carried the greatest weight against him--Such, particularly, as the
infamous methods to which he had recourse--

It would, no doubt, have been a ready retort from every mouth, that I
ought not to have thrown myself into the power of such a man, and that I
ought to take for my pains what had befallen me.

But had the prosecution been carried on to effect, and had he even been
sentenced to death, can it be supposed that his family would not have had
interest enough to obtain his pardon, for a crime thought too lightly of,
though one of the greatest that can be committed against a creature
valuing her honour above her life?--While I had been censured as pursuing
with sanguinary views a man who offered me early all the reparation in
his power to make?

And had he been pardoned, would he not then have been at liberty to do as
much mischief as ever?

I dare say, Sir, such is the assurance of the man upon whom my unhappy
destiny threw me; and such his inveteracy to my family, (which would then
have appeared to be justified by their known inveteracy to him, and by
their earnest endeavours to take away his life;) that he would not have
been sorry to have had an opportunity to confront me, and my father,
uncles, and brother, at the bar of a court of justice, on such an
occasion.  In which case, would not (on his acquittal, or pardon)
resentments have been reciprocally heightened?  And then would my
brother, or my cousin Morden, have been more secure than now?

How do these conditions aggravate my fault!  My motives, at first, were
not indeed blamable: but I had forgotten the excellent caution, which yet
I was not ignorant of, That we ought not to do evil that good may come of
it.

In full conviction of the purity of my heart, and of the firmness of my
principles, [Why may I not, thus called upon, say what I am conscious of,
and yet without the imputation of faulty pride; since all is but a duty,
and I should be utterly inexcusable, could I not justly say what I do?--
In this full conviction,] he has offered me marriage.  He has avowed his
penitence: a sincere penitence I have reason to think it, though perhaps
not a christian one.  And his noble relations, (kinder to the poor
sufferer than her own,) on the same conviction, and his own not
ungenerous acknowledgements, have joined to intercede with me to forgive
and accept of him.  Although I cannot comply with the latter part of
their intercession, have not you, Sir, from the best rules, and from the
divinest example, taught me to forgive injuries?

The injury I have received from him is indeed of the highest nature, and
it was attended with circumstances of unmanly baseness and premeditation;
yet, I bless God, it has not tainted my mind; it has not hurt my morals.
No thanks indeed to the wicked man that it has not.  No vile courses have
followed it.  My will is unviolated.  The evil, (respecting myself, and
not my friends,) is merely personal.  No credulity, no weakness, no want
of vigilance, have I to reproach myself with.  I have, through grace,
triumphed over the deepest machinations.  I have escaped from him.  I
have renounced him.  The man whom once I could have loved, I have been
enabled to despise: And shall not charity complete my triumph? and shall
I not enjoy it?--And where would be my triumph if he deserved my
forgiveness?--Poor man! he has had a loss in losing me!  I have the pride
to think so, because I think I know my own heart.  I have had none in
losing him.

But I have another plea to make, which alone would have been enough (as I
presume) to answer the contents of your very kind and friendly letter.

I know, my dear and reverend friend, the spiritual guide and director of
my happier days! I know, that you will allow of my endeavour to bring
myself to this charitable disposition, when I tell you how near I think
myself to that great and awful moment, in which, and even in the ardent
preparation to which, every sense of indignity or injury that concerns
not the immortal soul, ought to be absorbed in higher and more important
contemplations.

Thus much for myself.

And for the satisfaction of my friends and favourers, Miss Howe is
solicitous to have all those letters and materials preserved, which will
set my whole story in a true light.  The good Dr. Lewen is one of the
principal of those friends and favourers.

The warning that may be given from those papers to all such young
creatures as may have known or heard of me, may be of more efficacy to
the end wished for, as I humbly presume to think, than my appearance
could have been in a court of justice, pursuing a doubtful event, under
the disadvantages I have mentioned.  And if, my dear and good Sir, you
are now, on considering every thing, of this opinion, and I could know
it, I should consider it as a particular felicity; being as solicitous
as ever to be justified in what I may in your eyes.

I am sorry, Sir, that your indisposition has reduced you to the necessity
of writing upon your pillow.  But how much am I obliged to that kind and
generous concern for me, which has impelled you, as I may say, to write a
letter, containing so many paternal lines, with such inconvenience to
yourself!

May the Almighty bless you, dear and reverend Sir, for all your goodness
to me of long time past, as well as for that which engaged my present
gratitude!  Continue to esteem me to the last, as I do and will venerate
you!  And let me bespeak your prayers, the continuance, I should say, of
your prayers; for I doubt not, that I have always had them: and to them,
perhaps, has in part been owing (as well as to your pious precepts
instilled through my earlier youth) that I have been able to make the
stand I have made; although every thing that you prayed for has not been
granted to me by that Divine Wisdom, which knows what is best for its
poor creatures.

My prayers for you are, that it will please God to restore you to your
affectionate flock; and after as many years of life as shall be for his
service, and to your own comfort, give us a happy meeting in those
regions of blessedness, which you have taught me, as well by example, as
by precept, to aspire to!

CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XXVI

MISS ARAB. HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S TO HER UNCLE ANTONY OF AUG. 13.*]
MONDAY, AUG. 21.


* See Letter IV. of this volume.


SISTER CLARY,

I find by your letters to my uncles, that they, as well as I, are in
great disgrace with you for writing our minds to you.

We can't help it, sister Clary.

You don't think it worth your while, I find, a second time to press for
the blessing you pretend to be so earnest about.  You think, no doubt,
that you have done your duty in asking for it: so you'll sit down
satisfied with that, I suppose, and leave it to your wounded parents to
repent hereafter that they have not done theirs, in giving it to you, at
the first word; and in making such inquiries about you, as you think
ought to have been made.  Fine encouragement to inquire after a run-away
daughter! living with her fellow as long as he would live with her!  You
repent also (with your full mind, as you modestly call it) that you wrote
to me.

So we are not likely to be applied to any more, I find, in this way.

Well then, since this is the case, sister Clary, let me, with all
humility, address myself with a proposal or two to you; to which you will
be graciously pleased to give an answer.

Now you must know, that we have had hints given us, from several
quarters, that you have been used in such a manner by the villain you ran
away with, that his life would be answerable for his crime, if it were
fairly to be proved.  And, by your own hints, something like it appears
to us.

If, Clary, there be any thing but jingle and affected period in what
proceeds from your full mind, and your dutiful consciousness; and if
there be truth in what Mrs. Norton and Mrs. Howe have acquainted us with;
you may yet justify your character to us, and to the world, in every
thing but your scandalous elopement; and the law may reach the villain:
and, could we but bring him to the gallows, what a meritorious revenge
would that be to our whole injured family, and to the innocents he has
deluded, as well as the saving from ruin many others!

Let me, therefore, know (if you please) whether you are willing to appear
to do yourself, and us, and your sex, this justice?  If not, sister
Clary, we shall know what to think of you; for neither you nor we can
suffer more than we have done from the scandal of your fall: and, if you
will, Mr. Ackland and counselor Derham will both attend you to make
proper inquiries, and to take minutes of your story, to found a process
upon, if it will bear one with as great a probability of success as we
are told it may be prosecuted with.

But, by what Mrs. Howe intimates, this is not likely to be complied with;
for it is what she hinted to you, it seems, by her lively daughter, but
not without effect;* so prudently in some certain points, as to entitle
yourself to public justice; which, if true, the Lord have mercy upon you!


* See Vol. VI. Letter LXXII.


One word only more as to the above proposal:--Your admirer, Dr. Lewen, is
clear, in his opinion, that you should prosecute the villain.

But if you will not agree to this, I have another proposal to make to
you, and that in the name of every one in the family; which is, that you
will think of going to Pensylvania to reside there for some few years
till all is blown over: and, if it please God to spare you, and your
unhappy parents, till they can be satisfied that you behave like a true
and uniform penitent; at least till you are one-and-twenty; you may then
come back to your own estate, or have the produce of it sent you thither,
as you shall choose.  A period which my father fixes, because it is the
custom; and because he thinks your grandfather should have fixed it; and
because, let me add, you have fully proved by your fine conduct, that you
were not at years of discretion at eighteen.  Poor doting, though good
old man!--Your grandfather, he thought--But I would not be too severe.

Mr. Hartley has a widow-sister at Pensylvania, with whom he will
undertake you may board, and who is a sober, sensible, well-read woman.
And if you were once well there, it would rid your father and mother of
a world of cares, and fears, and scandal; and that I think is what you
should wish for of all things.

Mr. Hartley will engage for all accommodations in your passage suitable
to your rank and fortune; and he has a concern in a ship, which will sail
in a month; and you may take your secret-keeping Hannah with you, or whom
you will of your newer acquaintance.  'Tis presumed that your companions
will be of your own sex.

These are what I had to communicate to you; and if you'll oblige me with
an answer, (which the hand that conveys this will call for on Wednesday
morning,) it will be very condescending.

ARABELLA HARLOWE.



LETTER XXVII

MISS CL. HARLOWE, TO MISS ARAB. HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.


Write to me, my hard-hearted Sister, in what manner you please, I shall
always be thankful to you for your notice.  But (think what you will of
me) I cannot see Mr. Ackland and the counselor on such a business as you
mention.

The Lord have mercy upon me indeed! for none else will.

Surely I am believed to a creature past all shame, or it could not be
thought of sending two gentlemen to me on such an errand.

Had my mother required of me (or would modesty have permitted you to
inquire into) the particulars of my sad story, or had Mrs. Norton been
directed to receive them from me, methinks it had been more fit: and I
presume to think that it would have been more in every one's character
too, had they been required of me before such heavy judgment had been
passed upon me as has been passed.

I know that this is Dr. Lewen's opinion.  He has been so good as to
enforce it in a kind letter to me.  I have answered his letter; and given
such reasons as I hope will satisfy him.  I could wish it were thought
worth while to request of him a sight of my answer.*


* Her letter, containing the reasons she refers to, was not asked for;
and Dr. Lewen's death, which fell out soon after he had received it, was
the reason that it was not communicated to the family, till it was too
late to do the service that might have been hoped for from it.


To your other proposal, of going to Pensylvania; this is my answer--If
nothing happen within a month which may full as effectually rid my
parents and friends of that world of cares, and fears, and scandals,
which you mention, and if I am then able to be carried on board of ship,
I will cheerfully obey my father and mother, although I were sure to die
in the passage.  And, if I may be forgiven for saying so (for indeed it
proceeds not from a spirit of reprisal) you shall set over me, instead of
my poor obliging, but really-unculpable, Hannah, your Betty Barnes; to
whom I will be answerable for all my conduct.  And I will make it worth
her while to accompany me.

I am equally surprised and concerned at the hints which both you and my
uncle Antony give of new points of misbehaviour in me!--What can be meant
by them?

I will not tell you, Miss Harlowe, how much I am afflicted at your
severity, and how much I suffer by it, and by your hard-hearted levity of
style, because what I shall say may be construed into jingle and period,
and because I know it is intended, very possibly for kind ends, to
mortify me.  All I will therefore say is, that it does not lose its end,
if that be it.

But, nevertheless, (divesting myself as much as possible of all
resentment,) I will only pray that Heaven will give you, for your own
sake, a kinder heart than at present you seem to have; since a kind
heart, I am convinced, is a greater blessing to its possessor than it can
be to any other person.  Under this conviction I subscribe myself, my
dear Bella,

Your ever-affectionate sister,
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XXVIII

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S OF THURSDAY, AUG. 17.*]
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.


* See Letter VI. of this volume.


MY DEAREST YOUNG LADY,

The letters you sent me I now return by the hand that brings you this.

It is impossible for me to express how much I have been affected by them,
and by your last of the 17th.  Indeed, my dear Miss Clary, you are very
harshly used; indeed you are!  And if you should be taken from us, what
grief and what punishment are not treasuring up against themselves in the
heavy reflections which their rash censures and unforgivingness will
occasion them!

But I find to what your uncle Antony's cruel letter is owing, as well as
one you will be still more afflicted by, [God help you, my poor dear
child!] when it comes to your hand, written by your sister, with
proposals to you.*


* See Letter XXVI. ibid.


It was finished to send you yesterday, I know; and I apprize you of it,
that you should fortify your heart against the contents of it.

The motives which incline them all to this severity, if well grounded,
would authorize any severity they could express, and which, while they
believe them to be so, both they and you are to be equally pitied.

They are owning to the information of that officious Mr. Brand, who has
acquainted them (from some enemy of your's in the neighbourhood about
you) that visits are made you, highly censurable, by a man of a free
character, and an intimate of Mr. Lovelace; who is often in private with
you; sometimes twice or thrice a day.

Betty gives herself great liberties of speech upon this occasion, and all
your friends are too ready to believe that things are not as they should
be; which makes me wish that, let the gentleman's views be ever so
honourable, you could entirely drop acquaintance with him.

Something of this nature was hinted at by Betty to me before, but so
darkly that I could not tell what to make of it; and this made me mention
to you so generally as I did in my last.

Your cousin Morden has been among them.  He is exceedingly concerned for
your misfortunes; and as they will not believe Mr. Lovelace would marry
you, he is determined to go to Lord M.'s, in order to inform himself from
Mr. Lovelace's own mouth, whether he intends to do you that justice or
not.

He was extremely caressed by every one at his first arrival; but I am
told there is some little coldness between them and him at present.

I was in hopes of getting a sight of this letter of Mr. Brand: (a rash
officious man!) but it seems Mr. Morden had it given him yesterday to
read, and he took it away with him.

God be your comfort, my dear Miss!  But indeed I am exceedingly disturbed
at the thoughts of what may still be the issue of all these things.  I
am, my beloved young lady,

Your most affectionate and faithful
JUDITH NORTON.



LETTER XXIX

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.


After I had sealed up the enclosed, I had the honour of a private visit
from your aunt Hervey; who has been in a very low-spirited way, and kept
her chamber for several weeks past; and is but just got abroad.

She longed, she said, to see me, and to weep with me, on the hard fate
that had befallen her beloved niece.

I will give you a faithful account of what passed between us; as I expect
that it will, upon the whole, administer hope and comfort to you.

'She pitied very much your good mother, who, she assured me, is obliged
to act a part entirely contrary to her inclinations; as she herself, she
owns, had been in a great measure.

'She said, that the poor lady was with great difficulty with-held from
answering your letter to her; which had (as was your aunt's expression)
almost broken the heart of every one: that she had reason to think that
she was neither consenting to your two uncles writing, nor approving of
what they wrote.

'She is sure they all love you dearly; but have gone so far, that they
know not how to recede.

'That, but for the abominable league which your brother had got every
body into (he refusing to set out for Scotland till it was renewed, and
till they had all promised to take no step towards a reconciliation in
his absence but by his consent; and to which your sister's resentments
kept them up); all would before now have happily subsided.

'That nobody knew the pangs which their inflexible behaviour gave them,
ever since you had begun to write to them in so affecting and humble a
style.

'That, however, they were not inclined to believe that you were either so
ill, or so penitent as you really are; and still less, that Mr. Lovelace
is in earnest in his offers of marriage.

'She is sure, however, she says, that all will soon be well: and the
sooner for Mr. Morden's arrival: who is very zealous in your behalf.

'She wished to Heaven that you would accept of Mr. Lovelace, wicked as he
has been, if he were now in earnest.

'It had always,' she said, 'been matter of astonishment to her, that so
weak a pride in her cousin James, of making himself the whole family,
should induce them all to refuse an alliance with such a family as Mr.
Lovelace's was.

'She would have it, that your going off with Mr. Lovelace was the
unhappiest step for your honour and your interest that could have been
taken; for that although you would have had a severe trial the next day,
yet it would probably have been the last; and your pathetic powers must
have drawn you off some friends--hinting at your mother, at your uncle
Harlowe, at your uncle Hervey, and herself.'

But here (that the regret that you did not trust to the event of that
meeting, may not, in your present low way, too much afflict you) I must
observe, that it seems a little too evident, even from this opinion of
your aunt's, that it was not absolutely determined that all compulsion
was designed to be avoided, since your freedom from it must have been
owing to the party to be made among them by your persuasive eloquence and
dutiful expostulation.

'She owned, that some of them were as much afraid of meeting you as you
could be of meeting them:'--But why so, if they designed, in the last
instance, to give you your way?

Your aunt told me, 'That Mrs. Williams* had been with her, and asked her
opinion, if it would be taken amiss, if she desired leave to go up, to
attend her dearest young lady in her calamity.  Your aunt referred her to
your mother: but had heard no more of it.


* The former housekeeper at Harlowe-place.


'Her daughter,' (Miss Dolly,) she said, 'had been frequently earnest with
her on the same subject; and renewed her request with the greatest
fervour when your first letter came to hand.'

Your aunt says, 'That she then being very ill, wrote to your mother upon
it, hoping it would not be taken amiss if she permitted Dolly to go; but
that your sister, as from your mother, answered her, That now you seemed
to be coming-to, and to have a due sense of your faults, you must be left
entirely to their own management.

'Miss Dolly,' she said, 'had pined ever since she had heard of Mr.
Lovelace's baseness, being doubly mortified by it: first, on account of
your sufferings; next, because she was one who rejoiced in your getting
off, and vindicated you for it; and had incurred censure and ill-will on
that account; especially from your brother and sister; so that she seldom
went to Harlowe-place.'

Make the best use of these intelligences, my dearest young lady, for your
consolation.

I will only add, that I am, with the most fervent prayers for your
recovery and restoration to favour,

Your ever-faitful
JUDITH NORTON.



LETTER XXX

MISS CL. HARLOWE, TO MRS. JUDITH NORTON
THURSDAY, AUG. 24.


The relation of such a conversation as passed between my aunt and you
would have given me pleasure, had it come some time ago; because it would
have met with a spirit more industrious than mine now is, to pick out
remote comfort in the hope of a favourable turn that might one day have
rewarded my patient duty.

I did not doubt my aunt't good-will to me.  Her affection I did not
doubt.  But shall we wonder that kings and princes meet with so little
controul in their passions, be they every so violent, when, in a private
family, an aunt, nay, even a mother in that family, shall choose to give
up a once-favoured child against their own inclinations, rather than
oppose an aspiring young man, who had armed himself with the authority of
a father, who, when once determined, never would be expostulated with?

And will you not blame me, if I say, that good sense, that kindred
indulgence, must be a little offended at the treatment I have met with;
and if I own, that I think that great rigour has been exercised towards
me!  And yet I am now authorized to call it rigour by the judgment of two
excellent sisters, my mother and my aunt, who acknowledge (as you tell me
from my aunt) that they have been obliged to join against me, contrary to
their inclinations; and that even in a point which might seem to concern
my eternal welfare.

But I must not go on at this rate.  For may not the inclination my mother
has given up be the effect of a too-fond indulgence, rather than that I
merit the indulgence?  And yet so petulantly perverse am I, that I must
tear myself from the subject.

All then that I will say further to it, at this time, is, that were the
intended goodness to be granted to me but a week hence, it would possibly
be too late--too late I mean to be of the consolation to me that I would
wish from it: for what an inefficacious preparation must I have been
making, if it has not, by this time, carried me above--But above what?--
Poor mistaken creature!  Unhappy self-deluder! that finds herself above
nothing!  Nor able to subdue her own faulty impatience!

But in-deed, to have done with a subject that I dare not trust myself
with, if it come in your way, let my aunt Hervey, let my dear cousin
Dolly, let the worthy Mrs. Williams, know how exceedingly grateful to me
their kind intentions and concern for me are: and, as the best warrant
or justification of their good opinions, (since I know that their favour
for me is founded on the belief that I loved virtue,) tell them, that I
continued to love virtue to my last hour, as I presume to hope it may be
said; and assure them that I never made the least wilful deviation,
however unhappy I became for one faulty step; which nevertheless was not
owing to unworthy or perverse motives.

I am very sorry that my cousin Morden has taken a resolution to see Mr.
Lovelace.

My apprehensions on this intelligence are a great abatement to the
pleasure I have in knowing that he still loves me.

My sister's letter to me is a most affecting one--so needlessly, so
ludicrously taunting!--But for that part of it that is so, I ought rather
to pity her, than to be so much concerned at it as I am.

I wonder what I have done to Mr. Brand--I pray God to forgive both him
and his informants, whoever they be.  But if the scandal arise solely
from Mr. Belford's visits, a very little time will confute it.  Mean
while, the packet I shall send you, which I sent to Miss Howe, will, I
hope, satisfy you, my dear Mrs. Norton, as to my reasons for admitting
his visits.

My sister's taunting letter, and the inflexibleness of my dearer friends
--But how do remoter-begun subjects tend to the point which lies nearest
the heart!--As new-caught bodily disorders all crowd to a fractured or
distempered part.

I will break off, with requesting your prayers that I may be blessed with
patience and due resignation; and with assuring you, that I am, and will
be to the last hour of my life,

Your equally grateful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XXXI

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[IN REPLY TO HER'S OF FRIDAY, AUG. 11.*]
YARMOUTH, ISLE OF WIGHT, AUG. 23.


* See Letter II. of this volume.


MY DEAREST FRIEND,

I have read the letters and copies of letters you favoured me with: and I
return them by a particular hand.  I am extremely concerned at your
indifferent state of health: but I approve of all your proceedings and
precautions in relation to the appointment of Mr. Belford for an office,
in which, I hope, neither he nor any body else will be wanted to act, for
many, very many years.

I admire, and so we do all, that greatness of mind which can make you so
stedfastly [sic] despise (through such inducements as no other woman
could resist, and in such desolate circumstances as you have been reduced
to) the wretch that ought to be so heartily despised and detested.

What must the contents of those letters from your relations be, which you
will not communicate to me!--Fie upon them!  How my heart rises!--But I
dare say no more--though you yourself now begin to think they use you
with great severity.

Every body here is so taken with Mr. Hickman (and the more from the
horror they conceive at the character of the detestable Lovelace,) that I
have been teased to death almost to name a day.  This has given him airs:
and, did I not keep him to it, he would behave as carelessly and as
insolently as if he were sure of me.  I have been forced to mortify him
no less than four times since we have been here.

I made him lately undergo a severe penance for some negligences that were
not to be passed over.  Not designed ones, he said: but that was a poor
excuse, as I told him: for, had they been designed, he should never have
come into my presence more: that they were not, showed his want of
thought and attention; and those were inexcusable in a man only in his
probatory state.

He hoped he had been more than in a probatory state, he said.

And therefore, Sir, might be more careless!--So you add ingratitude to
negligence, and make what you plead as accident, that itself wants an
excuse, design, which deserves none.

I would not see him for two days, and he was so penitent, and so humble,
that I had like to have lost myself, to make him amends: for, as you have
said, resentment carried too high, often ends in amends too humble.

I long to be nearer to you: but that must not yet be, it seems.  Pray, my
dear, let me hear from you as often as you can.

May Heaven increase your comforts, and restore your health, are the
prayers of

Your ever faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.


P.S. Excuse me that I did not write before: it was owing to a little
      coasting voyage I was obliged to give into.



LETTER XXXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 25.


You are very obliging, my dear Miss Howe, to account to me for your
silence.  I was easy in it, as I doubted not that, among such near and
dear friends as you are with, you was diverted from writing by some such
agreeable excursion as that you mention.

I was in hopes that you had given over, at this time of day, those very
sprightly airs, which I have taken the liberty to blame you for, as often
as you have given me occasion to so do; and that has been very often.

I was always very grave with you upon this subject: and while your own
and a worthy man's future happiness are in the question, I must enter
into it, whenever you forget yourself, although I had not a day to live:
and indeed I am very ill.

I am sure it was not your intention to take your future husband with you
to the little island to make him look weak and silly among those of your
relations who never before had seen him.  Yet do you think it possible
for them (however prepared and resolved they may be to like him) to
forbear smiling at him, when they see him suffering under your whimsical
penances?  A modest man should no more be made little in his own eyes,
than in the eyes of others.  If he be, he will have a diffidence, which
will give an awkwardness to every thing he says or does; and this will be
no more to the credit of your choice than to that of the approbation he
meets with from your friends, or to his own credit.

I love an obliging, and even an humble, deportment in a man to the woman
he addresses.  It is a mark of his politeness, and tends to give her that
opinion of herself, which it may be supposed bashful merit wants to be
inspired with.  But if the woman exacts it with an high hand, she shows
not either her own politeness or gratitude; although I must confess she
does her courage.  I gave you expectations that I would be very serious
with you.

O my dear, that it had been my lot (as I was not permitted to live
single,) to have met with a man by whom I could have acted generously and
unreservedly!

Mr. Lovelace, it is now plain, in order to have a pretence against me,
taxed my behaviour to him with stiffness and distance.  You, at one time,
thought me guilty of some degree of prudery.  Difficult situations should
be allowed for: which often make seeming occasions for censure
unavoidable.  I deserved not blame from him who made mine difficult.  And
you, my dear, had I any other man to deal with, or had he but half the
merit which Mr. Hickman has, would have found that my doctrine on this
subject should have governed my practice.

But to put myself out of the question--I'll tell you what I should think,
were I an indifferent by-stander, of those high airs of your's, in return
for Mr. Hickman's humble demeanour.  'The lady thinks of having the
gentleman, I see plainly, would I say.  But I see as plainly, that she
has a very great indifference to him.  And to what may this indifference
be owing?  To one or all of these considerations, no doubt: that she
receives his addresses rather from motives of convenience than choice:
that she thinks meanly of his endowments and intellects; at least more
highly of her own: or, she has not the generosity to use that power with
moderation, which his great affection for her puts into her hands.'

How would you like, my dear, to have any of these things said?

Then to give but the shadow of a reason for free-livers and free speakers
to say, or to imagine, that Miss Howe gives her hand to a man who has no
reason to expect any share in her heart, I am sure you would not wish
that such a thing should be so much as supposed.  Then all the regard
from you to come afterwards; none to be shown before; must, should I
think, be capable of being construed as a compliment to the husband, made
at the expense of the wife's and even of the sex's delicacy!

There is no fear that attempts could be formed by the most audacious [two
Lovelaces there cannot be!] upon a character so revered for virtue, and
so charmingly spirited, as Miss Howe's: yet, to have any man encouraged
to despise a husband by the example of one who is most concerned to do
him honour; what, my dear, think you of that?  It is but too natural for
envious men (and who that knows Miss Howe, will not envy Mr. Hickman!) to
scoff at, and to jest upon, those who are treated with or will bear
indignity from a woman.

If a man so treated have a true and ardent love for the woman he
addresses, he will be easily overawed by her displeasure: and this will
put him upon acts of submission, which will be called meanness.  And what
woman of true spirit would like to have it said, that she would impose
any thing upon the man from whom she one day expects protection and
defence, that should be capable of being construed as a meanness, or
unmanly abjectness in his behaviour, even to herself?--Nay, I am not
sure, and I ask it of you, my dear, to resolve me, whether, in your own
opinion, it is not likely, that a woman of spirit will despise rather
than value more, the man who will take patiently an insult at her hands;
especially before company.

I have always observed, that prejudices in disfavour of a person at his
first appearance, fix deeper, and are much more difficult to be removed
when fixed, than that malignant principle so eminently visible in little
minds, which makes them wish to bring down the more worthy characters to
their own low level, I pretend not to determine.  When once, therefore, a
woman of your good sense gives room to the world to think she has not an
high opinion of the lover, whom nevertheless she entertains, it will be
very difficult for her afterwards to make that world think so well as she
would have it of the husband she has chosen.

Give me leave to observe, that to condescend with dignity, and to command
with such kindness, and sweetness of manners, as should let the
condescension, while in a single state, be seen and acknowledged, are
points, which a wise woman, knowing her man, should aim at: and a wise
woman, I should think, would choose to live single all her life rather
than give herself to a man whom she thinks unworthy of a treatment so
noble.

But when a woman lets her lover see that she has the generosity to
approve of and reward a well-meant service; that she has a mind that
lifts her above the little captious follies, which some (too
licentiously, I hope,) attribute to the sex in general: that she resents
not (if ever she thinks she has reason to be displeased) with petulance,
or through pride: nor thinks it necessary to insist upon little points,
to come at or secure great ones, perhaps not proper to be aimed at: nor
leaves room to suppose she has so much cause to doubt her own merit, as
to put the love of the man she intends to favour upon disagreeable or
arrogant trials: but let reason be the principal guide of her actions--
she will then never fail of that true respect, of that sincere
veneration, which she wishes to meet with; and which will make her
judgment after marriage consulted, sometimes with a preference to a man's
own; at other times as a delightful confirmation of his.

And so much, my beloved Miss Howe, for this subject now, and I dare say,
for ever!

I will begin another letter by-and-by, and send both together.  Mean
time, I am, &c.



LETTER XXXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


[In this letter, the Lady acquaints Miss Howe with Mr. Brand's report;
      with her sister's proposals either that she will go abroad, or
      prosecute Mr. Lovelace.  She complains of the severe letters of
      her uncle Antony and her sister; but in milder terms than they
      deserved.

She sends her Dr. Lewen's letter, and the copy of her answer to it.

She tells her of the difficulties she had been under to avoid seeing Mr.
      Lovelace.  She gives her the contents of the letter she wrote to
      him to divert him from his proposed visit: she is afraid, she says,
      that it is a step that is not strictly right, if allegory or
      metaphor be not allowable to one in her circumstances.

She informs her of her cousin Morden's arrival and readiness to take her
      part with her relations; of his designed interview with Mr.
      Lovelace; and tells her what her apprehensions are upon it.

She gives her the purport of the conversation between her aunt Hervey and
      Mrs. Norton. And then add:]


But were they ever so favourably inclined to me now, what can they do for
me?  I wish, and that for their sakes more than for my own, that they
would yet relent--but I am very ill--I must drop my pen--a sudden
faintness overspreads my heart--excuse my crooked writing!--Adieu, my
dear!--Adieu!


THREE O'CLOCK, FRIDAY.

Once more I resume my pen.  I thought I had taken my last farewell to
you.  I never was so very oddly affected: something that seemed totally
to overwhelm my faculties--I don't know how to describe it--I believe I
do amiss in writing so much, and taking too much upon me: but an active
mind, though clouded by bodily illness, cannot be idle.

I'll see if the air, and a discontinued attention, will help me.  But, if
it will not, don't be concerned for me, my dear.  I shall be happy.  Nay,
I am more so already than of late I thought I could ever be in this life.
--Yet how this body clings!--How it encumbers!


SEVEN O'CLOCK.

I could not send this letter away with so melancholy an ending, as you
would have thought it.  So I deferred closing it, till I saw how I should
be on my return from my airing: and now I must say I am quite another
thing: so alert! that I could proceed with as much spirit as I began, and
add more preachment to your lively subject, if I had not written more
than enough upon it already.

I wish you would let me give you and Mr. Hickman joy.  Do, my dear.  I
should take some to myself, if you would.

My respectful compliments to all your friends, as well to those I have
the honour to know, as to those I do not know.


***


I have just now been surprised with a letter from one whom I long ago
gave up all thoughts of hearing from.  From Mr. Wyerley.  I will enclose
it.  You'll be surprised at it as much as I was.  This seems to be a man
whom I might have reclaimed.  But I could not love him.  Yet I hope I
never treated him with arrogance.  Indeed, my dear, if I am not too
partial to myself, I think I refused him with more gentleness, than you
retain somebody else.  And this recollection gives me less pain than I
should have had in the other case, on receiving this instance of a
generosity that affects me.  I will also enclose the rough draught of my
answer, as soon as I have transcribed it.

If I begin another sheet, I shall write to the end of it: wherefore I
will only add my prayers for your honour and prosperity, and for a long,
long, happy life; and that, when it comes to be wound up, you may be as
calm and as easy at quitting it as I hope in God I shall be.  I am, and
will be, to the latest moment,

Your truly affectionate and obliged servant,
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XXXIV

MR. WYERLEY, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 23.


DEAREST MADAM,

You will be surprised to find renewed, at this distance of time, an
address so positively though so politely discouraged: but, however it be
received, I must renew it.  Every body has heard that you have been
vilely treated by a man who, to treat you ill, must be the vilest of men.
Every body knows your just resentment of his base treatment: that you are
determined never to be reconciled to him: and that you persist in these
sentiments against all the entreaties of his noble relations, against all
the prayers and repentance of his ignoble self.  And all the world that
have the honour to know you, or have heard of him, applaud your
resolution, as worthy of yourself; worthy of your virtue, and of that
strict honour which was always attributed to you by every one who spoke
of you.

But, Madam, were all the world to have been of a different opinion, it
could never have altered mine.  I ever loved you; I ever must love you.
Yet have I endeavoured to resign to my hard fate.  When I had so many
ways, in vain, sought to move you in my favour, I sat down seemingly
contented.  I even wrote to you that I would sit down contented.  And I
endeavoured to make all my friends and companions think I was.  But
nobody knows what pangs this self-denial cost me!  In vain did the chace,
in vain did travel, in vain did lively company, offer themselves, and
were embraced in their turn: with redoubled force did my passion for you
renew my unhappiness, when I looked into myself, into my own heart; for
there did your charming image sit enthroned; and you engrossed me all.

I truly deplore those misfortunes, and those sufferings, for your own
sake; which nevertheless encourage me to renew my old hope.  I know not
particulars.  I dare not inquire after them; because my sufferings would
be increased with the knowledge of what your's have been.  I therefore
desire not the know more than what common report wounds my ears with; and
what is given me to know, by your absence from your cruel family, and
from the sacred place, where I, among numbers of your rejected admirers,
used to be twice a week sure to behold you doing credit to that service
of which your example gave me the highest notions.  But whatever be those
misfortunes, of whatsoever nature those sufferings, I shall bless the
occasion for my own sake (though for your's curse the author of them,) if
they may give me the happiness to know that this my renewed address may
not be absolutely rejected.--Only give me hope, that it may one day meet
with encouragement, if in the interim nothing happen, either in my morals
or behaviour, to give you fresh offence.  Give me but hope of this--not
absolutely to reject me is all the hope I ask for; and I will love you,
if possible, still more than I ever loved you--and that for your
sufferings; for well you deserve to be loved, even to adoration, who can,
for honour's and for virtue's sake, subdue a passion which common spirits
[I speak by cruel experience] find invincible; and this at a time when
the black offender kneels and supplicates, as I am well assured he does,
(all his friends likewise supplicating for him,) to be forgiven.

That you cannot forgive him, not forgive him so as to receive him again
to favour, is no wonder.  His offence is against virtue: this is a part
of your essence.  What magnanimity is this!  How just to yourself, and to
your spotless character!  Is it any merit to admire more than ever a lady
who can so exaltedly distinguish?  It is not.  I cannot plead it.

What hope have I left, may it be said, when my address was before
rejected, now, that your sufferings, so nobly borne, have, with all the
good judges, exalted your character?  Yet, Madam, I have to pride myself
in this, that while your friends (not looking upon you in the just light
I do) persecute and banish you; while your estate is withheld from you,
and threatened (as I know,) to be withheld, as long as the chicaning law,
or rather the chicaneries of its practisers, can keep it from you: while
you are destitute of protection; every body standing aloof, either
through fear of the injurer of one family, or of the hard-hearted of the
other; I pride myself, I say, to stand forth, and offer my fortune, and
my life, at your devotion.  With a selfish hope indeed: I should be too
great an hypocrite not to own this! and I know how much you abhor
insincerity.

But, whether you encourage that hope or not, accept my best services, I
beseech you, Madam: and be pleased to excuse me for a piece of honest
art, which the nature of the case (doubting the honour of your notice
otherwise) makes me choose to conclude with--it is this:

If I am to be still the most unhappy of men, let your pen by one line
tell me so.  If I am permitted to indulge a hope, however distant, your
silence shall be deemed, by me, the happiest indication of it that you
can give--except that still happier--(the happiest than can befall me,)
a signification that you will accept the tender of that life and fortune,
which it would be my pride and my glory to sacrifice in your service,
leaving the reward to yourself.

Be your determination as it may, I must for ever admire and love you.
Nor will I ever change my condition, while you live, whether you change
your's or not: for, having once had the presumption to address you, I
cannot stoop to think of any other woman: and this I solemnly declare in
the presence of that God, whom I daily pray to bless and protect you, be
your determination what it will with regard to, dearest Madam,

Your most devoted and ever affectionate
and faithful servant,
ALEXANDER WYERLEY.



LETTER XXXV

MISS CL. HARLOWE, TO ALEX. WYERLEY, ESQ.
SAT. AUG. 26.


SIR,

The generosity of your purpose would have commanded not only my notice,
but my thanks, although you had not given me the alternative you are
pleased to call artful.  And I do therefore give you my thanks for your
kind letter.

At the time you distinguished me by your favourable opinion, I told you,
Sir, that my choice was the single life.  And most truly did I tell you
so.

When that was not permitted me, and I looked round upon the several
gentlemen who had been proposed to me, and had reason to believe that
there was not one of them against whose morals or principles there lay
not some exception, it would not have been much to be wondered at, if
FANCY had been allowed to give a preference, where JUDGMENT was at a loss
to determine.

Far be it from me to say this with a design to upbraid you, Sir, or to
reflect upon you.  I always wished you well.  You had reason to think I
did.  You had the generosity to be pleased with the frankness of my
behaviour to you; as I had with that of your's to me; and I am sorry,
very sorry, to be now told, that the acquaintance you obliged me with
gave you so much pain.

Had the option I have mentioned been allowed me afterwards, (as I not
only wished, but proposed,) things had not happened that did happen.  But
there was a kind of fatality by which our whole family was impelled, as I
may say; and which none of us were permitted to avoid.  But this is a
subject that cannot be dwelt upon.

As matters are, I have only to wish, for your own sake, that you will
encourage and cultivate those good motions in your mind, to which many
passages in your kind and generous letter now before me must be owing.
Depend upon it, Sir, that such motions, wrought into habit, will yield
you pleasure at a time when nothing else can; and at present, shining out
in your actions and conversation, will commend you to the worthiest of
our sex.  For, Sir, the man who is so good upon choice, as well as by
education, has that quality in himself, which ennobles the human race,
and without which the most dignified by birth or rank or ignoble.

As to the resolution you solemnly make not to marry while I live, I
should be concerned at it, were I not morally sure that you may keep it,
and yet not be detrimented by it: since a few, a very few days, will
convince you, that I am got above all human dependence; and that there is
no need of that protection and favour, which you so generously offer to,
Sir,

Your obliged well-wisher, and humble servant,
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XXXVI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY NOON, AUG. 28.


About the time of poor Belton's interment last night, as near as we could
guess, Lord M., Mowbray, and myself, toasted once, To the memory of
honest Tom. Belton; and, by a quick transition to the living, Health to
Miss Harlowe; which Lord M. obligingly began, and, To the happy
reconciliation; and then we stuck in a remembrance To honest Jack
Belford, who, of late, we all agreed, is become an useful and humane man;
and one who prefers his friend's service to his own.

But what is the meaning I hear nothing from thee?*  And why dost thou not
let me into the grounds of the sudden reconciliation between my beloved
and her friends, and the cause of the generous invitation which she gives
me of attending her at her father's some time hence?


* Mr. Belford has not yet sent him his last-written letter.  His reason
for which see Letter XXIII. of this volume.


Thou must certainly have been let into the secret by this time; and I can
tell thee, I shall be plaguy jealous if there is to be any one thing pass
between my angel and thee that is to be concealed from me.  For either I
am a principal in this cause, or I am nothing.

I have dispatched Will. to know the reason of thy neglect.

But let me whisper a word or two in thy ear.  I begin to be afraid, after
all, that this letter was a stratagem to get me out of town, and for
nothing else: for, in the first place, Tourville, in a letter I received
this morning, tells me, that the lady is actually very ill!  [I am sorry
for it with all my soul!].  This, thou'lt say, I may think a reason why
she cannot set out as yet: but then I have heard, on the other hand, but
last night, that the family is as implacable as ever; and my Lord and I
expect this very afternoon a visit from Colonel Morden; who, undertakes,
it seems, to question me as to my intention with regard to his cousin.

This convinces me, that if she has apprized her friends of my offers to
her, they will not believe me to be in earnest, till they are assured
that I am so from my own mouth.  But then I understand, that the intended
visit is an officiousness of Morden's own, without the desire of any of
her friends.

Now, Jack, what can a man make of all this?  My intelligence as to the
continuance of her family's implacableness is not to be doubted; and yet
when I read her letter, what can one say?--Surely, the dear little rogue
will not lie!

I never knew her dispense with her word, but once; and that was, when she
promised to forgive me after the dreadful fire that had like to have
happened at our mother's, and yet would not see me the next day, and
afterwards made her escape to Hampstead, in order to avoid forgiving me:
and as she severely smarted for this departure from her honour given,
(for it is a sad thing for good people to break their word when it is in
their power to keep it,) one would not expect that she should set about
deceiving again; more especially by the premeditation of writing.  Thou,
perhaps, wilt ask, what honest man is obliged to keep his promise with a
highwayman? for well I know thy unmannerly way of making comparisons; but
I say, every honest man is--and I will give thee an illustration.

Here is a marauding varlet, who demands your money, with a pistol at your
breast.  You have neither money nor valuable effects about you; and
promise solemnly, if he will spare your life, that you will send him an
agreed-upon sum, by such a day, to such a place.

The question is, if your life is not in the fellow's power?

How he came by the power is another question; for which he must answer
with his life when caught--so he runs risque for risque.

Now if he give you your life, does he not give, think you, a valuable
consideration for the money you engage your honour to send him?  If not,
the sum must be exorbitant, or your life is a very paltry one, even in
your own opinion.

I need not make the application; and I am sure that even thou thyself,
who never sparest me, and thinkest thou knowest my heart by thy own,
canst not possibly put the case in a stronger light against me.

Then, why do good people take upon themselves to censure, as they do,
persons less scrupulous than themselves?  Is it not because the latter
allow themselves in any liberty, in order to carry a point?  And can my
not doing my duty, warrant another for not doing his?--Thou wilt not say
it can.

And how would it sound, to put the case as strongly once more, as my
greatest enemy would put it, both as to fact and in words--here has that
profligate wretch Lovelace broken his vow with and deceived Miss Clarissa
Harlowe.--A vile fellow! would an enemy say: but it is like him.  But
when it comes to be said that the pious Clarissa has broken her word with
and deceived Lovelace; Good Lord! would every one say; sure it cannot be!

Upon my soul, Jack, such is the veneration I have for this admirable
woman, that I am shocked barely at putting the case--and so wilt thou, if
thou respectest her as thou oughtest: for thou knowest that men and
women, all the world over, form their opinions of one another by each
person's professions and known practices.  In this lady, therefore, it
would be unpardonable to tell a wilful untruth, as it would be strange if
I kept my word.--In love cases, I mean; for, as to the rest, I am an
honest, moral man, as all who know me can testify.

And what, after all, would this lady deserve, if she has deceived me in
this case?  For did she not set me prancing away, upon Lord M.'s best
nag, to Lady Sarah's, and to Lady Betty's, with an erect and triumphing
countenance, to show them her letter to me?

And let me tell thee, that I have received their congratulations upon it:
Well, and now, cousin Lovelace, cries one: Well, and now, cousin
Lovelace, cries t'other; I hope you will make the best of husbands to so
excellent and so forgiving a lady!--And now we shall soon have the
pleasure of looking upon you as a reformed man, added one!  And now we
shall see you in the way we have so long wished you to be in, cried the
other!

My cousins Montague also have been ever since rejoicing in the new
relationship.  Their charming cousin, and their lovely cousin, at every
word!  And how dearly they will love he!  What lessons they will take
from her!  And yet Charlotte, who pretends to have the eye of an eagle,
was for finding out some mystery in the style and manner, till I overbore
her, and laughed her out of it.

As for Lord M. he has been in hourly expectation of being sent to with
proposals of one sort or other from the Harlowes; and still we have it,
that such proposals will be made by Colonel Morden when he comes; and
that the Harlowes only put on a fae of irreconcileableness, till they
know the issue of Morden's visit, in order to make the better terms with
us.

Indeed, if I had not undoubted reason, as I said, to believe the
continuance of their antipathy to me, and implacableness to her, I should
be apt to think there might be some foundation for my Lord's conjecture;
for there is a cursed deal of low cunning in all that family, except in
the angel of it; who has so much generosity of soul, that she despises
cunning, both name and thing.

What I mean by all this is, to let thee see what a stupid figure I shall
make to all my own family, if my Clarissa has been capable, as Gulliver
in his abominable Yahoo story phrases it, if it were only that I should
be outwitted by such a novice at plotting, and that it would make me look
silly to my kinswomen here, who know I value myself upon my contrivances,
it would vex me to the heart; and I would instantly clap a featherbed
into a coach and six, and fetch her away, sick or well, and marry her at
my leisure.

But Col. Morden is come, and I must break off.



LETTER XXXVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY NIGHT, AUG. 28.


I doubt you will be all impatience that you have not heard from me since
mine of Thursday last.  You would be still more so, if you knew that I
had by me a letter ready written.

I went early yesterday morning to Epsom; and found every thing disposed
according to the directions I had left on Friday; and at night the solemn
office was performed.  Tourville was there; and behaved very decently,
and with greater concern than I thought he would every have expressed for
any body.

Thomasine, they told me, in a kind of disguise, was in an obscure pew,
out of curiosity (for it seems she was far from showing any tokens of
grief) to see the last office performed for the man whose heart she had
so largely contributed to break.

I was obliged to stay till this afternoon, to settle several necessary
matters, and to direct inventories to be taken, in order for
appraisement; for every thing is to be turned into money, by his will.
I presented his sister with the hundred guineas the poor man left me as
his executor, and desired her to continue in the house, and take the
direction of every thing, till I could hear from his nephew at Antigua,
who is heir at law.  He had left her but fifty pounds, although he knew
her indigence; and that it was owing to a vile husband, and not to
herself, that she was indigent.

The poor man left about two hundred pounds in money, and two hundred
pounds in two East-India bonds; and I will contrive, if I can, to make
up the poor woman's fifty pounds, and my hundred guineas, two hundred
pounds to her; and then she will have some little matter coming in
certain, which I will oblige her to keep out of the hands of a son, who
has completed that ruin which his father had very nearly effected.

I gave Tourville his twenty pounds, and will send you and Mowbray your's
by the first order.

And so much for poor Belton's affairs till I see you.

I got to town in the evening, and went directly to Smith's.  I found Mrs.
Lovick and Mrs. Smith in the back shop, and I saw they had been both in
tears.  They rejoiced to see me, however; and told me, that the Doctor
and Mr. Goddard were but just gone; as was also the worthy clergyman, who
often comes to pray by her; and all three were of opinion, that she would
hardly live to see the entrance of another week.  I was not so much
surprised as grieved; for I had feared as much when I left her on
Saturday.

I sent up my compliments; and she returned, that she would take it for a
favour if I would call upon her in the morning by eight o'clock.  Mrs.
Lovick told me that she had fainted away on Saturday, while she was
writing, as she had done likewise the day before; and having received
benefit then by a little turn in a chair, she was carried abroad again.
She returned somewhat better; and wrote till late; yet had a pretty good
night: and went to Covent-garden church in the morning; but came home so
ill that she was obliged to lie down.

When she arose, seeing how much grieved Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith were
for her, she made apologies for the trouble she gave them--You were
happy, said she, before I came hither.  It was a cruel thing in me to
come amongst honest strangers, and to be sick, and die with you.

When they touched upon the irreconcileableness of her friends, I have had
ill offices done me to them, said she, and they do not know how ill I am;
nor will they believe any thing I should write.  But yet I cannot
sometimes forbear thinking it a little hard, that out of so many near and
dear friends as I have living, not one of them will vouchsafe to look
upon me.  No old servant, no old friend, proceeded she, to be permitted
to come near me, without being sure of incurring displeasure!  And to
have such a great work to go through by myself, a young creature as I am,
and to have every thing to think of as to my temporal matters, and to
order, to my very interment!  No dear mother, said the sweet sufferer, to
pray by me and bless me!--No kind sister to sooth and comfort me!--But
come, recollected she, how do I know but all is for the best--if I can
but make a right use of my discomforts?--Pray for me, Mrs. Lovick--pray
for me, Mrs. Smith, that I may--I have great need of your prayers.--This
cruel man has discomposed me.  His persecutions have given mea pain just
here, [putting her hand to her heart.]  What a step has he made me take
to avoid him!--Who can touch pitch, and not be defiled?  He had made a
bad spirit take possession of me, I think--broken in upon all my duties
--and will not yet, I doubt, let me be at rest.  Indeed he is very cruel
--but this is one of my trials, I believe.  By God's grace, I shall be
easier to-morrow, and especially if I have no more of his tormentings,
and if I can get a tolerable night.  And I will sit up till eleven, that
I may.

She said, that though this was so heavy a day with her, she was at other
times, within these few days past especially, blessed with bright hours;
and particularly that she had now and then such joyful assurances, (which
she hoped were not presumptuous ones,) that God would receive her to his
mercy, that she could hardly contain herself, and was ready to think
herself above this earth while she was in it: And what, inferred she to
Mrs. Lovick, must be the state itself, the very aspirations after which
have often cast a beamy light through the thickest darkness, and, when I
have been at the lowest ebb, have dispelled the black clouds of
despondency?--As I hope they soon will this spirit of repining.

She had a pretty good night, it seems; and this morning went in a chair
to St. Dunstan's church.

The chairmen told Mrs. Smith, that after prayers (for she did not return
till between nine and ten) they carried her to a house in Fleet-street,
whither they never waited on her before.  And where dost think this was?
--Why to an undertaker's!  Good Heaven! what a woman is this!  She went
into the back shop, and talked with the master of it about half an hour,
and came from him with great serenity; he waiting upon her to her chair
with a respectful countenance, but full of curiosity and seriousness.

'Tis evident that she went to bespeak her house that she talked of*--As
soon as you can, Sir, were her words to him as she got into the chair.
Mrs. Smith told me this with the same surprise and grief that I heard it.


* See Letter XXIII. of this volume.


She was very ill in the afternoon, having got cold either at St.
Dunstan's, or at chapel, and sent for the clergyman to pray by her; and
the women, unknown to her, sent both for Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard: who were
just gone, as I told you, when I came to pay my respects to her this
evening.

And thus have I recounted from the good women what passed to this night
since my absence.

I long for to-morrow, that I may see her: and yet it is such a melancholy
longing as I never experienced, and know not how to describe.


TUESDAY, AUG. 29.

I was at Smith's at half an hour after seven.  They told me that the lady
was gone in a chair to St. Dunstan's: but was better than she had been in
either of the two preceding days; and that she said she to Mrs. Lovick
and Mrs. Smith, as she went into the chair, I have a good deal to answer
for to you, my good friends, for my vapourish conversation of last night.

If, Mrs. Lovick, said she, smiling, I have no new matters to discompose
me, I believe my spirits will hold out purely.

She returned immediately after prayers.

Mr. Belford, said she, as she entered the back shop where I was, (and
upon my approaching her,) I am very glad to see you.  You have been
performing for your poor friend a kind last office.  'Tis not long ago
since you did the same for a near relation.  Is it not a little hard upon
you, that these troubles should fall so thick to your lot?  But they are
charitable offices: and it is a praise to your humanity, that poor dying
people know not where to choose so well.

I told her I was sorry to hear she had been so ill since I had the honour
to attend her; but rejoiced to find that now she seemed a good deal
better.

It will be sometimes better, and sometimes worse, replied she, with poor
creatures, when they are balancing between life and death.  But no more
of these matters just now.  I hope, Sir, you'll breakfast with me.  I was
quite vapourish yesterday.  I had a very bad spirit upon me.  Had I not,
Mrs. Smith?  But I hope I shall be no more so.  And to-day I am perfectly
serene.  This day rises upon me as if it would be a bright one.

She desired me to walk up, and invited Mr. Smith and his wife, and Mrs.
Lovick also, to breakfast with her.  I was better pleased with her
liveliness than with her looks.

The good people retiring after breakfast, the following conversation
passed between us:

Pray, Sir, let me ask you, if you think I may promise myself that I shall
be no more molested by your friend?

I hesitated: For how could I answer for such a man?

What shall I do, if he comes again?--You see how I am.--I cannot fly from
him now--If he has any pity left for the poor creature whom he has thus
reduced, let him not come.--But have you heard from him lately?  And will
he come?

I hope not, Madam.  I have not heard from him since Thursday last, that
he went out of town, rejoicing in the hopes your letter gave him of a
reconciliation between your friends and you, and that he might in good
time see you at your father's; and he is gone down to give all his
friends joy of the news, and is in high spirits upon it.

Alas! for me: I shall then surely have him come up to persecute me again!
As soon as he discovers that that was only a stratagem to keep him away,
he will come up, and who knows but even now he is upon the road?  I
thought I was so bad that I should have been out of his and every body's
way before now; for I expected not that this contrivance would serve me
above two or three days; and by this time he must have found out that I
am not so happy as to have any hope of a reconciliation with my family;
and then he will come, if it be only in revenge for what he will think a
deceit, but is not, I hope, a wicked one.

I believe I looked surprised to hear her confess that her letter was a
stratagem only; for she said, You wonder, Mr. Belford, I observe, that I
could be guilty of such an artifice.  I doubt it is not right: it was
done in a hurry of spirits.  How could I see a man who had so mortally
injured me; yet pretending a sorrow for his crimes, (and wanting to see
me,) could behave with so much shocking levity, as he did to the honest
people of the house?  Yet, 'tis strange too, that neither you nor he
found out my meaning on perusal of my letter.  You have seen what I
wrote, no doubt?

I have, Madam.  And then I began to account for it, as an innocent
artifice.

Thus far indeed, Sir, it is an innocent, that I meant him no hurt, and
had a right to the effect I hoped for from it; and he had none to invade
me.  But have you, Sir, that letter of his in which he gives you (as I
suppose he does) the copy of mine?

I have, Madam.  And pulled it out of my letter-case.  But hesitating--
Nay, Sir, said she, be pleased to read my letter to yourself--I desire
not to see his--and see if you can be longer a stranger to a meaning so
obvious.

I read it to myself--Indeed, Madam, I can find nothing but that you are
going down to Harlowe-place to be reconciled to your father and other
friends: and Mr. Lovelace presumed that a letter from your sister, which
he saw brought when he was at Mr. Smith's, gave you the welcome news of
it.

She then explained all to me, and that, as I may say, in six words--A
religious meaning is couched under it, and that's the reason that neither
you nor I could find it out.

'Read but for my father's house, Heaven, said she, and for the
interposition of my dear blessed friend, suppose the mediation of my
Saviour (which I humbly rely upon); and all the rest of the letter will
be accounted for.'  I hope (repeated she) that it is a pardonable
artifice.  But I am afraid it is not strictly right.

I read it so, and stood astonished for a minute at her invention, her
piety, her charity, and at thine and mine own stupidity to be thus taken
in.

And now, thou vile Lovelace, what hast thou to do (the lady all
consistent with herself, and no hopes left for thee) but to hang, drown,
or shoot thyself, for an outwitted boaster?

My surprise being a little over, she proceeded: As to the letter that
came from my sister while your friend was here, you will soon see, Sir,
that it is the cruellest letter she ever wrote me.

And then she expressed a deep concern for what might be the consequence
of Colonel Morden's intended visit to you; and besought me, that if now,
or at any time hereafter, I had opportunity to prevent any further
mischief, without detriment or danger to myself, I would do it.

I assured her of the most particular attention to this and to all her
commands; and that in a manner so agreeable to her, that she invoked a
blessing upon me for my goodness, as she called it, to a desolate
creature who suffered under the worst of orphanage; those were her words.

She then went back to her first subject, her uneasiness for fear of your
molesting her again; and said, If you have any influence over him, Mr.
Belford, prevail upon him that he will give me the assurance that the
short remainder of my time shall be all my own.  I have need of it.
Indeed I have.  Why will he wish to interrupt me in my duty?  Has he not
punished me enough for my preference of him to all his sex?  Has he not
destroyed my fame and my fortune?  And will not his causeless vengeance
upon me be complete, unless he ruin my soul too?--Excuse me, Sir, for
this vehemence!  But indeed it greatly imports me to know that I shall be
no more disturbed by him.  And yet, with all this aversion, I would
sooner give way to his visit, though I were to expire the moment I saw
him, than to be the cause of any fatal misunderstanding between you and
him.

I assured her that I would make such a representation of the matter to
you, and of the state of her health, that I would undertake to answer for
you, that you would not attempt to come near her.

And for this reason, Lovelace, do I lay the whole matter before you, and
desire you will authorize me, as soon as this and mine of Saturday last
come to your hands, to dissipate her fears.

This gave her a little satisfaction; and then she said that had I not
told her that I could promise for you, she was determined, ill as she is,
to remove somewhere out of my knowledge as well as out of your's.  And
yet, to have been obliged to leave people I am but just got acquainted
with, said the poor lady, and to have died among perfect strangers, would
have completed my hardships.

This conversation, I found, as well from the length as the nature of it,
had fatigued her; and seeing her change colour once or twice, I made that
my excuse, and took leave of her: desiring her permission, however, to
attend her in the evening; and as often as possible; for I could not help
telling her that, every time I saw her, I more and more considered her as
a beatified spirit; and as one sent from Heaven to draw me after her out
of the miry gulf in which I had been so long immersed.

And laugh at me if thou wilt; but it is true that, every time I approach
her, I cannot but look upon her as one just entering into a companionship
with saints and angels.  This thought so wholly possessed me, that I
could not help begging, as I went away, her prayers and her blessing,
with the reverence due to an angel.

In the evening, she was so low and weak, that I took my leave of her in
less than a quarter of an hour.  I went directly home.  Where, to the
pleasure and wonder of my cousin and her family, I now pass many honest
evenings: which they impute to your being out of town.

I shall dispatch my packet to-morrow morning early by my own servant, to
make thee amends for the suspense I must have kept thee in: thou'lt thank
me for that, I hope; but wilt not, I am sure, for sending thy servant
back without a letter.

I long for the particulars of the conversation between you and Mr.
Morden; the lady, as I have hinted, is full of apprehensions about it.
Send me back this packet when perused; for I have not had either time or
patience to take a copy of it.  And I beseech you enable me to make good
my engagements to the poor lady that you will not invade her again.



LETTER XXXVIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 30.


I have a conversation to give you that passed between this admirable lady
and Dr. H. which will furnish a new instance of the calmness and serenity
with which she can talk of death, and prepare for it, as if it were an
occurrence as familiar to her as dressing and undressing.

As soon as I had dispatched my servant to you with my letters of the
26th, 28th, and yesterday the 29th, I went to pay my duty to her, and had
the pleasure to find her, after a tolerable night, pretty lively and
cheerful.  She was but just returned from her usual devotions; and Doctor
H. alighted as she entered the door.

After inquiring how she did, and hearing her complaints of shortness of
breath, (which she attributed to inward decay, precipitated by her late
harasses, as well from her friends as from you,) he was for advising her
to go into the air.

What will that do for me? said she: tell me truly, good Sir, with a
cheerful aspect, (you know you cannot disturb me by it,) whether now you
do not put on the true physician; and despairing that any thing in
medicine will help me, advise me to the air, as the last resource?--Can
you think the air will avail in such a malady as mine?

He was silent.

I ask, said she, because my friends (who will possibly some time hence
inquire after the means I used for my recovery) may be satisfied that I
omitted nothing which so worthy and skilful a physician prescribed?

The air, Madam, may possibly help the difficulty of breathing, which has
so lately attacked you.

But, Sir, you see how weak I am.  You must see that I have been consuming
from day to day; and now, if I can judge by what I feel in myself,
putting her hand to her heart, I cannot continue long.  If the air would
very probably add to my days, though I am far from being desirous to have
them lengthened, I would go into it; and the rather, as I know Mrs.
Lovick would kindly accompany me.  But if I were to be at the trouble of
removing into new lodgings, (a trouble which I think now would be too
much for me,) and this only to die in the country, I had rather the scene
were to shut up here.  For here have I meditated the spot, and the
manner, and every thing, as well of the minutest as of the highest
consequence, that can attend the solemn moments.  So, Doctor, tell me
truly, may I stay here, and be clear of any imputations of curtailing,
through wilfulness or impatiency, or through resentments which I hope I
am got above, a life that might otherwise be prolonged?--Tell me, Sir;
you are not talking to a coward in this respect; indeed you are not!--
Unaffectedly smiling.

The doctor, turning to me, was at a loss what to say, lifting up his eyes
only in admiration of her.

Never had any patient, said she, a more indulgent and more humane
physician.  But since you are loth to answer my question directly, I will
put it in other words--You don't enjoin me to go into the air, Doctor, do
you?

I do not, Madam.  Nor do I now visit you as a physician; but as a person
whose conversation I admire, and whose sufferings I condole.  And, to
explain myself more directly, as to the occasion of this day's visit in
particular, I must tell you, Madam, that, understanding how much you
suffer by the displeasure of your friends; and having no doubt but that,
if they knew the way you are in, they would alter their conduct to you;
and believing it must cut them to the heart, when too late, they shall be
informed of every thing; I have resolved to apprize them by letter
(stranger as I am to their persons) how necessary it is for some of them
to attend you very speedily.  For their sakes, Madam, let me press for
your approbation of this measure.

She paused; and at last said, This is kind, very kind, in you, Sir.  But
I hope that you do not think me so perverse, and so obstinate, as to have
left till now any means unessayed which I thought likely to move my
friends in my favour.  But now, Doctor, said she, I should be too much
disturbed at their grief, if they were any of them to come or to send to
me: and perhaps, if I found they still loved me, wish to live; and so
should quit unwillingly that life, which I am now really fond of
quitting, and hope to quit as becomes a person who has had such a
weaning-time as I have been favoured with.

I hope, Madam, said I, we are not so near as you apprehend to that
deplorable catastrophe you hint at with such an amazing presence of mind.
And therefore I presume to second the doctor's motion, if it were only
for the sake of your father and mother, that they may have the
satisfaction, if they must lose you, to think they were first reconciled
to you.

It is very kindly, very humanely considered, said she.  But, if you think
me not so very near my last hour, let me desire this may be postponed
till I see what effect my cousin Morden's mediation may have.  Perhaps he
may vouchsafe to make me a visit yet, after his intended interview with
Mr. Lovelace is over; of which, who knows, Mr. Belford, but your next
letters may give an account?  I hope it will not be a fatal one to any
body.  Will you promise me, Doctor, to forbear writing for two days only,
and I will communicate to you any thing that occurs in that time; and then
you shall take your own way?  Mean time, I repeat my thanks for your
goodness to me.--Nay, dear Doctor, hurry not away from me so
precipitately [for he was going, for fear of an offered fee]: I will no
more affront you with tenders that have pained you for some time past:
and since I must now, from this kindly-offered favour, look upon you only
as a friend, I will assure you henceforth that I will give you no more
uneasiness on that head: and now, Sir, I know I shall have the pleasure
of seeing you oftener than heretofore.

The worthy gentleman was pleased with this assurance, telling her that he
had always come to see her with great pleasure, but parted with her, on
the account she hinted at, with as much pain; and that he should not have
forborne to double his visits, could he have had this kind assurance as
early as he wished for it.

There are few instances of like disinterestedness, I doubt, in this
tribe.  Till now I always held it for gospel, that friendship and
physician were incompatible things; and little imagined that a man of
medicine, when he had given over his patient to death, would think of any
visits but those of ceremony, that he might stand well with the family,
against it came to their turns to go through his turnpike.

After the doctor was gone, she fell into a very serious discourse of the
vanity of life, and the wisdom of preparing for death, while health and
strength remained, and before the infirmities of body impaired the
faculties of the mind, and disabled them from acting with the necessary
efficacy and clearness: the whole calculated for every one's meridian,
but particularly, as it was easy to observe, for thine and mine.

She was very curious to know farther particulars of the behaviour of poor
Belton in his last moments.  You must not wonder at my inquiries, Mr.
Belford, said she; For who is it, that is to undertake a journey into a
country they never travelled to before, that inquires not into the
difficulties of the road, and what accommodations are to be expected in
the way?

I gave her a brief account of the poor man's terrors, and unwillingness
to die: and, when I had done, Thus, Mr. Belford, said she, must it always
be with poor souls who have never thought of their long voyage till the
moment they are to embark for it.

She made other such observations upon this subject as, coming from the
mouth of a person who will so soon be a companion for angels, I shall
never forget.  And indeed, when I went home, that I might engraft them
the better on my memory, I entered them down in writing: but I will not
let you see them until you are in a frame more proper to benefit by them
than you are likely to be in one while.

Thus far had I written, when the unexpected early return of my servant
with your packet (your's and he meeting at Slough, and exchanging
letters) obliged me to leave off to give its contents a reading.--Here,
therefore, I close this letter.



LETTER XXXIX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY MORN. AUG. 29.


Now, Jack, will I give thee an account of what passed on occasion of the
visit made us by Col. Morden.

He came on horseback, attended by one servant; and Lord M. received him
as a relation of Miss Harlowe's with the highest marks of civility and
respect.

After some general talk of the times, and of the weather, and such
nonsense as Englishmen generally make their introductory topics to
conversation, the Colonel addressed himself to Lord M. and to me, as
follows:

I need not, my Lord, and Mr. Lovelace, as you know the relation I bear to
the Harlowe family, make any apology for entering upon a subject, which,
on account of that relation, you must think is the principal reason of
the honour I have done myself in this visit.

Miss Harlowe, Miss Clarissa Harlowe's affair, said Lord M. with his usual
forward bluntness.  That, Sir, is what you mean.  She is, by all
accounts, the most excellent woman in the world.

I am glad to hear that is your Lordship's opinion of her.  It is every
one's.

It is not only my opinion, Col. Morden (proceeded the prating Peer), but
it is the opinion of all my family.  Of my sisters, of my nieces, and of
Mr. Lovelace himself.

Col.   Would to Heaven it had been always Mr. Lovelace's opinion of her!

Lovel.   You have been out of England, Colonel, a good many years.
Perhaps you are not yet fully apprized of all the particulars of this
case.

Col.   I have been out of England, Sir, about seven years.  My cousin
Clary was then about 12 years of age: but never was there at twenty so
discreet, so prudent, and so excellent a creature.  All that knew her, or
saw her, admired her.  Mind and person, never did I see such promises of
perfection in any young lady: and I am told, nor is it to be wondered at,
that, as she advanced to maturity, she more than justified and made good
those promises.--Then as to fortune--what her father, what her uncles,
and what I myself, intended to do for her, besides what her grandfather
had done--there is not a finer fortune in the country.

Lovel.   All this, Colonel, and more than this, is Miss Clarissa Harlowe;
and had it not been for the implacableness and violence of her family
(all resolved to push her upon a match as unworthy of her as hateful to
her) she had still been happy.

Col.   I own, Mr. Lovelace, the truth of what you observed just now, that
I am not thoroughly acquainted with all that has passed between you and
my cousin.  But permit me to say, that when I first heard that you made
your addresses to her, I knew but of one objection against you; that,
indeed, a very great one: and upon a letter sent me, I gave her my free
opinion upon that subject.*  But had it not been for that, I own, that,
in my private mind, there could not have been a more suitable match: for
you are a gallant gentleman, graceful in your person, easy and genteel in
your deportment, and in your family, fortunes, and expectations, happy as
a man can wish to be.  Then the knowledge I had of you in Italy
(although, give me leave to say, your conduct there was not wholly
unexceptionable) convinces me that you are brave: and few gentlemen come
up to you in wit and vivacity.  Your education has given you great
advantages; your manners are engaging, and you have travelled; and I
know, if you'll excuse me, you make better observations than you are
governed by.  All these qualifications make it not at all surprising that
a young lady should love you: and that this love, joined to that
indiscreet warmth wherewith my cousin's friends would have forced her
inclinations in favour of men who are far your inferiors in the qualities
I have named, should throw herself upon your protection.  But then, if
there were these two strong motives, the one to induce, the other to
impel, her, let me ask you, Sir, if she were not doubly entitled to
generous usage from a man whom she chose for her protector; and whom, let
me take the liberty to say, she could so amply reward for the protection
he was to afford her?


* See Vol. IV. Letter XIX.


Lovel.   Miss Clarissa Harlowe was entitled, Sir, to have the best usage
that man could give her.  I have no scruple to own it.  I will always do
her the justice she so well deserves. I know what will be your inference;
and have only to say, that time past cannot be recalled; perhaps I wish
it could.

The Colonel then, in a very manly strain, set forth the wickedness of
attempting a woman of virtue and character.  He said, that men had
generally too many advantages from the weakness, credulity, and
inexperience of the fair sex: that their early learning, which chiefly
consisted in inflaming novels, and idle and improbable romances,
contributed to enervate and weaken their minds: that his cousin, however,
he was sure, was above the reach of common seduction, and not to be
influenced to the rashness her parents accused her of, by weaker motives
than their violence, and the most solemn promises on my part: but,
nevertheless, having those motives, and her prudence (eminent as it was)
being rather the effect of constitution than experience, (a fine
advantage, however, he said, to ground an unblamable future life upon,)
she might not be apprehensive of bad designs in a man she loved: it was,
therefore, a very heinous thing to abuse the confidence of such a woman.

He was going on in this trite manner; when, interrupting him, I said,
These general observations, Colonel, suit not perhaps this particular
case.  But you yourself are a man of gallantry; and, possibly, were you
to be put to the question, might not be able to vindicate every action of
your life, any more than I.

Col.   You are welcome, Sir, to put what questions you please to me.
And, I thank God, I can both own an be ashamed of my errors.

Lord M. looked at me; but as the Colonel did not by his manner seem to
intend a reflection, I had no occasion to take it for one; especially as
I can as readily own my errors, as he, or any man, can his, whether
ashamed of them or not.

He proceeded.  As you seem to call upon me, Mr. Lovelace, I will tell you
(without boasting of it) what has been my general practice, till lately,
that I hope I have reformed it a good deal.

I have taken liberties, which the laws of morality will by no means
justify; and once I should have thought myself warranted to cut the
throat of any young fellow who should make as free with a sister of mine
as I have made with the sisters and daughters of others.  But then I took
care never to promise any thing I intended not to perform.  A modest ear
should as soon have heard downright obscenity from my lips, as matrimony,
if I had not intended it.  Young ladies are generally ready enough to
believe we mean honourably, if they love us; and it would look lie a
strange affront to their virtue and charms, that it should be supposed
needful to put the question whether in your address you mean a wife.  But
when once a man make a promise, I think it ought to be performed; and a
woman is well warranted to appeal to every one against the perfidy of a
deceiver; and is always sure to have the world on her side.

Now, Sir, continued he, I believe you have so much honour as to own, that
you could not have made way to so eminent a virtue, without promising
marriage; and that very explicitly and solemnly--

I know very well, Colonel, interrupted I, all you would say.  You will
excuse me, I am sure, that I break in upon you, when you find it is to
answer the end you drive at.

I own to you then that I have acted very unworthily by Miss Clarissa
Harlowe; and I'll tell you farther, that I heartily repent of my
ingratitude and baseness to her.  Nay, I will say still farther, that I
am so grossly culpable as to her, that even to plead that the abuses and
affronts I daily received from her implacable relations were in any
manner a provocation to me to act vilely by her, would be a mean and low
attempt to excuse myself--so low and so mean, that it would doubly
condemn me.  And if you can say worse, speak it.

He looked upon Lord M. and then upon me, two or three times.  And my Lord
said, My kinsman speaks what he thinks, I'll answer for him.

Lovel.   I do, Sir; and what can I say more?  And what farther, in your
opinion, can be done?

Col.   Done!  Sir?  Why, Sir, [in a haughty tone he spoke,] I need not
tell you that reparation follows repentance.  And I hope you make no
scruple of justifying your sincerity as to the one or the other.

I hesitated, (for I relished not the manner of his speech, and his
haughty accent,) as undetermined whether to take proper notice of it or
not.

Col.   Let me put this question to you, Mr. Lovelace: Is it true, as I
have heard it is, that you would marry my cousin, if she would have you?
--What say you, Sir?--

This wound me up a peg higher.

Lovel.   Some questions, as they may be put, imply commands, Colonel.  I
would be glad to know how I am to take your's?  And what is to be the end
of your interrogatories?

Col.   My questions are not meant by me as commands, Mr. Lovelace.  The
end is, to prevail upon a gentleman to act like a gentleman, and a man of
honour.

Lovel. (briskly)   And by what arguments, Sir, do you propose to prevail
upon me?

Col.   By what arguments, Sir, prevail upon a gentleman to act like a
gentleman!--I am surprised at that question from Mr. Lovelace.

Lovel.   Why so, Sir?

Col.   WHY so, Sir!  (angrily)--Let me--

Lovel. (interrupting)   I don't choose, Colonel, to be repeated upon, in
that accent.

Lord M.   Come, come, gentlemen, I beg of you to be willing to understand
one another.  You young gentlemen are so warm--

Col.   Not I, my Lord--I am neither very young, nor unduly warm.  Your
nephew, my Lord, can make me be every thing he would have me to be.

Lovel.   And that shall be, whatever you please to be, Colonel.

Col. (fiercely)   The choice be your's, Mr. Lovelace.  Friend or foe! as
you do or are willing to do justice to one of the finest women in the
world.

Lord M.   I guessed, from both your characters, what would be the case
when you met.  Let me interpose, gentlemen, and beg you but to understand
one another.  You both shoot at one mark; and, if you are patient, will
both hit it.  Let me beg of you, Colonel, to give no challenges--

Col.   Challenges, my Lord!--They are things I ever was readier to accept
than to offer.  But does your Lordship think that a man, so nearly
related as I have the honour to be to the most accomplished woman on
earth,--

Lord M. (interrupting)   We all allow the excellencies of the lady--and
we shall all take it as the greatest honour to be allied to her that can
be conferred upon us.

Col.   So you ought, my Lord!--

A perfect Chamont; thought I.*


* See Otway's Orphan.


Lord M.   So we ought, Colonel! and so we do!--and pray let every one do
as he ought!--and no more than he ought; and you, Colonel, let me tell
you, will not be so hasty.

Lovel. (coolly)   Come, come, Col. Morden, don't let this dispute, whatever
you intend to make of it, go farther than with you and me.  You
deliver yourself in very high terms.  Higher than ever I was talked to in
my life.  But here, beneath this roof, 'twould be inexcusable for me to
take that notice of it which, perhaps, it would become me to take
elsewhere.

Col.   That is spoken as I wish the man to speak whom I should be pleased
to call my friend, if all his actions were of a piece; and as I would
have the man speak whom I would think it worth my while to call my foe.
I love a man of spirit, as I love my soul.  But, Mr. Lovelace, as my Lord
thinks we aim at one mark, let me say, that were we permitted to be alone
for six minutes, I dare say, we should soon understand one another
perfectly well.--And he moved to the door.

Lovel.   I am entirely of your opinion, Sir; and will attend you.

My Lord rung, and stept between us: Colonel, return, I beseech you
return, said he: for he had stept out of the room while my Lord held me--
Nephew, you shall not go out.

The bell and my Lord's raised voice brought in Mowbray, and Clements, my
Lord's gentleman; the former in his careless way, with his hands behind
him, What's the matter, Bobby?  What's the matter, my Lord?

Only, only, only, stammered the agitated peer, these young gentlemen are,
are, are--are young gentlemen, that's all.--Pray, Colonel Morden, [who
again entered the room with a sedater aspect,] let this cause have a fair
trial, I beseech you.

Col.   With all my heart, my Lord.

Mowbray whispered me, What is the cause, Bobby?--Shall I take the
gentleman to task for thee, my boy?

Not for the world, whispered I.  The Colonel is a gentleman, and I desire
you'll not say one word.

Well, well, well, Bobby, I have done.  I can turn thee loose to the best
man upon God's earth; that's all, Bobby; strutting off to the other end
of the room.

Col.   I am sorry, my Lord, I should give your Lordship the least
uneasiness.  I came not with such a design.

Lord M.   Indeed, Colonel, I thought you did, by your taking fire so
quickly.  I am glad to hear you say you did not.  How soon a little spark
kindles into a flame; especially when it meets with such combustible
spirits!

Col.   If I had had the least thought of proceeding to extremities, I am
sure Mr. Lovelace would have given me the honour of a meeting where I
should have been less an intruder: but I came with an amicable intention;
to reconcile differences rather than to widen them.

Lovel.   Well then, Colonel Morden, let us enter upon the subject in your
own way.  I don't know the man I should sooner choose to be upon terms
with than one whom Miss Clarissa Harlowe so much respects.  But I cannot
bear to be treated, either in word or accent, in a menacing way.

Lord M.   Well, well, well, well, gentlemen, this is somewhat like.
Angry men make to themselves beds of nettles, and, when they lie down in
them, are uneasy with every body.  But I hope you are friends.  Let me
hear you say you are.  I am persuaded, Colonel, that you don't know all
this unhappy story.  You don't know how desirous my kinsman is, as well
as all of us, to have this matter end happily.  You don't know, do you,
Colonel, that Mr. Lovelace, at all our requests, is disposed to marry the
lady?

Col.   At all your requests, my Lord?--I should have hoped that Mr.
Lovelace was disposed to do justice for the sake of justice; and when at
the same time the doing of justice was doing himself the highest honour.

Mowbray lifted up his before half-closed eyes to the Colonel, and glanced
them upon me.

Lovel.   This is in very high language, Colonel.

Mowbr.   By my soul, I thought so.

Col.   High language, Mr. Lovelace?  Is it not just language?

Lovel.   It is, Colonel.  And I think, the man that does honour to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe, does me honour.  But, nevertheless, there is a manner
in speaking, that may be liable to exception, where the words, without
that manner, can bear none.

Col.   Your observation in the general is undoubtedly just: but, if you
have the value for my cousin that you say you have, you must needs think
--

Lovel.   You must allow me, Sir, to interrupt you--IF I have the value I
say I have--I hope, Sir, when I say I have that value, there is no room
for that if, pronounced as you pronounced it with an emphasis.

Col.   You have broken in upon me twice, Mr. Lovelace.  I am as little
accustomed to be broken in upon, as you are to be repeated upon.

Lord M.   Two barrels of gunpowder, by my conscience!  What a devil will
it signify talking, if thus you are to blow one another up at every word?

Lovel.   No man of honour, my Lord, will be easy to have his veracity
called into question, though but by implication.

Col.   Had you heard me out, Mr. Lovelace, you would have found, that my
if was rather an if of inference, than of doubt.  But 'tis, really a
strange liberty gentlemen of free principles take; who at the same time
that they would resent unto death the imputation of being capable of
telling an untruth to a man, will not scruple to break through the most
solemn oaths and promises to a woman.  I must assure you, Mr. Lovelace,
that I always made a conscience of my vows and promises.

Lovel.   You did right, Colonel.  But let me tell you, Sir, that you know
not the man you talk to, if you imagine he is not able to rise to a
proper resentment, when he sees his generous confessions taken for a mark
of base-spiritedness.

Col. (warmly, and with a sneer,)   Far be it from me, Mr. Lovelace, to
impute to you the baseness of spirit you speak of; for what would that be
but to imagine that a man, who has done a very flagrant injury, is not
ready to show his bravery in defending it--

Mowbr.   This is d----d severe, Colonel.  It is, by Jove.  I could not
take so much at the hands of any man breathing as Mr. Lovelace before
this took at your's.

Col.   Who are you, Sir?  What pretence have you to interpose in a cause
where there is an acknowledged guilt on one side, and the honour of a
considerable family wounded in the tenderest part by that guilt on the
other?

Mowbr. (whispering to the Colonel)   My dear child, you will oblige me
highly if you will give me the opportunity of answering your question.
And was going out.

The Colonel was held in by my Lord.  And I brought in Mowbray.

Col.   Pray, my good Lord, let me attend this officious gentleman, I
beseech you do.  I will wait upon your Lordship in three minutes, depend
upon it.

Lovel.   Mowbray, is this acting like a friend by me, to suppose me
incapable of answering for myself?  And shall a man of honour and
bravery, as I know Colonel Morden to be, (rash as perhaps in this visit
he has shown himself,) have it to say, that he comes to my Lord M.'s
house, in a manner naked as to attendants and friends, and shall not for
that reason be rather borne with than insulted?  This moment, my dear
Mowbray, leave us.  You have really no concern in this business; and if
you are my friend, I desire you'll ask the Colonel pardon for interfering
in it in the manner you have done.

Mowbr.   Well, well, Bob.; thou shalt be arbiter in this matter; I know I
have no business in it--and, Colonel, (holding out his hand,) I leave you
to one who knows how to defend his own cause as well as any man in
England.

Col. (taking Mowbray's hand, at Lord M.'s request,)   You need not tell
me that, Mr. Mowbray.  I have no doubt of Mr. Lovelace's ability to
defend his own cause, were it a cause to be defended.  And let me tell
you, Mr. Lovelace, that I am astonished to think that a brave man, and a
generous man, as you have appeared to be in two or three instances that
you have given in the little knowledge I have of you, should be capable
of acting as you have done by the most excellent of her sex.

Lord M.   Well, but, gentlemen, now Mr. Mowbray is gone, and you have
both shown instances of courage and generosity to boot, let me desire you
to lay your heads together amicably, and think whether there be any thing
to be done to make all end happily for the lady?

Lovel.   But hold, my Lord, let me say one thing, now Mowbray is gone;
and that is, that I think a gentleman ought not to put up tamely one or
two severe things that the Colonel has said.

Lord M.   What the devil canst thou mean?  I thought all had been over.
Why thou hast nothing to do but to confirm to the Colonel that thou art
willing to marry Miss Harlowe, if she will have thee.

Col.   Mr. Lovelace will not scruple to say that, I suppose,
notwithstanding all that has passed: but if you think, Mr. Lovelace, I
have said any thing I should not have said, I suppose it is this, that
the man who has shown so little of the thing honour, to a defenceless
unprotected woman, ought not to stand so nicely upon the empty name of
it, with a man who is expostulating with him upon it.  I am sorry to have
cause to say this, Mr. Lovelace; but I would, on the same occasion,
repeat it to a king upon his throne, and surrounded by all his guards.

Lord M.   But what is all this, but more sacks upon the mill? more coals
upon the fire?  You have a mind to quarrel both of you, I see that.  Are
you not willing, Nephew, are you not most willing, to marry this lady, if
she can be prevailed upon to have you?

Lovel.   D---n me, my Lord, if I'd marry my empress upon such treatment
as this.

Lord M.   Why now, Bob., thou art more choleric than the Colonel.  It was
his turn just now.  And now you see he is cool, you are all gunpowder.

Lovel.   I own the Colonel has many advantages over me; but, perhaps,
there is one advantage he has not, if it were put to the trial.

Col.   I came not hither, as I said before, to seek the occasion: but if
it were offered me, I won't refuse it--and since we find we disturb my
good Lord M. I'll take my leave, and will go home by the way of St.
Alban's.

Lovel.   I'll see you part of the way, with all my heart, Colonel.

Col.   I accept your civility very cheerfully, Mr. Lovelace.

Lord M. (interposing again, as we were both for going out,)   And what
will this do, gentlemen?  Suppose you kill one another, will the matter
be bettered or worsted by that?  Will the lady be made happier or
unhappier, do you think, by either or both of your deaths?  Your
characters are too well known to make fresh instances of the courage of
either needful.  And, I think, if the honour of the lady is your view,
Colonel, it can by no other way so effectually promoted as by marriage.
And, Sir, if you would use your interest with her, it is very probable
that you may succeed, though nobody else can.

Lovel.   I think, my Lord, I have said all that a man can say, (since
what is passed cannot be recalled:) and you see Colonel Morden rises in
proportion to my coolness, till it is necessary for me to assert myself,
or even he would despise me.

Lord M.   Let me ask you, Colonel, have you any way, any method, that you
think reasonable and honourable to propose, to bring about a
reconciliation with the lady?  That is what we all wish for.  And I can
tell you, Sir, it is not a little owing to her family, and to their
implacable usage of her, that her resentments are heightened against my
kinsman; who, however, has used her vilely; but is willing to repair her
wrongs.--

Lovel.   Not, my Lord, for the sake of her family; nor for this
gentleman's haughty behaviour; but for her own sake, and in full sense of
the wrongs I have done her.

Col.   As to my haughty behaviour, as you call it, Sir, I am mistaken if
you would not have gone beyond it in the like case of a relation so
meritorious, and so unworthily injured.  And, Sir, let me tell you, that
if your motives are not love, honour, and justice, and if they have the
least tincture of mean compassion for her, or of an uncheerful assent on
your part, I am sure it will neither be desired or accepted by a person
of my cousin's merit and sense; nor shall I wish that it should.

Lovel.   Don't think, Colonel, that I am meanly compounding off a debate,
that I should as willingly go through with you as to eat or drink, if I
have the occasion given me for it: but thus much I will tell you, that my
Lord, that Lady Sarah Sadleir, Lady Betty Lawrance, my two cousins
Montague, and myself, have written to her in the most solemn and sincere
manner, to offer her such terms as no one but herself would refuse, and
this long enough before Colonel Morden's arrival was dreamt of.

Col.   What reason, Sir, may I ask, does she give, against listening to
so powerful a mediation, and to such offers?

Lovel.   It looks like capitulating, or else--

Col.   It looks not like any such thing to me, Mr. Lovelace, who have as
good an opinion of your spirit as man can have.  And what, pray, is the
part I act, and my motives for it?  Are they not, in desiring that
justice may be done to my Cousin Clarissa Harlowe, that I seek to
establish the honour of Mrs. Lovelace, if matters can once be brought to
bear?

Lovel.   Were she to honour me with her acceptance of that name, Mr.
Morden, I should not want you or any man to assert the honour of Mrs.
Lovelace.

Col.   I believe it.  But still she has honoured you with that
acceptance, she is nearer to me than to you, Mr. Lovelace.  And I speak
this, only to show you that, in the part I take, I mean rather to deserve
your thanks than your displeasure, though against yourself, were there
occasion.  Nor ought you take it amiss, if you rightly weigh the matter:
For, Sir, whom does a lady want protection against but her injurers?  And
who has been her greatest injurer?--Till, therefore, she becomes entitled
to your protection, as your wife, you yourself cannot refuse me some
merit in wishing to have justice done my cousin.  But, Sir, you were
going to say, that if it were not to look like capitulating, you would
hint the reasons my cousin gives against accepting such an honourable
mediation?

I then told him of my sincere offers of marriage: 'I made no difficulty,
I said, to own my apprehensions, that my unhappy behaviour to her had
greatly affected her: but that it was the implacableness of her friends
that had thrown her into despair, and given her a contempt for life.'  I
told him, 'that she had been so good as to send me a letter to divert me
from a visit my heart was set upon making her: a letter on which I built
great hopes, because she assured me that in it she was going to her
father's; and that I might see her there, when she was received, if it
were not my own fault.

Col.   Is it possible?  And were you, Sir, thus earnest?  And did she
send you such a letter?

Lord M. confirmed both; and also, that, in obedience to her desires, and
that intimation, I had come down without the satisfaction I had proposed
to myself in seeing her.

It is very true, Colonel, said I: and I should have told you this before:
but your heat made me decline it; for, as I said, it had an appearance of
meanly capitulating with you.  An abjectness of heart, of which, had I
been capable, I should have despised myself as much as I might have
expected you would despise me.

Lord M. proposed to enter into the proof of all this.  He said, in his
phraseological way, That one story was good till another was heard; and
that the Harlowe family and I, 'twas true, had behaved like so many
Orsons to one another; and that they had been very free with all our
family besides: that nevertheless, for the lady's sake, more than for
their's, or even for mine, (he could tell me,) he would do greater things
for me than they could ask, if she could be brought to have me: and that
this he wanted to declare, and would sooner have declared, if he could
have brought us sooner to patience, and a good understanding.

The Colonel made excuses for his warmth, on the score of his affection to
his cousin.

My regard for her made me readily admit them: and so a fresh bottle of
Burgundy, and another of Champagne, being put upon the table, we sat down
in good humour, after all this blustering, in order to enter closer into
the particulars of the case: which I undertook, at both their desires, to
do.

But these things must be the subject of another letter, which shall
immediately follow this, if it do not accompany it.

Mean time you will observe that a bad cause gives a man great
disadvantages: for I myself thing that the interrogatories put to me with
so much spirit by the Colonel made me look cursedly mean; at the same
time that it gave him a superiority which I know not how to allow to the
best man in Europe.  So that, literally speaking, as a good man would
infer, guilt is its own punisher: in that it makes the most lofty spirit
look like the miscreant he is--a good man, I say: So, Jack, proleptically
I add, thou hast no right to make the observation.



LETTER XL

MR. LOVELACE
[IN CONTINUATION.]
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, AUG. 29.


I went back, in this part of our conversation, to the day that I was
obliged to come down to attend my Lord in the dangerous illness which
some feared would have been his last.

I told the Colonel, 'what earnest letters I had written to a particular
friend, to engage him to prevail upon the lady not to slip a day that had
been proposed for the private celebration of our nuptials; and of my
letters* written to her on that subject;' for I had stepped to my closet,
and fetched down all the letters and draughts and copies of letters
relating to this affair.


* See Vol. VI. Letters XXXVII. XXXVIII. XXXIX. XLIII.


I read to him, 'several passages in the copies of those letters, which,
thou wilt remember, make not a little to my honour.'  And I told him,
'that I wished I had kept copies of those to my friend on the same
occasion; by which he would have seen how much in earnest I was in my
professions to her, although she would not answer one of them;' and thou
mayest remember, that one of those four letters accounted to herself why
I was desirous she should remain where I had left her.*


* See Vol. VI. Letter XXXVII.


I then proceeded to give him an account 'of the visit made by Lady Sarah
and Lady Betty to Lord M. and me, in order to induce me to do her
justice: of my readiness to comply with their desires; and of their high
opinion of her merit: of the visit made to Miss Howe by my cousins
Montague, in the name of us all, to engage her interest with her friend
in my behalf: of my conversation with Miss Howe, at a private assembly,
to whom I gave the same assurances, and besought her interest with her
friend.'

I then read a copy of the letter (though so much to my disadvantage)
which was written to her by Miss Charlotte Montague, Aug. 1,* entreating
her alliance in the names of all our family.


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXVI.


This made him ready to think that his fair cousin carried her resentment
against me too far.  He did not imagine, he said, that either myself or
our family had been so much in earnest.

So thou seest, Belford, that it is but glossing over one part of a story,
and omitting another, that will make a bad cause a good one at any time.
What an admirable lawyer should I have made!  And what a poor hand would
this charming creature, with all her innocence, have made of it in a
court of justice against a man who had so much to say and to show for
himself!

I then hinted at the generous annual tender which Lord M. and his sisters
made to his fair cousin, in apprehension that she might suffer by her
friends' implacableness.

And this also the Colonel highly applauded, and was pleased to lament the
unhappy misunderstanding between the two families, which had made the
Harlowes less fond of an alliance with a family of so much honour as this
instance showed ours to be.

I then told him, 'That having, by my friend, [meaning thee,] who was
admitted into her presence, (and who had always been an admirer of her
virtues, and had given me such advice from time to time in relation to
her as I wished I had followed,) been assured that a visit from me would
be very disagreeable to her, I once more resolved to try what a letter
would do; and that, accordingly, on the seventh of August, I wrote her
one.

'This, Colonel, is the copy of it.  I was then out of humour with my Lord
M. and the ladies of my family.  You will, therefore, read it to
yourself.'*


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXIX.


This letter gave him high satisfaction.  You write here, Mr. Lovelace,
from your heart.  'Tis a letter full of penitence and acknowledgement.
Your request is reasonable--To be forgiven only as you shall appear to
deserve it after a time of probation, which you leave to her to fix.
Pray, Sir, did she return an answer to this letter?

She did, but with reluctance, I own, and not till I had declared by my
friend, that, if I could not procure one, I would go up to town, and
throw myself at her feet.

I wish I might be permitted to see it, Sir, or to hear such parts of it
read as you shall think proper.

Turning over my papers, Here it is, Sir.*  I will make no scruple to put
it into your hands.

This is very obliging, Mr. Lovelace.

He read it.  My charming cousin!--How strong her resentments!--Yet how
charitable her wishes!--Good Heaven! that such an excellent creature--
But, Mr. Lovelace, it is to your regret, as much as to mine, I doubt not
--

Interrupting him, I swore that it was.

So it ought, said he.  Nor do I wonder that it should be so.  I shall
tell you by-and-by, proceeded he, how much she suffers with her friends
by false and villanous reports.  But, Sir, will you permit me to take
with me these two letters?  I shall make use of them to the advantage of
you both.

I told him I would oblige him with all my heart.  And this he took very
kindly (as he had reason); and put them in his pocket-book, promising to
return hem in a few days.

I then told him, 'That upon this her refusal, I took upon myself to go to
town, in hopes to move her in my favour; and that, though I went without
giving her notice of my intention, yet had she got some notion of my
coming, and so contrived to be out of the way: and at last, when she
found I was fully determined at all events to see her, before I went
abroad, (which I shall do, said I, if I cannot prevail upon her,) she
sent me the letter I have already mentioned to you, desiring me to
suspend my purposed visit: and that for a reason which amazes and
confounds me; because I don't find there is any thing in it: and yet I
never knew her once dispense with her word; for she always made it a
maxim, that it was not lawful to do evil, that good might come of it: and
yet in this letter, for no reason in the world but to avoid seeing me (to
gratify an humour only) has she sent me out of town, depending upon the
assurance she had given me.'

Col.   This is indeed surprising.  But I cannot believe that my cousin,
for such an end only, or indeed for any end, according to the character I
hear of her, should stoop to make use of such an artifice.

Lovel.   This, Colonel, is the thing that astonishes me; and yet, see
here!--This is the letter she wrote me--Nay, Sir, 'tis her own hand.

Col.   I see it is; and a charming hand it is.

Lovel.   You observe, Colonel, that all her hopes of reconciliation with
her parents are from you.  You are her dear blessed friend!  She always
talked of you with delight.

Col.   Would to Heaven I had come to England before she left
Harlowe-place!--Nothing of this had then happened.  Not a man of those
whom I have heard that her friends proposed for her should have had her.
Nor you, Mr. Lovelace, unless I had found you to be the man every one who
sees you must wish you to be: and if you had been that man, no one living
should I have preferred to you for such an excellence.

My Lord and I both joined in the wish: and 'faith I wished it most
cordially.

The Colonel read the letter twice over, and then returned it to me.  'Tis
all a mystery, said he.  I can make nothing of it.  For, alas! her
friends are as averse to a reconciliation as ever.

Lord M.   I could not have thought it.  But don't you think there is
something very favourable to my nephew in this letter--something that
looks as if the lady would comply at last?

Col.   Let me die if I know what to make of it.  This letter is very
different from her preceding one!--You returned an answer to it, Mr.
Lovelace?

Lovel.   An answer, Colonel!  No doubt of it.  And an answer full of
transport.  I told her, 'I would directly set out for Lord M.'s, in
obedience to her will.  I told her that I would consent to any thing she
should command, in order to promote this happy reconciliation.  I told
her that it should be my hourly study, to the end of my life, to deserve
a goodness so transcendent.'  But I cannot forbear saying that I am not a
little shocked and surprised, if nothing more be meant by it than to get
me into the country without seeing her.

Col.   That can't be the thing, depend upon it, Sir.  There must be more
in it than that.  For, were that all, she must think you would soon be
undeceived, and that you would then most probably resume your intention--
unless, indeed, she depended upon seeing me in the interim, as she knew I
was arrived.  But I own I know not what to make of it.  Only that she
does me a great deal of honour, if it be me that she calls her dear
blessed friend, whom she always loved and honoured.  Indeed I ever loved
her: and if I die unmarried, and without children, shall be as kind to
her as her grandfather was: and the rather, as I fear there is too much
of envy and self-love in the resentments her brother and sister endeavour
to keep up in her father and mother against her.  But I shall know better
how to judge of this, when my cousin James comes from Edinburgh; and he
is every hour expected.

But let me ask you, Mr. Lovelace, what is the name of your friend, who is
admitted so easily into my cousin's presence?  Is it not Belford, pray?

Lovel.   It is, Sir; and Mr. Belford's a man of honour; and a great
admirer of your fair cousin.

Was I right, as to the first, Jack?  The last I have such strong proof
of, that it makes me question the first; since she would not have been
out of the way of my intended visit but for thee.

Col.   Are you sure, Sir, that Mr. Belford is a man of honour?

Lovel.   I can swear for him, Colonel.  What makes you put this question?

Col.   Only this: that an officious pragmatical novice has been sent up
to inquire into my cousin's life and conversation: And, would you believe
it? the frequent visits of this gentlemen have been interpreted basely to
her disreputation.--Read that letter, Mr. Lovelace; and you will be
shocked at ever part of it.

This cursed letter, no doubt, is from the young Levite, whom thou, Jack,
describest as making inquiry of Mrs. Smith about Miss Harlowe's character
and visiters.*


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.


I believe I was a quarter of an hour in reading it: for I made it, though
not a short one, six times as long as it is, by the additions of oaths
and curses to every pedantic line.  Lord M. too helped to lengthen it, by
the like execrations.  And thou, Jack, wilt have as much reason to curse
it as we.

You cannot but see, said the Colonel, when I had done reading it, that
this fellow has been officious in his malevolence; for what he says is
mere hearsay, and that hearsay conjectural scandal without fact, or the
appearance of fact, to support it; so that an unprejudiced eye, upon the
face of the letter, would condemn the writer of it, as I did, and acquit
my cousin.  But yet, such is the spirit by which the rest of my relations
are governed, that they run away with the belief of the worst it
insinuates, and the dear creature has had shocking letters upon it; the
pedant's hints are taken; and a voyage to one of the colonies has been
proposed to her, as the only way to avoid Mr. Belford and you.  I have
not seen these letters indeed; but they took a pride in repeating some of
their contents, which must have cut the poor soul to the heart; and
these, joined to her former sufferings,--What have you not, Mr. Lovelace,
to answer for?

Lovel.   Who the devil could have expected such consequences as these?
Who could have believe there could be parents so implacable?  Brother and
sister so immovably fixed against the only means that could be taken to
put all right with every body?--And what now can be done?

Lord M.   I have great hopes that Col. Morden may yet prevail upon his
cousin.  And, by her last letter, it runs in my mind that she has some
thoughts of forgiving all that's past.  Do you think, Colonel, if there
should not be such a thing as a reconciliation going forward at present,
that her letter may not imply that, if we could bring such a thing to
bear with her friends, she would be reconciled with Mr. Lovelace?

Col.   Such an artifice would better become the Italian subtilty than the
English simplicity.  Your Lordship has been in Italy, I presume?

Lovel.   My Lord has read Boccaccio, perhaps; and that's as well, as to
the hint he gives, which may be borrowed from one of that author's
stories.  But Miss Clarissa Harlowe is above all artifice.  She must have
some meaning I cannot fathom.

Col.   Well, my Lord, I can only say that I will make some use of the
letters Mr. Lovelace has obliged me with: and after I have had some talk
with my cousin James, who is hourly expected; and when I have dispatched
two or three affairs that press upon me; I will pay my respects to my
dear cousin; and shall then be able to form a better judgment of things.
Mean time I will write to her; for I have sent to inquire about her, and
find she wants consolation.

Lovel.   If you favour me, Colonel, with the d----d letter of that fellow
Brand for a day or two, you will oblige me.

Col.   I will.  But remember, the man is a parson, Mr. Lovelace; an
innocent one too, they say.  Else I had been at him before now.  And
these college novices, who think they know every thing in their
cloisters, and that all learning lies in books, make dismal figures when
they come into the world among men and women.

Lord M.   Brand!  Brand!  It should have been Firebrand, I think in my
conscience!

Thus ended this doughty conference.

I cannot say, Jack, but I am greatly taken with Col. Morden.  He is brave
and generous, and knows the world; and then his contempt of the parsons
is a certain sign that he is one of us.

We parted with great civility: Lord M. (not a little pleased that we did,
and as greatly taken with Colonel) repeated his wish, after the Colonel
was gone, that he had arrived in time to save the lady, if that would
have done it.

I wish so too.  For by my soul, Jack, I am every day more and more uneasy
about her.  But I hope she is not so ill as I am told she is.

I have made Charlotte transcribe the letter of this Firebrand, as my Lord
calls him; and will enclose her copy of it.  All thy phlegm I know will
be roused into vengeance when thou readest it.

I know not what to advise as to showing it to the lady.  Yet, perhaps,
she will be able to reap more satisfaction than concern from it, knowing
her own innocence; in that it will give her to hope that her friends'
treatment of her is owing as much to misrepresentation as to their own
natural implacableness.  Such a mind as her's, I know, would be glad to
find out the shadow of a reason for the shocking letters the Colonel says
they have sent her, and for their proposal to her of going to some one of
the colonies [confound them all--but, if I begin to curse, I shall never
have done]--Then it may put her upon such a defence as she might be glad
of an opportunity to make, and to shame them for their monstrous
credulity--but this I leave to thy own fat-headed prudence--Only it vexes
me to the heart, that even scandal and calumny should dare to surmise the
bare possibility of any man sharing the favours of a woman, whom now
methinks I could worship with a veneration due only to a divinity.

Charlotte and her sister could not help weeping at the base aspersion:
When, when, said Patty, lifting up her hands, will this sweet lady's
sufferings be at an end?--O cousin Lovelace!--

And thus am I blamed for every one's faults!--When her brutal father
curses her, it is I.  I upbraid her with her severe mother.  The
implacableness of her stupid uncles is all mine.  The virulence of her
brother, and the spite of her sister, are entirely owing to me.  The
letter of this rascal Brand is of my writing--O Jack, what a wretch is
thy Lovelace!


***


Returned without a letter!--This d----d fellow Will. is returned without
a letter!--Yet the rascal tells me that he hears you have been writing to
me these two days!

Plague confound thee, who must know my impatience, and the reason for it!

To send a man and horse on purpose; as I did!  My imagination chained me
to the belly of the beast, in order to keep pace with him!--Now he is got
to this place; now to that; now to London; now to thee!

Now [a letter given him] whip and spur upon the return.  This town just
entered, not staying to bait: that village passed by: leaves the wind
behind him; in a foaming sweat man and horse.

And in this way did he actually enter Lord M.'s courtyard.

The reverberating pavement brought me down--The letter, Will.!  The
letter, dog!--The letter, Sirrah!

No letter, Sir!--Then wildly staring round me, fists clenched, and
grinning like a maniac, Confound thee for a dog, and him that sent thee
without one!--This moment out of my sight, or I'll scatter thy stupid
brains through the air.  I snatched from his holsters a pistol, while the
rascal threw himself from the foaming beast, and ran to avoid the fate
which I wished with all my soul thou hadst been within the reach of me to
have met with.

But, to be as meek as a lamb to one who has me at his mercy, and can
wring and torture my soul as he pleases, What canst thou mean to send
back my varlet without a letter?--I will send away by day-dawn another
fellow upon another beast for what thou hast written; and I charge thee
on thy allegiance, that thou dispatch him not back empty-handed.


POSTSCRIPT

Charlotte, in a whim of delicacy, is displeased that I send the enclosed
letter to you--that her handwriting, forsooth! should go into the hands
of a single man!

There's encouragement for thee, Belford!  This is a certain sign that
thou may'st have her if thou wilt.  And yet, till she has given me this
unerring demonstration of her glancing towards thee, I could not have
thought it.  Indeed I have often in pleasantry told her that I would
bring such an affair to bear.  But I never intended it; because she
really is a dainty girl; and thou art such a clumsy fellow in thy person,
that I should as soon have wished her a rhinoceros for a husband as thee.
But, poor little dears! they must stay till their time's come!  They
won't have this man, and they won't have that man, from seventeen to
twenty-five: but then, afraid, as the saying is, that God has forgot
them, and finding their bloom departing, they are glad of whom they can
get, and verify the fable of the parson and the pears.



LETTER XLI

MR. BRAND, TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
[ENCLOSED IN THE PRECEDING.]


WORTHY SIR, MY VERY GOOD FRIEND AND PATRON,

I arrived in town yesterday, after a tolerably pleasant journey
(considering the hot weather and dusty roads).  I put up at the Bull and
Gate in Holborn, and hastened to Covent-garden.  I soon found the house
where the unhappy lady lodgeth.  And, in the back shop, had a good deal
of discourse* with Mrs. Smith, (her landlady,) whom I found to be so
'highly prepossessed'** in her 'favour,' that I saw it would not answer
your desires to take my informations 'altogether' from her: and being
obliged to attend my patron, (who to my sorrow,


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.
** Transcriber's note: Mr. Brand's letters are characterized by a style
that makes excessive use of italics for emphasis. Although in the
remainder of _Clarissa_ I have largely disregarded italics for the sake
of plain-text formatting, this style makes such emphatic use of italics
that I have indicated all such instances in his letters by placing the
italicized words and phrases in quotations, thus ' '.


      'Miserum et aliena vivere quadra,')

I find wanteth much waiting upon, and is 'another' sort of man than he
was at college: for, Sir, 'inter nos,' 'honours change manners.'  For the
'aforesaid causes,' I thought it would best answer all the ends of the
commission with which you honoured me, to engage, in the desired
scrutiny,  the wife of a 'particular friend,' who liveth almost
over-against the house where she lodgeth, and who is a gentlewoman of
'character,' and 'sobriety,' a 'mother of children,' and one who
'knoweth' the 'world' well.

To her I applied myself, therefore, and gave her a short history of the
case, and desired she would very particularly inquire into the 'conduct'
of the unhappy young lady; her 'present way of life' and 'subsistence';
her 'visiters,' her 'employments,' and such-like: for these, Sir, you
know, are the things whereof you wished to be informed.

Accordingly, Sir, I waited upon the gentlewoman aforesaid, this day; and,
to 'my' very great trouble, (because I know it will be to 'your's,' and
likewise to all your worthy family's,) I must say, that I do find things
look a little more 'darkly' than I hoped the would.  For, alas! Sir, the
gentlewoman's report turneth out not so 'favourable' for Miss's
reputation, as 'I' wished, as 'you' wished, and as 'every one' of her
friends wished.  But so it is throughout the world, that 'one false step'
generally brings on 'another'; and peradventure 'a worse,' and 'a still
worse'; till the poor 'limed soul' (a very fit epithet of the Divine
Quarles's!) is quite 'entangled,' and (without infinite mercy) lost for
ever.

It seemeth, Sir, she is, notwithstanding, in a very 'ill state of
health.'  In this, 'both' gentlewomen (that is to say, Mrs. Smith, her
landlady, and my friend's wife) agree.  Yet she goeth often out in a
chair, to 'prayers' (as it is said).  But my friend's wife told me, that
nothing is more common in London, than that the frequenting of the church
at morning prayers is made the 'pretence' and 'cover' for 'private
assignations.'  What a sad thing is this! that what was designed for
'wholesome nourishment' to the 'poor soul,' should be turned into 'rank
poison!'  But as Mr. Daniel de Foe (an ingenious man, though a
'dissenter') observeth (but indeed it is an old proverb; only I think he
was the first that put it into verse)

      God never had a house of pray'r
      But Satan had a chapel there.

Yet to do the lady 'justice,' nobody cometh home with her: nor indeed
'can' they, because she goeth forward and backward in a 'sedan,' or
'chair,' (as they call it).  But then there is a gentleman of 'no good
character' (an 'intimado' of Mr. Lovelace) who is a 'constant' visiter
of her, and of the people of the house, whom he 'regaleth' and
'treateth,' and hath (of consequence) their 'high good words.'

I have thereupon taken the trouble (for I love to be 'exact' in any
'commission' I undertake) to inquire 'particularly' about this
'gentleman,' as he is called (albeit I hold no man so but by his actions:
for, as Juvenal saith,

      --'Nobilitas sola est, atque unica virtus')

And this I did 'before' I would sit down to write to you.

His name is Belford.  He hath a paternal estate of upwards of one
thousand pounds by the year; and is now in mourning for an uncle who left
him very considerably besides.  He beareth a very profligate character as
to 'women,' (for I inquired particularly about 'that,') and is Mr.
Lovelace's more especial 'privado,' with whom he holdeth a 'regular
correspondence'; and hath been often seen with Miss (tete a tete) at the
'window'--in no 'bad way,' indeed: but my friend's wife is of opinion
that all is not 'as it should be.'  And, indeed, it is mighty strange to
me, if Miss be so 'notable a penitent' (as is represented) and if she
have such an 'aversion' to Mr. Lovelace, that she will admit his
'privado' into 'her retirements,' and see 'no other company.'

I understand, from Mrs. Smith, that Mr. Hickman was to see her some time
ago, from Miss Howe; and I am told, by 'another' hand, (you see, Sir, how
diligent I have been to execute the 'commissions' you gave me,) that he
had no 'extraordinary opinion' of this Belford at first; though they were
seen together one morning by the opposite neighbour, at 'breakfast': and
another time this Belford was observed to 'watch' Mr. Hickman's coming
from her; so that, as it should seem, he was mighty zealous to
'ingratiate' himself with Mr. Hickman; no doubt to engage him to make a
'favourable report to Miss Howe' of the 'intimacy' he was admitted into
by her unhappy friend; who ('as she is very ill') may 'mean no harm' in
allowing his visits, (for he, it seemeth, brought to her, or recommended,
at least, the doctor and apothecary that attend her:) but I think (upon
the whole) 'it looketh not well.'

I am sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a better account of the young lady's
'prudence.'  But, what shall we say?

      'Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva,'

as Juvenal observeth.

One thing I am afraid of; which is, that Miss may be under 'necessities';
and that this Belford (who, as Mrs. Smith owns, hath 'offered her money,'
which she, 'at the time,' refused) may find an opportunity to 'take
advantage' of those 'necessities': and it is well observed by that poet,
that

      'AEgre formosam poteris servare puellam:
         Nunc prece, nunc pretio, forma petita ruit.'

And this Belford (who is a 'bold man,' and hath, as they say, the 'look'
of one) may make good that of Horace, (with whose writings you are so
well acquainted; nobody better;)

      'Audax omnia perpeti,
      Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.'

Forgive me, Sir, for what I am going to write: but if you could prevail
upon the rest of your family to join in the scheme which 'you,' and her
'virtuous sister,' Miss Arabella, and the Archdeacon, and I, once talked
of, (which is to persuade the unhappy young lady to go, in some
'creditable' manner, to some one of the foreign colonies,) it might not
save only her 'own credit' and 'reputation,' but the 'reputation' and
'credit' of all her 'family,' and a great deal of 'vexation' moreover.
For it is my humble opinion, that you will hardly (any of you) enjoy
yourselves while this ('once' innocent) young lady is in the way of being
so frequently heard of by you: and this would put her 'out of the way'
both of 'this Belford' and of 'that Lovelace,' and it might,
peradventure, prevent as much 'evil' as 'scandal.'

You will forgive me, Sir, for this my 'plainness.'  Ovid pleadeth for me,

      '----Adulator nullus amicus erit.'

And I have no view but that of approving myself a 'zealous well-wisher'
to 'all' your worthy family, (whereto I owe a great number of
obligations,) and very particularly, Sir,

Your obliged and humble servant,
ELIAS BRAND.

WEDN. AUG. 9.


P.S. I shall give you 'farther hints' when I come down, (which will be in
      a few days;) and who my 'informants' were; but by 'these' you will
      see, that I have been very assiduous (for the time) in the task you
      set me upon.

The 'length' of my letter you will excuse: for I need not tell you, Sir,
      what 'narrative,' 'complex,' and 'conversation' letters (such a one
      as 'mine') require.  Every one to his 'talent.'  'Letter-writing'
      is mine.  I will be bold to say; and that my 'correspondence' was
      much coveted in the university, on that account, by 'tyros,' and
      by 'sophs,' when I was hardly a 'soph' myself.  But this I should
      not have taken upon myself to mention, but only in defence of the
      'length' of my letter; for nobody writeth 'shorter' or 'pithier,'
      when the subject requireth 'common forms' only--but, in apologizing
      for my 'prolixity,' I am 'adding' to the 'fault,' (if it were one,
      which, however, I cannot think it to be, the 'subject' considered:
      but this I have said before in other words:) so, Sir, if you will
      excuse my 'post-script,' I am sure you will not find fault with my
      'letter.'

One word more as to a matter of 'erudition,' which you greatly love to
      hear me 'start' and 'dwell upon.'  Dr. Lewen once, in 'your'
      presence, (as you, 'my good patron,' cannot but remember,) in a
      'smartish' kind of debate between 'him' and 'me,' took upon him to
      censure the 'paranthetical' style, as I call it.  He was a very
      learned and judicious man, to be sure, and an ornament to 'our
      function': but yet I must needs say, that it is a style which I
      greatly like; and the good Doctor was then past his 'youth,' and
      that time of life, of consequence, when a 'fertile imagination,'
      and a 'rich fancy,' pour in ideas so fast upon a writer, that
      parentheses are often wanted (and that for the sake of 'brevity,'
      as well as 'perspicuity') to save the reader the trouble of reading
      a passage 'more than once.'  Every man to his talent, (as I said
      before.)  We are all so apt to set up our 'natural biasses' for
      'general standards,' that I wondered 'the less' at the worthy
      Doctor's 'stiffness' on this occasion.  He 'smiled at me,' you may
      remember, Sir--and, whether I was right or not, I am sure I 'smiled
      at him.'  And 'you,' my 'worthy patron,' (as I had the satisfaction
      to observe,) seemed to be of 'my party.'  But was it not strange,
      that the 'old gentleman' and 'I' should so widely differ, when the
      'end' with 'both' (that is to say, 'perspicuity' or 'clearness,')
      was the same?--But what shall we say?--

            'Errare est hominis, sed non persistere.'

I think I have nothing to add until I have the honour of attending you in
      'person'; but I am, (as above,) &c. &c. &c.

E.B.



LETTER XLII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, AUG. 30.


It was lucky enough that our two servants met at Hannah's,* which gave
them so good an opportunity of exchanging their letters time enough for
each to return to his master early in the day.


* The Windmill, near Slough.


Thou dost well to boast of thy capacity for managing servants, and to set
up for correcting our poets in their characters of this class of people,*
when, like a madman, thou canst beat their teeth out, and attempt to
shoot them through the head, for not bringing to thee what they had no
power to obtain.


* See Letter XX. of this volume.


You well observe* that you would have made a thorough-paced lawyer.  The
whole of the conversation-piece between you and the Colonel affords a
convincing proof that there is a black and a white side to every cause:
But what must the conscience of a partial whitener of his own cause, or
blackener of another's, tell him, while he is throwing dust in the eyes
of his judges, and all the time knows his own guilt?


* See Letter XL. of this volume.


The Colonel, I see, is far from being a faultless man: but while he
sought not to carry his point by breach of faith, he has an excuse which
thou hast not.  But, with respect to him, and to us all, I can now, with
the detestation of some of my own actions, see, that the taking advantage
of another person's good opinion of us to injure (perhaps to ruin) that
other, is the most ungenerous wickedness that can be committed.

Man acting thus by man, we should not be at a loss to give such actions a
name: But is it not doubly and trebly aggravated, when such advantage is
taken of an unexperienced and innocent young creature, whom we pretend to
love above all the women in the world; and when we seal our pretences by
the most solemn vows and protestations of inviolable honour that we can
invent?

I see that this gentleman is the best match thou ever couldest have had,
upon all accounts: his spirit such another impetuous one as thy own; soon
taking fire; vindictive; and only differing in this, that the cause he
engages in is a just one.  But commend me to honest brutal Mowbray, who,
before he knew the cause, offers his sword in thy behalf against a man
who had taken the injured side, and whom he had never seen before.

As soon as I had run through your letters, and the copy of that of the
incendiary Brand's, (by the latter of which I saw to what cause a great
deal of this last implacableness of the Harlowe family is owing,) I took
coach to Smith's, although I had been come from thence but about an hour,
and had taken leave of the lady for the night.

I sent up for Mrs. Lovick, and desired her, in the first place, to
acquaint the lady (who was busied in her closet,) that I had letters from
Berks: in which I was informed, that the interview between Colonel Morden
and Mr. Lovelace had ended without ill consequences; that the Colonel
intended to write to her very soon, and was interesting himself mean
while, in her favour, with her relations; that I hoped that this
agreeable news would be means of giving her good rest; and I would wait
upon her in the morning, by the time she should return from prayers, with
all the particulars.

She sent me word that she should be glad to see me in the morning; and
was highly obliged to me for the good news I had sent her up.

I then, in the back shop, read to Mrs. Lovick and to Mrs. Smith the copy
of Brand's letter, and asked them if they could guess at the man's
informant?  They were not at a loss; Mrs. Smith having seen the same
fellow Brand who had talked with her, as I mentioned in the former,* come
out of a milliner's shop over against them; which milliner, she said, had
also lately been very inquisitive about the lady.


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.


I wanted no farther hint; but, bidding them take no notice to the lady of
what I had read, I shot over the way, and, asking for the mistress of the
house, she came to me.

Retiring with her, at her invitation, into her parlour, I desired to know
if she were acquainted with a young country clergyman of the name of
Brand.  She hesitatingly, seeing me in some emotion, owned that she had
some small knowledge of the gentleman.  Just then came in her husband,
who is, it seems, a petty officer of excise, (and not an ill-behaved
man,) who owned a fuller knowledge of him.

I have the copy of a letter, said I, from this Brand, in which he has
taken great liberties with my character, and with that of the most
unblamable lady in the world, which he grounds upon information that you,
Madam, have given him.  And then I read to them several passages in his
letter, and asked what foundation she had for giving that fellow such
impressions of either of us?

They knew not what to answer: but at last said, that he had told them how
wickedly the young lady had run away from her parents: what worthy and
rich people they were: in what favour he stood with them; and that they
had employed him to inquire after her behaviour, visiters, &c.

They said, 'That indeed they knew very little of the young lady; but that
[curse upon their censoriousness!] it was but too natural to think, that,
where a lady had given way to a delusion, and taken so wrong a step, she
would not stop there: that the most sacred places and things were but too
often made clokes for bad actions; that Mr. Brand had been informed
(perhaps by some enemy of mine) that I was a man of very free principles,
and an intimado, as he calls it, of the man who had ruined her.  And that
their cousin Barker, a manteau-maker, who lodged up one pair of stairs,'
(and who, at their desire, came down and confirmed what they said,) 'had
often, from her window, seen me with the lady in her chamber, and both
talking very earnestly together; and that Mr. Brand, being unable to
account for her admiring my visits, and knowing I was but a new
acquaintance of her's, and an old one of Mr. Lovelace, thought himself
obliged to lay these matters before her friends.'

This was the sum and substance of their tale.  O how I cursed the
censoriousness of this plaguy triumvirate!  A parson, a milliner, and a
mantua-maker!  The two latter, not more by business led to adorn the
persons, than generally by scandal to destroy the reputations, of those
they have a mind to exercise their talents upon!

The two women took great pains to persuade me that they themselves were
people of conscience;--of consequence, I told them, too much addicted, I
feared, to censure other people who pretended not to their strictness;
for that I had ever found censoriousness, with those who affected to be
thought more pious than their neighbours.

They answered, that that was not their case; and that they had since
inquired into the lady's character and manner of life, and were very much
concerned to think any thing they had said should be made use of against
her: and as they heard from Mrs. Smith that she was not likely to live
long, they should be sorry she should go out of the world a sufferer by
their means, or with an ill opinion of them, though strangers to her.
The husband offered to write, if I pleased, to Mr. Brand, in vindication
of the lady; and the two women said they should be glad to wait upon her
in person, to beg her pardon for any thing she had reason to take amiss
from them; because they were now convinced that there was not such
another young lady in the world.

I told them that the least said of the affair to the lady, in her present
circumstances, was best.  That she was a heavenly creature, and fond of
taking all occasions to find excuses for her relations on their
implacableness to her: that therefore I should take some notice to her of
the uncharitable and weak surmises which gave birth to so vile a scandal:
but that I would have him, Mr. Walton, (for that is the husband's name,)
write to his acquaintance Brand as soon as possible, as he had offered;
and so I left them.

As to what thou sayest of thy charming cousin, let me know if thou hast
any meaning in it.  I have not the vanity to think myself deserving of
such a lady as Miss Montague; and should not therefore care to expose
myself to her scorn and to thy derision.  But were I assured I might
avoid both of these, I would soon acquaint thee that I should think no
pains nor assiduity too much to obtain a share in the good graces of such
a lady.

But I know thee too well to depend upon any thing thou sayest on this
subject.  Thou lovest to make thy friends the objects of ridicule to
ladies; and imaginest, from the vanity, (and, in this respect, I will say
littleness,) of thine own heart, that thou shinest the brighter for the
foil.

Thus didst thou once play off the rough Mowbray with Miss Hatton, till
the poor fellow knew not how to go either backward or forward.



LETTER XLIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, 11 O'CLOCK, AUG. 31.


I am just come from the lady, whom I left cheerful and serene.

She thanked me for my communication of the preceding night.  I read to
her such parts of your letters as I could read to her; and I thought it
was a good test to distinguish the froth and whipt-syllabub in them from
the cream, in what one could and could not read to a woman of so fine a
mind; since four parts out of six of thy letters, which I thought
entertaining as I read them to myself, appeared to me, when I should have
read them to her, most abominable stuff, and gave me a very contemptible
idea of thy talents, and of my own judgment.

She as far from rejoicing, as I had done, at the disappointment her
letter gave you when explained.

She said, she meant only an innocent allegory, which might carry
instruction and warning to you, when the meaning was taken, as well as
answer her own hopes for the time.  It was run off in a hurry.  She was
afraid it was not quite right in her.  But hoped the end would excuse (if
it could not justify) the means.  And then she again expressed a good
deal of apprehension lest you should still take it into your head to
molest her, when her time, she said, was so short, that she wanted every
moment of it; repeating what she had once said before, that, when she
wrote, she was so ill that she believed she should not have lived till
now: if she had thought she should, she must have studied for an
expedient that would have better answered her intentions.  Hinting at a
removal out of the knowledge of us both.

But she was much pleased that the conference between you and Colonel
Morden, after two or three such violent sallies, as I acquainted her you
had had between you, ended so amicably; and said she must absolutely
depend upon the promise I had given her to use my utmost endeavours to
prevent farther mischief on her account.

She was pleased with the justice you did her character to her cousin.

She was glad to hear that he had so kind an opinion of her, and that he
would write to her.

I was under an unnecessary concern, how to break to her that I had the
copy of Brand's vile letter: unnecessary, I say; for she took it just as
you thought she would, as an excuse she wished to have for the
implacableness of her friends; and begged I would let her read it
herself; for, said she, the contents cannot disturb me, be they what they
will.

I gave it to her, and she read it to herself; a tear now and then being
ready to start, and a sigh sometimes interposing.

She gave me back the letter with great and surprising calmness,
considering the subject.

There was a time, said she, and that not long since, when such a letter
as this would have greatly pained me.  But I hope I have now go above all
these things: and I can refer to your kind offices, and to those of Miss
Howe, the justice that will be done to my memory among my friends.  There
is a good and a bad light in which every thing that befalls us may be
taken.  If the human mind will busy itself to make the worst of every
disagreeable occurrence, it will never want woe.  This letter, affecting
as the subject of it is to my reputation, gives me more pleasure than
pain, because I can gather from it, that had not my friends been
prepossessed by misinformed or rash and officious persons, who are always
at hand to flatter or soothe the passions of the affluent, they could not
have been so immovably determined against me.  But now they are
sufficiently cleared from every imputation of unforgivingness; for, while
I appeared to them in the character of a vile hypocrite, pretending to
true penitence, yet giving up myself to profligate courses, how could I
expect either their pardon or blessing?

But, Madam, said I, you'll see by the date of this letter, that their
severity, previous to that, cannot be excused by it.

It imports me much, replied she, on account of my present wishes, as to
the office you are so kind to undertake, that you should not think
harshly of my friends.  I must own to you, that I have been apt sometimes
myself to think them not only severe but cruel.  Suffering minds will be
partial to their own cause and merits.  Knowing their own hearts, if
sincere, they are apt to murmur when harshly treated: But, if they are
not believed to be innocent, by persons who have a right to decide upon
their conduct according to their own judgments, how can it be helped?
Besides, Sir, how do you know, that there are not about my friends as
well-meaning misrepresenters as Mr. Brand really seems to be?  But, be
this as it will, there is no doubt that there are and have been
multitudes of persons, as innocent as myself, who have suffered upon
surmises as little probable as those on which Mr. Brand founds his
judgment.  Your intimacy, Sir, with Mr. Lovelace, and (may I say?) a
character which, it seems, you have been less solicitous formerly to
justify than perhaps you will be for the future, and your frequent visits
to me may well be thought to be questionable circumstances in my conduct.

I could only admire her in silence.

But you see, Sir, proceeded she, how necessary it is for young people of
our sex to be careful of our company.  And how much, at the same time, it
behoves young persons of your's to be chary of their own reputation, were
it only for the sake of such of our's as they may mean honourably by, and
who otherwise may suffer in their good names for being seen in their
company.

As to Mr. Brand, continued she, he is to be pitied; and let me enjoin
you, Mr. Belford, not to take any resentments against him which may be
detrimental either to his person or his fortunes.  Let his function and
his good meaning plead for him.  He will have concern enough, when he
finds every body, whose displeasure I now labour under, acquitting my
memory of perverse guilt, and joining in a general pity for me.

This, Lovelace, is the woman whose life thou hast curtailed in the
blossom of it!--How many opportunities must thou have had of admiring her
inestimable worth, yet couldst have thy senses so much absorbed in the
WOMAN, in her charming person, as to be blind to the ANGEL, that shines
out in such full glory in her mind!  Indeed, I have ever thought myself,
when blest with her conversation, in the company of a real angel: and I
am sure it would be impossible for me, were she to be as beautiful, and
as crimsoned over with health, as I have seen her, to have the least
thought of sex, when I heard her talk.


THURSDAY, THREE O'CLOCK, AUG. 31.

On my re-visit to the lady, I found her almost as much a sufferer from
joy as she had sometimes been from grief; for she had just received a
very kind letter from her cousin Morden; which she was so good as to
communicate to me.  As she had already begun to answer it, I begged leave
to attend her in the evening, that I might not interrupt her in it.

The letter is a very tender one * * * *

[Here Mr. Belford gives the substance of it upon his memory; but that is
      omitted; as the letter is given at length (see the next letter.)
      And then adds:]

But, alas! all will be now too late.  For the decree is certainly gone
out--the world is unworthy of her.



LETTER XLIV

COLONEL MORDEN, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 29.


I should not, my dearest Cousin, have been a fortnight in England,
without either doing myself the honour of waiting upon you in person, or
of writing to you; if I had not been busying myself almost all the time
in your service, in hopes of making my visit or letter still more
acceptable to you--acceptable as I have reason to presume either will be
from the unquestionable love I ever bore you, and from the esteem you
always honoured me with.

Little did I think that so many days would have been required to effect
my well-intended purpose, where there used to be a love so ardent on one
side, and where there still is, as I am thoroughly convinced, the most
exalted merit on the other!

I was yesterday with Mr. Lovelace and Lord M.  I need not tell you, it
seems, how very desirous the whole family and all the relations of that
nobleman are of the honour of an alliance with you; nor how exceedingly
earnest the ungrateful man is to make you all the reparation in his
power.

I think, my dear Cousin, that you cannot now do better than to give him
the honour of your hand.  He says just and great things of your virtue,
and so heartily condemns himself, that I think there is honorable room
for you to forgive him: and the more room, as it seems you are determined
against a legal prosecution.

Your effectual forgiveness of Mr. Lovelace, it is evident to me, will
accelerate a general reconciliation: for, at present, my other cousins
cannot persuade themselves that he is in earnest to do you justice; or
that you would refuse him, if you believed he was.

But, my dear Cousin, there may possibly be something in this affair, to
which I may be a stranger.  If there be, and you will acquaint me with
it, all that a naturally-warm heart can do in your behalf shall be done.

I hope I shall be able, in my next visits to my several cousins, to set
all right with them.  Haughty spirits, when convinced that they have
carried resentments too high, want but a good excuse to condescend: and
parents must always love the child they once loved.

But if I find them inflexible, I will set out, and attend you without
delay; for I long to see you, after so many years' absence.

Mean while, I beg the favour of a few lines, to know if you have reason
to doubt Mr. Lovelace's sincerity.  For my part, I can have none, if I am
to judge from the conversation that passed between us yesterday, in
presence of Lord M.

You will be pleased to direct for me at your uncle Antony's.

Permit me, my dearest Cousin, till I can procure a happy reconciliation
between you and your father, and brother, and uncles, to supply the place
to you of all those near relations, as well as that of

Your affectionate kinsman, and humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.



LETTER XLV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO WM. MORDEN, ESQ.
THURSDAY, AUG. 31.


I most heartily congratulate you, dear Sir, on your return to your native
country.

I heard with much pleasure that you were come; but I was both afraid and
ashamed, till you encouraged me by a first notice, to address myself to
you.

How consoling is it to my wounded heart to find that you have not been
carried away by that tide of resentment and displeasure with which I have
been so unhappily overwhelmed--but that, while my still nearer relations
have not thought fit to examine into the truth of vile reports raised
against me, you have informed yourself of my innocence, and generously
credited the information!

I have not the least reason to doubt Mr. Lovelace's sincerity in his
offers of marriage; nor that all his relations are heartily desirous of
ranking me among them.  I have had noble instances of their esteem for
me, on their apprehending that my father's displeasure must have had
absolutely refused their pressing solicitations in their kinsman's favour
as well as his own.

Nor think me, my dear Cousin, blamable for refusing him.  I had given Mr.
Lovelace no reason to think me a weak creature.  If I had, a man of his
character might have thought himself warranted to endeavour to take
ungenerous advantage of the weakness he had been able to inspire.  The
consciousness of my own weakness (in that case) might have brought me to
a composition with his wickedness.

I can indeed forgive him.  But that is, because I think his crimes have
set me above him.  Can I be above the man, Sir, to whom I shall give my
hand and my vows, and with them a sanction to the most premeditated
baseness?  No, Sir, let me say, that your cousin Clarissa, were she
likely to live many years, and that (if she married not this man) in
penury or want, despised and forsaken by all her friends, puts not so
high a value upon the conveniencies of life, nor upon life itself, as to
seek to re-obtain the one, or to preserve the other, by giving such a
sanction: a sanction, which (were she to perform her duty,) would reward
the violator.

Nor is it so much from pride as from principle that I say this.  What,
Sir! when virtue, when chastity, is the crown of a woman, and
particularly of a wife, shall form an attempt upon her's but upon a
presumption that she was capable of receiving his offered hand when he
had found himself mistaken in the vile opinion he had conceived of her?
Hitherto he has not had reason to think me weak.  Nor will I give an
instance so flagrant, that weak I am in a point in which it would be
criminal to be found weak.

One day, Sir, you will perhaps know all my story.  But, whenever it is
known, I beg that the author of my calamities may not be vindictively
sought after.  He could not have been the author of them, but for a
strange concurrence of unhappy causes.  As the law will not be able to
reach him when I am gone, the apprehension of any other sort of vengeance
terrifies me; since, in such a case, should my friends be safe, what
honour would his death bring to my memory?--If any of them should come to
misfortune, how would my fault be aggravated!

God long preserve you, my dearest Cousin, and bless you but in proportion
to the consolation you have given me, in letting me know that you still
love me; and that I have one near and dear relation who can pity and
forgive me; (and then you will be greatly blessed;) is the prayer of

Your ever grateful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XLVI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO HIS LETTERS XXIII. XXXVII. OF THIS VOLUME.]
THURSDAY, AUG. 31.


I cannot but own that I am cut to the heart by this Miss Harlowe's
interpretation of her letter.  She ought never to be forgiven.  She, a
meek person, and a penitent, and innocent, and pious, and I know not
what, who can deceive with a foot in the grave!--

'Tis evident, that she sat down to write this letter with a design to
mislead and deceive.  And if she be capable of that, at such a crisis,
she has as much need of Heaven's forgiveness, as I have of her's: and,
with all her cant of charity and charity, if she be not more sure of it
than I am of her real pardon, and if she take the thing in the light she
ought to take it in, she will have a few darker moments yet to come than
she seems to expect.

Lord M. himself, who is not one of those (to speak in his own phrase) who
can penetrate a millstone, sees the deceit, and thinks it unworthy of
her; though my cousins Montague vindicate her.  And no wonder this cursed
partial sex [I hate 'em all--by my soul, I hate 'em all!] will never
allow any thing against an individual of it, where our's is concerned.
And why?  Because, if they censure deceit in another, they must condemn
their own hearts.

She is to send me a letter after she is in Heaven, is she?  The devil
take such allegories, and the devil take thee for calling this absurdity
an innocent artifice!

I insist upon it, that if a woman of her character, at such a critical
time, is to be justified in such a deception, a man in full health and
vigour of body and mind, as I am, may be excused for all his stratagems
and attempts against her.  And, thank my stars, I can now sit me down
with a quiet conscience on that score.  By my soul, I can, Jack.  Nor has
any body, who can acquit her, a right to blame me.  But with some,
indeed, every thing she does must be good, every thing I do must be bad--
And why?  Because she has always taken care to coax the stupid misjudging
world, like a woman: while I have constantly defied and despised its
censures, like a man.

But, notwithstanding all, you may let her know from me that I will not
molest her, since my visits would be so shocking to her: and I hope she
will take this into her consideration as a piece of generosity which she
could hardly expect after the deception she has put upon me.  And let her
farther know, that if there be any thing in my power, that will
contribute either to her ease or honour, I will obey her, at the very
first intimation, however disgraceful or detrimental to myself.  All
this, to make her unapprehensive, and that she may have nothing to pull
her back.

If her cursed relations could be brought as cheerfully to perform their
parts, I'd answer life for life for her recovery.

But who, that has so many ludicrous images raised in his mind by the
awkward penitence, can forbear laughing at thee?  Spare, I beseech thee,
dear Belford, for the future, all thine own aspirations, if thou wouldst
not dishonour those of an angel indeed.

When I came to that passage, where thou sayest that thou considerest her*
as one sent from Heaven to draw thee after her--for the heart of me I
could not for an hour put thee out of my head, in the attitude of dame
Elizabeth Carteret, on her monument in Westminster Abbey.  If thou never
observedst it, go thither on purpose: and there wilt thou see this dame
in effigy, with uplifted head and hand, the latter taken hold of by a
cupid every inch of stone, one clumsy foot lifted up also, aiming, as the
sculptor designed it, to ascend; but so executed, as would rather make
one imagine that the figure (without shoe or stocking, as it is, though
the rest of the body is robed) was looking up to its corn-cutter: the
other riveted to its native earth, bemired, like thee (immersed thou
callest it) beyond the possibility of unsticking itself.  Both figures,
thou wilt find, seem to be in a contention, the bigger, whether it should
pull down the lesser about its ears--the lesser (a chubby fat little
varlet, of a fourth part of the other's bigness, with wings not much
larger than those of a butterfly) whether it should raise the larger to a
Heaven it points to, hardly big enough to contain the great toes of
either.


* See Letter XXXVII. of this volume.


Thou wilt say, perhaps, that the dame's figure in stone may do credit, in
the comparison, to thine, both in grain and shape, wooden as thou art all
over: but that the lady, who, in every thing but in the trick she has
played me so lately, is truly an angel, is but sorrily represented by the
fat-flanked cupid.  This I allow thee.  But yet there is enough in thy
aspirations to strike my mind with a resemblance of thee and the lady to
the figures on the wretched monument; for thou oughtest to remember,
that, prepared as she may be to mount to her native skies, it is
impossible for her to draw after her a heavy fellow who has so much to
repent of as thou hast.

But now, to be serious once more, let me tell you, Belford, that, if the
lady be really so ill as you write she is, it will become you [no Roman
style here!] in a case so very affecting, to be a little less pointed and
sarcastic in your reflections.  For, upon my soul, the matter begins to
grate me most confoundedly.

I am now so impatient to hear oftener of her, that I take the hint
accidentally given me by our two fellows meeting at Slough, and resolve
to go to our friend Doleman's at Uxbridge; whose wife and sister, as well
as he, have so frequently pressed me to give them my company for a week
or two.  There shall I be within two hours' ride, if any thing should
happen to induce her to see me: for it will well become her piety, and
avowed charity, should the worst happen, [the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
however, avert that worst!] to give me that pardon from her lips, which
she has not denied to me by pen and ink.  And as she wishes my
reformation, she knows not what good effects such an interview may have
upon me.

I shall accordingly be at Doleman's to-morrow morning, by eleven at
farthest.  My fellow will find me there at his return from you (with a
letter, I hope).  I shall have Joel with me likewise, that I may send
the oftener, as matters fall out.  Were I to be still nearer, or in town,
it would be impossible to withhold myself from seeing her.

But, if the worst happen!--as, by your continual knelling, I know not
what to think of it!--[Yet, once more, Heaven avert that worst!--How
natural it is to pray, when once cannot help one's self!]--THEN say not,
in so many dreadful words, what the event is--Only, that you advise me to
take a trip to Paris--And that will stab me to the heart.


***


I so well approve of your generosity to poor Belton's sister, that I have
made Mowbray give up his legacy, as I do mine, towards her India bonds.
When I come to town, Tourville shall do the like; and we will buy each a
ring to wear in memory of the honest fellow, with our own money, that we
may perform his will, as well as our own.

My fellow rides the rest of the night.  I charge you, Jack, if you would
save his life, that you send him not back empty-handed.



LETTER XLVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, AUG. 30.


When I concluded my last, I hoped that my next attendance upon this
surprising lady would furnish me with some particulars as agreeable as
now could be hoped for from the declining way she is in, by reason of
the welcome letter she had received from her cousin Morden.  But it
proved quite otherwise to me, though not to herself; for I think I was
never more shocked in my life than on the occasion I shall mention
presently.

When I attended her about seven in the evening, she told me that she
found herself in a very petulant way after I had left her.  Strange, said
she, that the pleasure I received from my cousin's letter should have
such an effect upon me!  But I could not help giving way to a comparative
humour, as I may call it, and to think it very hard that my nearer
relations did not take the methods which my cousin Morden kindly took, by
inquiring into my merit or demerit, and giving my cause a fair audit
before they proceeded to condemnation.

She had hardly said this, when she started, and a blush overspread her
sweet face, on hearing, as I also did, a sort of lumbering noise upon the
stairs, as if a large trunk were bringing up between two people: and,
looking upon me with an eye of concern, Blunderers! said she, they have
brought in something two hours before the time.--Don't be surprised, Sir
--it is all to save you trouble.

Before I could speak, in came Mrs. Smith: O Madam, said she, what have
you done?--Mrs. Lovick, entering, made the same exclamation.  Lord have
mercy upon me, Madam! cried I, what have you done?--For she, stepping at
the same instant to the door, the women told me it was a coffin.--O
Lovelace! that thou hadst been there at that moment!--Thou, the causer of
all these shocking scenes!  Surely thou couldst not have been less
affected than I, who have no guilt, as to her, to answer for.

With an intrepidity of a piece with the preparation, having directed them
to carry it to her bed-chamber, she returned to us: they were not to have
brought it in till after dark, said she--Pray, excuse me, Mr. Belford:
and don't you, Mrs. Lovick, be concerned: nor you, Mrs. Smith.--Why
should you?  There is nothing more in it than the unusualness of the
thing.  Why may we not be as reasonably shocked at going to church where
are the monuments of our ancestors, with whose dust we even hope our dust
shall be one day mingled, as to be moved at such a sight as this?

We all remaining silent, the women having their aprons at their eyes, Why
this concern for nothing at all? said she.  If I am to be blamed for any
thing, it is for showing too much solicitude, as it may be thought, for
this earthly part.  I love to do every thing for myself that I can do.  I
ever did.  Every other material point is so far done, and taken care of,
that I have had leisure for things of lesser moment.  Minutenesses may be
observed, where greater articles are not neglected for them.  I might
have had this to order, perhaps, when less fit to order it.  I have no
mother, no sister, no Mrs. Norton, no Miss Howe, near me.  Some of you
must have seen this in a few days, if not now; perhaps have had the
friendly trouble of directing it.  And what is the difference of a few
days to you, when I am gratified rather than discomposed by it?  I shall
not die the sooner for such a preparation.  Should not every body that
has any thing to bequeath make their will?  And who, that makes a will,
should be afraid of a coffin?--My dear friends, [to the women] I have
considered these things; do not, with such an object before you as you
have had in me for weeks, give me reason to think you have not.

How reasonable was all this!--It showed, indeed, that she herself had
well considered it.  But yet we could not help being shocked at the
thoughts of the coffin thus brought in; the lovely person before our
eyes who is, in all likelihood, so soon to fill it.

We were all silent still, the women in grief; I in a manner stunned.  She
would not ask me, she said; but would be glad, since it had thus earlier
than she had intended been brought in, that her two good friends would
walk in and look upon it.  They would be less shocked when it was made
more familiar to their eye: don't you lead back, said she, a starting
steed to the object he is apt to start at, in order to familiarize him to
it, and cure his starting?  The same reason will hold in this case.  Come,
my good friends, I will lead you in.

I took my leave; telling her she had done wrong, very wrong; and ought
not, by any means, to have such an object before her.

The women followed her in.--'Tis a strange sex!  Nothing is too shocking
for them to look upon, or see acted, that has but novelty and curiosity
in it.

Down I posted; got a chair; and was carried home, extremely shocked and
discomposed: yet, weighing the lady's arguments, I know not why I was so
affected--except, as she said, at the unusualness of the thing.

While I waited for a chair, Mrs. Smith came down, and told me that there
were devices and inscriptions upon the lid.  Lord bless me! is a coffin a
proper subject to display fancy upon?--But these great minds cannot avoid
doing extraordinary things!



LETTER XLVIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY MORN. SEPT. 1.


It is surprising, that I, a man, should be so much affected as I was, at
such an object as is the subject of my former letter; who also, in my
late uncle's case, and poor Belton's had the like before me, and the
directing of it: when she, a woman, of so weak and tender a frame, who
was to fill it (so soon perhaps to fill it!) could give orders about it,
and draw out the devices upon it, and explain them with so little concern
as the women tell me she did to them last night after I was gone.

I really was ill, and restless all night.  Thou wert the subject of my
execration, as she was of my admiration, all the time I was quite awake:
and, when I dozed, I dreamt of nothing but of flying hour-glasses,
deaths-heads, spades, mattocks, and eternity; the hint of her devices (as
given me by Mrs. Smith) running in my head.

However, not being able to keep away from Smith's, I went thither about
seven.  The lady was just gone out: she had slept better, I found, than
I, though her solemn repository was under her window, not far from her
bed-side.

I was prevailed upon by Mrs. Smith and her nurse Shelburne (Mrs. Lovick
being abroad with her) to go up and look at the devices.  Mrs. Lovick has
since shown me a copy of the draught by which all was ordered; and I will
give thee a sketch of the symbols.

The principal device, neatly etched on a plate of white metal, is a
crowned serpent, with its tail in its mouth, forming a ring, the emblem
of eternity: and in the circle made by it is this inscription:

                          CLARISSA HARLOWE.

                               April x.

                           [Then the year.]

                              AETAT. XIX.

For ornaments: at top, an hour-glass, winged.  At bottom, an urn.

Under the hour-glass, on another plate, this inscription:

      HERE the wicked cease from troubling: and HERE the
        weary be at rest.  Job. iii. 17.

Over the urn, near the bottom:

      Turn again unto thy rest, O my soul! for the Lord hath
        rewarded thee: And why?  Thou hast delivered my
        soul from death; mine eyes from tears; and my feet
        from falling.  Ps. cxvi. 7, 8.

Over this is the head of a white lily snapt short off, and just falling
from the stalk; and this inscription over that, between the principal
plate and the lily:

      The days of man are but as grass.  For he flourisheth as a
        flower of the field: for, as soon as the wind goeth over
        it, it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no
        more.  Ps. ciii. 15, 16.

She excused herself to the women, on the score of her youth, and being
used to draw for her needleworks, for having shown more fancy than would
perhaps be thought suitable on so solemn an occasion.

The date, April 10, she accounted for, as not being able to tell what her
closing-day would be; and as that was the fatal day of her leaving her
father's house.

She discharged the undertaker's bill after I went away, with as much
cheerfulness as she could ever have paid for the clothes she sold to
purchase this her palace: for such she called it; reflecting upon herself
for the expensiveness of it, saying, that they might observe in her, that
pride left not poor mortals to the last: but indeed she did not know but
her father would permit it, when furnished, to be carried down to be
deposited with her ancestors; and, in that case, she ought not to
discredit those ancestors in her appearance amongst them.

It is covered with fine black cloth, and lined with white satin; soon,
she said, to be tarnished with viler earth than any it could be covered
by.

The burial-dress was brought home with it.  The women had curiosity
enough, I suppose, to see her open that, if she did open it.--And,
perhaps, thou wouldst have been glad to have been present to have admired
it too!--

Mrs. Lovick said, she took the liberty to blame her; and wished the
removal of such an object--from her bed-chamber, at least: and was so
affected with the noble answer she made upon it, that she entered it down
the moment she left her.

'To persons in health, said she, this sight may be shocking; and the
preparation, and my unconcernedness in it, may appear affected: but to
me, who have had so gradual a weaning-time from the world, and so much
reason not to love it, I must say, I dwell on, I indulge, (and, strictly
speaking, I enjoy,) the thoughts of death.  For, believe me,' [looking
stedfastly at the awful receptacle,] 'believe what at this instant I feel
to be most true, That there is such a vast superiority of weight and
importance in the thought of death, and its hoped-for happy consequences,
that it in a manner annihilates all other considerations and concerns.
Believe me, my good friends, it does what nothing else can do: it teaches
me, by strengthening in me the force of the divinest example, to forgive
the injuries I have received; and shuts out the remembrance of past evils
from my soul.'

And now let me ask thee, Lovelace, Dost thou think that, when the time
shall come that thou shalt be obliged to launch into the boundless ocean
of eternity, thou wilt be able (any more than poor Belton) to act thy
part with such true heroism, as this sweet and tender blossom of a woman
has manifested, and continues to manifest!

Oh! no! it cannot be!--And why can't it be?--The reason is evident: she
has no wilful errors to look back upon with self-reproach--and her mind
is strengthened by the consolations which flow from that religious
rectitude which has been the guide of all her actions; and which has
taught her rather to choose to be a sufferer than an aggressor!

This was the support of the divine Socrates, as thou hast read.  When led
to execution, his wife lamenting that he should suffer being innocent,
Thou fool, said he, wouldst thou wish me to be guilty!



LETTER XLIX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, SEPT. 1.


How astonishing, in the midst of such affecting scenes, is thy mirth on
what thou callest my own aspirations!  Never, surely, was there such
another man in this world, thy talents and thy levity taken together!--
Surely, what I shall send thee with this will affect thee.  If not,
nothing can, till thy own hour come: and heavy will then thy reflections
be!

I am glad, however, that thou enablest me to assure the lady that thou
wilt no more molest her; that is to say, in other words, that, after
having ruined her fortunes, and all her worldly prospects, thou wilt be
so gracious, as to let her lie down and die in peace.

Thy giving up to poor Belton's sister the little legacy, and thy
undertaking to make Mowbray and Tourville follow thy example, are, I must
say to thy honour, of a piece with thy generosity to thy Rose-bud and her
Johnny; and to a number of other good actions in pecuniary matters:
although thy Rose-bud's is, I believe, the only instance, where a pretty
woman was concerned, of such a disinterested bounty.

Upon my faith, Lovelace, I love to praise thee; and often and often, as
thou knowest, have I studied for occasions to do it: insomuch that when,
for the life of me, I could not think of any thing done by thee that
deserved praise, I have taken pains to applaud the not ungraceful manner
in which thou hast performed actions that merited the gallows.

Now thou art so near, I will dispatch my servant to thee, if occasion
requires.  But, I fear, I shall soon give thee the news thou art
apprehensive of.  For I am just now sent for by Mrs. Smith; who has
ordered the messenger to tell me, that she knew not if the lady will be
alive when I come.


FRIDAY, SEPT. 1, TWO O'CLOCK, AT SMITH'S.

I could not close my letter in such an uncertainty as must have added to
your impatience.  For you have, on several occasions, convinced me, that
the suspense you love to give would be the greatest torment to you that
you could receive.  A common case with all aggressive and violent
spirits, I believe.  I will just mention then (your servant waiting here
till I have written) that the lady has had two very severe fits: in the
last of which whilst she lay, they sent to the doctor and Mr. Goddard,
who both advised that a messenger should be dispatched for me, as her
executor; being doubtful whether, if she had a third, it would not carry
her off.

She was tolerably recovered by the time I cane; and the doctor made her
promise before me, that, while she was so weak, she would not attempt any
more to go abroad; for, by Mrs. Lovick's description, who attended her,
the shortness of her breath, her extreme weakness, and the fervour of her
devotions when at church, were contraries, which, pulling different ways
(the soul aspiring, the body sinking) tore her tender frame in pieces.

So much for the present.  I shall detain Will. no longer than just to beg
that you will send me back this packet and the last.  Your memory is so
good, that once reading is all you ever give, or need to give, to any
thing.  And who but ourselves can make out our characters, were you
inclined to let any body see what passes between us?  If I cannot be
obliged, I shall be tempted to withhold what I write, till I have time to
take a copy of it.*


* It may not be amiss to observe, that Mr. Belford's solicitude to get
back his letters was owing to his desire of fulfilling the lady's wishes
that he would furnish Miss Howe with materials to vindicate her memory.


A letter from Miss Howe is just now brought by a particular messenger,
who says he must carry back a few lines in return.  But, as the lady is
just retired to lie down, the man is to call again by-and-by.



LETTER L

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SEPT. 1, TWELVE O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.


I send you the papers with this.  You must account to me honestly and
fairly, when I see you, for the earnestness with which you write for
them.  And then also will we talk about the contents of your last
dispatch, and about some of your severe and unfriendly reflections.

Mean time, whatever thou dost, don't let the wonderful creature leave us!
Set before her the sin of her preparation, as if she thought she could
depart when she pleased.  She'll persuade herself, at this rate, that she
has nothing to do, when all is ready, but to lie down, and go to sleep:
and such a lively fancy as her's will make a reality of a jest at any
time.

A jest I call all that has passed between her and me; a mere jest to die
for--For has not her triumph over me, from first to last, been infinitely
greater than her sufferings from me?

Would the sacred regard I have for her purity, even for her personal as
well as intellectual purity, permit, I could prove this as clear as the
sun.  Tell, therefore, the dear creature that she must not be wicked in
her piety.  There is a too much, as well as too little, even in
righteousness.  Perhaps she does not think of that.--Oh! that she would
have permitted my attendance, as obligingly as she does of thine!--The
dear soul used to love humour.  I remember the time that she knew how to
smile at a piece of apropos humour.  And, let me tell thee, a smile upon
the lips, or a sparkling in the eye, must have had its correspondent
cheerfulness in a heart so sincere as her's.

Tell the doctor I will make over all my possessions, and all my
reversions, to him, if he will but prolong her life for one twelvemonth
to come.  But for one twelvemonth, Jack!--He will lose all his reputation
with me, and I shall treat him as Belton did his doctor, if he cannot do
this for me, on so young a subject.  But nineteen, Belford!--nineteen
cannot so soon die of grief, if the doctor deserve that title; and so
blooming and so fine a constitution as she had but three or four months
ago!

But what need the doctor to ask her leave to write to her friends?  Could
he not have done it without letting her know any thing of the matter?
That was one of the likeliest means that could be thought of to bring
some of them about her, since she is so desirous to see them.  At least
it would have induced them to send up her favourite Norton.  But these
plaguy solemn fellows are great traders in parade.  They'll cram down
your throat their poisonous drugs by wholesale, without asking you a
question; and have the assurance to own it to be prescribing: but when
they are to do good, they are to require your consent.

How the dear creature's character rises in every line of thy letters!
But it is owing to the uncommon occasions she has met with that she
blazes out upon us with such a meridian lustre.  How, but for those
occasions, could her noble sentiments, her prudent consideration, her
forgiving spirit, her exalted benevolence, and her equanimity in view of
the most shocking prospects (which set her in a light so superior to all
her sex, and even to the philosophers of antiquity) have been manifested?

I know thou wilt think I am going to claim some merit to myself, for
having given her such opportunities of signalizing her virtues.  But I am
not; for, if I did, I must share that merit with her implacable
relations, who would justly be entitled to two-thirds of it, at least:
and my soul disdains a partnership in any thing with such a family.

But this I mention as an answer to thy reproaches, that I could be so
little edified by perfections, to which, thou supposest, I was for so
long together daily and hourly a personal witness--when, admirable as she
was in all she said, and in all she did, occasion had not at that time
ripened, and called forth, those amazing perfections which now astonish
and confound me.

Hence it is that I admire her more than ever; and that my love for her is
less personal, as I may say, more intellectual, than ever I thought it
could be to a woman.

Hence also it is that I am confident (would it please the Fates to spare
her, and make her mine) I could love her with a purity that would draw on
my own FUTURE, as well as ensure her TEMPORAL, happiness.--And hence, by
necessary consequence, shall I be the most miserable of all men, if I am
deprived of her.

Thou severely reflectest upon me for my levity: the Abbey instance in
thine eye, I suppose.  And I will be ingenuous enough to own, that as
thou seest not my heart, there may be passages, in every one of my
letters, which (the melancholy occasion considered) deserve thy most
pointed rebukes.  But faith, Jack, thou art such a tragi-comical mortal,
with thy leaden aspirations at one time, and thy flying hour-glasses and
dreaming terrors at another, that, as Prior says, What serious is, thou
turn'st to farce; and it is impossible to keep within the bounds of
decorum or gravity when one reads what thou writest.

But to restrain myself (for my constitutional gayety was ready to run
away with me again) I will repeat, I must ever repeat, that I am most
egregiously affected with the circumstances of the case: and, were this
paragon actually to quit the world, should never enjoy myself one hour
together, though I were to live to the age of Methusalem.

Indeed it is to this deep concern, that my levity is owing: for I
struggle and struggle, and try to buffet down my cruel reflections as
they rise; and when I cannot, I am forced, as I have often said, to try
to make myself laugh, that I may not cry; for one or other I must do: and
is it not philosophy carried to the highest pitch, for a man to conquer
such tumults of soul as I am sometimes agitated by, and, in the very
height of the storm, to be able to quaver out an horse-laugh?

Your Seneca's, your Epictetus's, and the rest of your stoical tribe, with
all their apathy nonsense, could not come up to this.  They could forbear
wry faces: bodily pains they could well enough seem to support; and that
was all: but the pangs of their own smitten-down souls they could not
laugh over, though they could at the follies of others.  They read grave
lectures; but they were grave.  This high point of philosophy, to laugh
and be merry in the midst of the most soul-harrowing woes, when the
heart-strings are just bursting asunder, was reserved for thy Lovelace.

There is something owing to constitution, I own; and that this is the
laughing-time of my life.  For what a woe must that be, which for an hour
together can mortify a man six or seven and twenty, in high blood and
spirits, of a naturally gay disposition, who can sing, dance, and
scribble, and take and give delight in them all?--But then my grief, as
my joy, is sharper-pointed than most other men's; and, like what Dolly
Welby once told me, describing the parturient throes, if there were not
lucid intervals, if they did not come and go, there would be no bearing
them.


***


After all, as I am so little distant from the dear creature, and as she
is so very ill, I think I cannot excuse myself from making her one visit.
Nevertheless, if I thought her so near--[what word shall I use, that my
soul is not shocked at!] and that she would be too much discomposed by a
visit, I would not think of it.--Yet how can I bear the recollection,
that, when she last went from me (her innocence so triumphant over my
premeditated guilt, as was enough to reconcile her to life, and to set
her above the sense of injuries so nobly sustained, that) she should then
depart with an incurable fracture in her heart; and that that should be
the last time I should ever see her!--How, how, can I bear this
reflection!

O Jack! how my conscience, that gives edge even to thy blunt reflections,
tears me!--Even this moment would I give the world to push the cruel
reproacher from me by one ray of my usual gayety!--Sick of myself!--sick
of the remembrance of my vile plots; and of my light, my momentary
ecstacy [villanous burglar, felon, thief, that I was!] which has brought
on me such durable and such heavy remorse! what would I give that I had
not been guilty of such barbarous and ungrateful perfidy to the most
excellent of God's creatures!

I would end, methinks, with one sprightlier line!--but it will not be.--
Let me tell thee then, and rejoice at it if thou wilt, that I am

Inexpressibly miserable!



LETTER LI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. MORNING, SEPT. 2.


I have some little pleasure given me by thine, just now brought me.  I
see now that thou hast a little humanity left.  Would to Heaven, for the
dear lady's sake, as well as for thy own, that thou hadst rummaged it up
from all the dark forgotten corners of thy soul a little sooner!

The lady is alive, and serene, and calm, and has all her noble intellects
clear and strong: but nineteen will not however save her.  She says she
will now content herself with her closet duties, and the visits of the
parish-minister; and will not attempt to go out.  Nor, indeed, will she,
I am afraid, ever walk up or down a pair of stairs again.

I am sorry at my soul to have this to say: but it would be a folly to
flatter thee.

As to thy seeing her, I believe the least hint of that sort, now, would
cut off some hours of her life.

What has contributed to her serenity, it seems, is, that taking the alarm
her fits gave her, she has entirely finished, and signed and sealed, her
last will: which she had deferred till this time, in hopes, as she said,
of some good news from Harlowe-place; which would have induced her to
alter some passages in it.

Miss Howe's letter was not given her till four in the afternoon,
yesterday; at which time the messenger returned for an answer.  She
admitted him into her presence in the dining-room, ill as she then was,
and she would have written a few lines, as desired by Miss Howe; but, not
being able to hold a pen, she bid the messenger tell her that she hoped
to be well enough to write a long letter by the next day's post; and
would not now detain him.


***


SATURDAY, SIX IN THE AFTERNOON.

I called just now, and found the lady writing to Miss Howe.  She made me
a melancholy compliment, that she showed me not Miss Howe's letter,
because I should soon have that and all her papers before me.  But she
told me that Miss Howe had very considerably obviated to Colonel Morden
several things which might have occasioned misapprehensions between him
and me; and had likewise put a lighter construction, for the sake of
peace, on some of your actions than they deserved.

She added, that her cousin Morden was warmly engaged in her favour with
her friends: and one good piece of news Miss Howe's letter contained,
that her father would give up some matters, which (appertaining to her of
right) would make my executorship the easier in some particulars that had
given her a little pain.

She owned she had been obliged to leave off (in the letter she was
writing) through weakness.

Will. says he shall reach you to-night.  I shall send in the morning;
and, if I find her not worse, will ride to Edgware, and return in the
afternoon.



LETTER LII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 29.


MY DEAREST FRIEND,

We are at length returned to our own home.  I had intended to wait on you
in London: but my mother is very ill--Alas! my dear, she is very ill
indeed--and you are likewise very ill--I see that by your's of the 25th--
What shall I do, if I lose two such near, and dear, and tender friends?
She was taken ill yesterday at our last stage in our return home--and has
a violent surfeit and fever, and the doctors are doubtful about her.

If she should die, how will all my pertnesses to her fly in my face!--
Why, why, did I ever vex her?  She says I have been all duty and
obedience!--She kindly forgets all my faults, and remembers every thing I
have been so happy as to oblige her in.  And this cuts me to the heart.

I see, I see, my dear, that you are very bad--and I cannot bear it.  Do,
my beloved Miss Harlowe, if you can be better, do, for my sake, be
better; and send me word of it.  Let the bearer bring me a line.  Be sure
you send me a line.  If I lose you, my more than sister, and lose my
mother, I shall distrust my own conduct, and will not marry.  And why
should I?--Creeping, cringing in courtship!--O my dear, these men are a
vile race of reptiles in our day, and mere bears in their own.  See in
Lovelace all that is desirable in figure, in birth, and in fortune: but
in his heart a devil!--See in Hickman--Indeed, my dear, I cannot tell
what any body can see in Hickman, to be always preaching in his favour.
And is it to be expected that I, who could hardly bear control from a
mother, should take it from a husband?--from one too, who has neither
more wit, nor more understanding, than myself? yet he to be my
instructor!--So he will, I suppose; but more by the insolence of his will
than by the merit of his counsel.  It is in vain to think of it.  I
cannot be a wife to any man breathing whom I at present know.  This I the
rather mention now, because, on my mother's danger, I know you will be
for pressing me the sooner to throw myself into another sort of
protection, should I be deprived of her.  But no more of this subject, or
indeed of any other; for I am obliged to attend my mamma, who cannot bear
me out of her sight.


***


WEDNESDAY, AUG. 30.

My mother, Heaven be praised! has had a fine night, and is much better.
Her fever has yielded to medicine! and now I can write once more with
freedom and ease to you, in hopes that you also are better.  If this be
granted to my prayers, I shall again be happy, I writhe with still the
more alacrity as I have an opportunity given me to touch upon a subject
in which you are nearly concerned.

You must know then, my dear, that your cousin Morden has been here with
me.  He told me of an interview he had on Monday at Lord M.'s with
Lovelace; and asked me abundance of questions about you, and about that
villanous man.

I could have raised a fine flame between them if I would: but, observing
that he is a man of very lively passions, and believing you would be
miserable if any thing should happen to him from a quarrel with a man who
is known to have so many advantages at his sword, I made not the worst of
the subjects we talked of.  But, as I could not tell untruths in his
favour, you must think I said enough to make him curse the wretch.

I don't find, well as they all used to respect Colonel Morden, that he
has influence enough upon them to bring them to any terms of
reconciliation.

What can they mean by it!--But your brother is come home, it seems: so,
the honour of the house, the reputation of the family, is all the cry!

The Colonel is exceedingly out of humour with them all.  Yet has he not
hitherto, it seems, seen your brutal brother.--I told him how ill you
were, and communicated to him some of the contents of your letter.  He
admired you, cursed Lovelace, and raved against all your family.--He
declared that they were all unworthy of you.

At his earnest request, I permitted him to take some brief notes of such
of the contents of your letter to me as I thought I could read to him;
and, particularly, of your melancholy conclusion.*


* See Letter XXXII. of this volume.


He says that none of your friends think you are so ill as you are; nor
will believe it.  He is sure they all love you; and that dearly too.

If they do, their present hardness of heart will be the subject of
everlasting remorse to them should you be taken from us--but now it seems
[barbarous wretches!] you are to suffer within an inch of your life.

He asked me questions about Mr. Belford: and, when he had heard what I
had to say of that gentleman, and his disinterested services to you, he
raved at some villanous surmises thrown out against you by that officious
pedant, Brand: who, but for his gown, I find, would come off poorly enough
between your cousin and Lovelace.

He was so uneasy about you himself, that on Thursday, the 24th, he sent
up an honest serious man,* one Alston, a gentleman farmer, to inquire of
your condition, your visiters, and the like; who brought him word that
you was very ill, and was put to great straits to support yourself: but
as this was told him by the gentlewoman of the house where you lodge,
who, it seems, mingled it with some tart, though deserved, reflections
upon your relations' cruelty, it was not credited by them: and I myself
hope it cannot be true; for surely you could not be so unjust, I will
say, to my friendship, as to suffer any inconveniencies for want of
money.  I think I could not forgive you, if it were so.


* See Letter XXIII. ibid.


The Colonel (as one of your trustees) is resolved to see you put into
possession of your estate: and, in the mean time, he has actually engaged
them to remit to him for you the produce of it accrued since your
grandfather's death, (a very considerable sum;) and proposes himself to
attend you with it.  But, by a hint he dropt, I find you had disappointed
some people's littleness, by not writing to them for money and supplies;
since they were determined to distress you, and to put you at defiance.

Like all the rest!--I hope I may say that without offence.

Your cousin imagines that, before a reconciliation takes place, they will
insist that you make such a will, as to that estate, as they shall
approve of: but he declares that he will not go out of England till he
has seen justice done you by every body; and that you shall not be
imposed on either by friend or foe--

By relation or foe, should he not have said?--for a friend will not
impose upon a friend.

So, my dear, you are to buy your peace, if some people are to have their
wills!

Your cousin [not I, my dear, though it was always my opinion*] says, that
the whole family is too rich to be either humble, considerate, or
contented.  And as for himself, he has an ample fortune, he says, and
thinks of leaving it wholly to you.


* See Vol. I. Letter X.


Had this villain Lovelace consulted his worldly interest only, what a
fortune would he have had in you, even although your marrying him had
deprived you of a paternal share!

I am obliged to leave off here.  But having a good deal still more to
write, and my mother better, I will pursue the subject in another letter,
although I send both together.  I need not say how much I am, and will
ever be,

Your affectionate, &c.
ANNA HOWE.



LETTER LIII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, AUGUST 31.


The Colonel thought fit once, in praise of Lovelace's generosity, to say,
that (as a man of honour ought) he took to himself all the blame, and
acquitted you of the consequences of the precipitate step you had taken;
since he said, as you loved him, and was in his power, he must have had
advantages which he would not have had, if you had continued at your
father's, or at any friend's.

Mighty generous, I said, (were it as he supposed,) in such insolent
reflectors, the best of them; who pretend to clear reputations which
never had been sullied but by falling into their dirty acquaintance! but
in this case, I averred, that there was no need of any thing but the
strictest truth, to demonstrate Lovelace to be the blackest of villains,
you the brightest of innocents.

This he catched at; and swore, that if any thing uncommon or barbarous in
the seduction were to come out, as indeed one of the letters you had
written to your friends, and which had been shown him, very strongly
implied; that is to say, my dear, if any thing worse than perjury, breach
of faith, and abuse of a generous confidence, were to appear! [sorry
fellows!] he would avenge his cousin to the utmost.

I urged your apprehensions on this head from your last letter to me: but
he seemed capable of taking what I know to be real greatness of soul, in
an unworthy sense: for he mentioned directly upon it the expectations
your friends had, that you should (previous to any reconciliation with
them) appear in a court of justice against the villain--IF you could do
it with the advantage to yourself that I hinted might be done.

And truly, if I would have heard him, he had indelicacy enough to have
gone into the nature of the proof of the crime upon which they wanted to
have Lovelace arraigned.  Yet this is a man improved by travel and
learning!--Upon my word, my dear, I, who have been accustomed to the most
delicate conversation ever since I had the honour to know you, despise
this sex from the gentleman down to the peasant.

Upon the whole, I find that Mr. Morden has a very slender notion of
women's virtue in particular cases: for which reason I put him down,
though your favourite, as one who is not entitled to cast the first
stone.

I never knew a man who deserved to be well thought of himself for his
morals, who had a slight opinion of the virtue of our sex in general.
For if, from the difference of temperament and education, modesty,
chastity, and piety too, are not to be found in our sex preferably to
the other, I should think it a sign of much worse nature in ours.

He even hinted (as from your relations indeed) that it is impossible
but there most be some will where there is much love.

These sort of reflections are enough to make a woman, who has at heart
her own honour and the honour of her sex, to look about her, and consider
what she is doing when she enters into an intimacy with these wretches;
since it is plain, that whenever she throws herself into the power of a
man, and leaves for him her parents or guardians, every body will believe
it to be owing more to her good luck than to her discretion if there be
not an end of her virtue: and let the man be ever such a villain to her,
she must take into her own bosom a share of his guilty baseness.

I am writing to general cases.  You, my dear, are out of the question.
Your story, as I have heretofore said, will afford a warning as well as
an example:* For who is it that will not infer, that if a person of your
fortune, character, and merit, could not escape ruin, after she had put
herself into the power of her hyaena, what can a thoughtless, fond, giddy
creature expect?


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXIII.


Every man, they will say, is not a LOVELACE--True: but then, neither is
every woman a CLARISSA.  And allow for the one and for the other the
example must be of general use.

I prepared Mr. Morden to expect your appointment of Mr. Belford for an
office that we both hope he will have no occasion to act in (nor any body
else) for many, very many years to come.  He was at first startled at it:
but, upon hearing such of your reasons as had satisfied me, he only said
that such an appointment, were it to take place, would exceedingly affect
his other cousins.

He told me, he had a copy of Lovelace's letter to you, imploring your
pardon, and offering to undergo any penance to procure it;* and also of
your answer to it.**


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXIX.
** Ibid. Letter LXXXIII.


I find he is willing to hope that a marriage between you may still take
place; which, he says, will heal up all breaches.

I would have written much more--on the following particulars especially;
to wit, of the wretched man's hunting you out of your lodgings: of your
relations' strange implacableness, [I am in haste, and cannot think of a
word you would like better just now:] of your last letter to Lovelace, to
divert him from pursuing you: of your aunt Hervey's penitential
conversation with Mrs. Norton: of Mr. Wyerley's renewed address: of your
lessons to me in Hickman's behalf, so approvable, were the man more so
than he is; but indeed I am offended with him at this instant, and have
been for these two days: of your sister's transportation-project: and of
twenty and twenty other things: but am obliged to leave off, to attend my
two cousins Spilsworth, and my cousin Herbert, who are come to visit us
on account of my mother's illness--I will therefore dispatch these by
Rogers; and if my mother gets well soon (as I hope she will) I am
resolved to see you in town, and tell you every thing that now is upon my
mind; and particularly, mingling my soul with your's, how much I am, and
will ever be, my dearest, dear friend,

Your affectionate
ANNA HOWE.

Let Rogers bring one line, I pray you.  I thought to have sent him this
      afternoon; but he cannot set out till to-morrow morning early.

I cannot express how much your staggering lines and your conclusion
      affect me!



LETTER LIV

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SUNDAY EVENING, SEPT. 3.


I wonder not at the impatience your servant tells me you express to hear
from me.  I was designing to write you a long letter, and was just
returned from Smith's for that purpose; but, since you are urgent, you
must be contented with a short one.

I attended the lady this morning, just before I set out for Edgware.  She
was so ill over-night, that she was obliged to leave unfinished her
letter to Miss Howe.  But early this morning she made an end of it, and
just sealed it up as I came.  She was so fatigued with writing, that she
told me she would lie down after I was gone, and endeavour to recruit her
spirits.

They had sent for Mr. Goddard, when she was so ill last night; and not
being able to see him out of her own chamber, he, for the first time, saw
her house, as she calls it.  He was extremely shocked and concerned at
it; and chid Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick for not persuading her to have
such an object removed form her bed-chamber: and when they excused
themselves on the little authority it was reasonable to suppose they must
have with a lady so much their superior, he reflected warmly on those who
had more authority, and who left her to proceed with such a shocking and
solemn whimsy, as he called it.

It is placed near the window, like a harpsichord, though covered over to
the ground: and when she is so ill that she cannot well go to her closet,
she writes and reads upon it, as others would upon a desk or table.  But
(only as she was so ill last night) she chooses not to see any body in
that apartment.

I went to Edgware; and, returning in the evening, attended her again.
She had a letter brought her from Mrs. Norton (a long one, as it seems by
its bulk,) just before I came.  But she had not opened it; and said, that
as she was pretty calm and composed, she was afraid to look into the
contents, lest she should be ruffled; expecting now to hear of nothing
that could do her good or give her pleasure from that good woman's dear
hard-hearted neighbours, as she called her own relations.

Seeing her so weak and ill, I withdrew; nor did she desire me to tarry,
as sometimes she does, when I make a motion to depart.

I had some hints, as I went away, from Mrs. Smith, that she had
appropriated that evening to some offices, that were to save trouble, as
she called it, after her departure; and had been giving orders to her
nurse, and to Mrs. Lovick, and Mrs. Smith, about what she would have done
when she was gone; and I believe they were of a very delicate and
affecting nature; but Mrs. Smith descended not to particulars.

The doctor had been with her, as well as Mr. Goddard; and they both
joined with great earnestness to persuade her to have her house removed
out of her sight; but she assured them that it gave her pleasure and
spirits; and, being a necessary preparation, she wondered they should be
surprised at it, when she had not any of her family about her, or any old
acquaintance, on whose care and exactness in these punctilios, as she
called them, she could rely.

The doctor told Mrs. Smith, that he believed she would hold out long
enough for any of her friends to have notice of her state, and to see
her; and hardly longer; and since he could not find that she had any
certainty of seeing her cousin Morden, (which made it plain that her
relations continued inflexible,) he would go home, and write a letter to
her father, take it as she would.

She had spent great part of the day in intense devotions; and to-morrow
morning she is to have with her the same clergyman who has often attended
her; from whose hands she will again receive the sacrament.

Thou seest, Lovelace, that all is preparing, that all will be ready; and
I am to attend her to-morrow afternoon, to take some instructions from
her in relation to my part in the office to be performed for her.  And
thus, omitting the particulars of a fine conversation between her and
Mrs. Lovick, which the latter acquainted me with, as well as another
between her and the doctor and apothecary, which I had a design this
evening to give you, they being of a very affecting nature, I have
yielded to your impatience.

   I shall dispatch Harry to-morrow morning early with her letter to Miss
      Howe: an offer she took very kindly; as she is extremely
      solicitous to lessen that young lady's apprehensions for her on
      not hearing from her by Saturday's post: and yet, if she write
      truth, as no doubt but she will, how can her apprehensions be
      lessened?



LETTER LV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, SEPT. 2.


I write, my beloved Miss Howe, though very ill still: but I could not by
the return of your messenger; for I was then unable to hold a pen.

Your mother's illness (as mentioned in the first part of your letter,)
gave me great distress for you, till I read farther.  You bewailed it as
became a daughter so sensible.  May you be blessed in each other for
many, very many years to come!  I doubt not, that even this sudden and
grievous indisposition, by the frame it has put you in, and the
apprehension it has given you of losing so dear a mother, will contribute
to the happiness I wish you: for, alas! my dear, we seldom know how to
value the blessings we enjoy, till we are in danger of losing them, or
have actually lost them: and then, what would we give to have them
restored to us!

What, I wonder, has again happened between you and Mr. Hickman?  Although
I know not, I dare say it is owing to some petty petulance, to some
half-ungenerous advantage taken of his obligingness and assiduity.  Will
you never, my dear, give the weight you and all our sex ought to give to
the qualities of sobriety and regularity of life and manners in that sex?
Must bold creatures, and forward spirits, for ever, and by the best and
wisest of us, as well as by the indiscreetest, be the most kindly
treated?

My dear friends know not that I have actually suffered within less than
an inch of my life.

Poor Mr. Brand! he meant well, I believe.  I am afraid all will turn
heavily upon him, when he probably imagined that he was taking the best
method to oblige.  But were he not to have been so light of belief, and
so weakly officious; and had given a more favourable, and, it would be
strange if I could not say, a juster report; things would have been,
nevertheless, exactly as they are.

I must lay down my pen.  I am very ill.  I believe I shall be better
by-and-by.  The bad writing would betray me, although I had a mind to
keep from you what the event must soon--


***


Now I resume my trembling pen.  Excuse the unsteady writing.  It will
be so--

I have wanted no money: so don't be angry about such a trifle as money.
Yet I am glad of what you inclined me to hope, that my friends will give
up the produce of my grandfather's estate since it has been in their
hands: because, knowing it to be my right, and that they could not want
it, I had already disposed of a good part of it; and could only hope they
would be willing to give it up at my last request.  And now how rich
shall I think myself in this my last stage!--And yet I did not want
before--indeed I did not--for who, that has many superfluities, can be
said to want!

Do not, my dear friend, be concerned that I call it my last stage; For
what is even the long life which in high health we wish for?  What, but,
as we go along, a life of apprehension, sometimes for our friends,
oftener for ourselves?  And at last, when arrived at the old age we
covet, one heavy loss or deprivation having succeeded another, we see
ourselves stript, as I may say, of every one we loved; and find ourselves
exposed, as uncompanionable poor creatures, to the slights, to the
contempts, of jostling youth, who want to push us off the stage, in hopes
to possess what we have:--and, superadded to all, our own infirmities
every day increasing: of themselves enough to make the life we wished for
the greatest disease of all!  Don't you remember the lines of Howard,
which once you read to me in my ivy-bower?*


* These are the lines the lady refers to:

      From death we rose to life: 'tis but the same,
      Through life to pass again from whence we came.
      With shame we see our PASSIONS can prevail,
      Where reason, certainty, and virtue fail.
      HONOUR, that empty name, can death despise;    |
      SCORN'D LOVE to death, as to a refuge, flies;  |
      And SORROW waits for death with longing eyes.  |
      HOPE triumphs o'er the thoughts of death; and FATE
      Cheats fools, and flatters the unfortunate.
      We fear to lose, what a small time must waste,
      Till life itself grows the disease at last.
      Begging for life, we beg for more decay,
      And to be long a dying only pray.


In the disposition of what belongs to me, I have endeavoured to do every
thing in the justest and best manner I could think of; putting myself in
my relations' places, and, in the greater points, ordering my matters as
if no misunderstanding had happened.

I hope they will not think much of some bequests where wanted, and where
due from my gratitude: but if they should, what is done, is done; and I
cannot now help it.  Yet I must repeat, that I hope, I hope, I have
pleased every one of them.  For I would not, on any account, have it
thought that, in my last disposition, any thing undaughterly, unsisterly,
or unlike a kinswoman, should have had place in a mind that is a truly
free (as I will presume to say) from all resentment, that it now
overflows with gratitude and blessings for the good I have received,
although it be not all that my heart wished to receive.  Were it even an
hardship that I was not favoured with more, what is it but an hardship
of half a year, against the most indulgent goodness of eighteen years and
an half, that ever was shown to a daughter?

My cousin, you tell me, thinks I was off my guard, and that I was taken
at some advantage.  Indeed, my dear, I was not.  Indeed I gave no room
for advantage to be taken of me.  I hope, one day, that will be seen, if
I have the justice done me which Mr. Belford assures me of.

I should hope that my cousin has not taken the liberties which you (by an
observation not, in general, unjust) seem to charge him with.  For it is
sad to think, that the generality of that sex should make so light of
crimes, which they justly hold so unpardonable in their own most intimate
relations of our's--yet cannot commit them without doing such injuries to
other families as they think themselves obliged to resent unto death,
when offered to their own.

But we women are to often to blame on this head; since the most virtuous
among us seldom make virtue the test of their approbation of the other
sex; insomuch that a man may glory in his wickedness of this sort without
being rejected on that account, even to the faces of women of
unquestionable virtue.  Hence it is, that a libertine seldom thinks
himself concerned so much as to save appearances: And what is it not that
our sex suffers in their opinion on this very score?  And what have I,
more than many others, to answer for on this account in the world's eye?

May my story be a warning to all, how they prefer a libertine to a man of
true honour; and how they permit themselves to be misled (where they mean
the best) by the specious, yet foolish hope of subduing riveted habits,
and, as I may say, of altering natures!--The more foolish, as constant
experience might convince us, that there is hardly one in ten, of even
tolerably happy marriages, in which the wife keeps the hold in the
husband's affections, which she had in the lover's.  What influence then
can she hope to have over the morals of an avowed libertine, who marries
perhaps for conveniency, who despises the tie, and whom, it is too
probable, nothing but old age, or sickness, or disease, (the consequence
of ruinous riot,) can reclaim?

I am very glad you gave my cous--


SUNDAY MORNING, SEPT. 3, SIX O'CLOCK.

Hither I had written, and was forced to quit my pen.  And so much weaker
and worse I grew, that had I resumed it, to have closed here, it must
have been with such trembling unsteadiness, that it would have given you
more concern for me, than the delay of sending it away by last night's
post can do.  I deferred it, therefore, to see how it would please God to
deal with me.  And I find myself, after a better night than I expected,
lively and clear; and hope to give a proof that I do, in the continuation
of my letter, which I will pursue as currently as if I had not left off.

I am glad that you so considerately gave my cousin Morden favourable
impressions of Mr. Belford; since, otherwise, some misunderstanding might
have happened between them: for although I hope this Mr. Belford is an
altered man, and in time will be a reformed one, yet is he one of those
high spirits that has been accustomed to resent imaginary indignities to
himself, when, I believe, he has not been studious to avoid giving real
offences to others; men of this cast acting as if they thought all the
world was made to bar with them, and they with nobody in it.

Mr. Lovelace, you tell me, thought fit to intrust my cousin with the copy
of his letter of penitence to me, and with my answer to it, rejecting him
and his suit: and Mr. Belford, moreover, acquaints me, how much concerned
Mr. Lovelace is for his baseness, and how freely he accused himself to my
cousin.  This shows, that the true bravery of spirit is to be above doing
a vile action; and that nothing subjects the human mind to so much
meanness, as the consciousness of having done wilful wrong to our fellow
creatures.  How low, how sordid, are the submissions which elaborate
baseness compels! that that wretch could treat me as he did, and then
could so poorly creep to me for forgiveness of crimes so wilful, so
black, and so premeditated! how my soul despised him for his meanness on
a certain occasion, of which you will one day be informed!* and him whose
actions one's heart despises, it is far from being difficult to reject,
had one ever so partially favoured him once.


* Meaning his meditated second violence (See Vol. VI. Letter XXXVI.) and
his succeeding letters to her, supplicating for her pardon.


Yet am I glad this violent spirit can thus creep; that, like a poisonous
serpent, he can thus coil himself, and hide his head in his own narrow
circlets; because this stooping, this abasement, gives me hope that no
farther mischief will ensue.

All my apprehension is, what may happen when I am gone; lest then my
cousin, or any other of my family, should endeavour to avenge me, and
risk their own more precious lives on that account.

If that part of Cain's curse were Mr. Lovelace's, to be a fugitive and
vagabond in the earth; that is to say, if it meant no more harm to him
than that he should be obliged to travel, as it seems he intends, (though
I wish him no ill in his travels;) and I could know it; then should I be
easy in the hoped-for safety of my friends from his skilful violence--Oh!
that I could hear he was a thousand miles off!

When I began this letter, I did not think I could have run to such a
length.  But 'tis to YOU, my dearest friend, and you have a title to the
spirits you raise and support; for they are no longer mine, and will
subside the moment I cease writing to you.

But what do you bid me hope for, when you tell me that, if your mother's
health will permit, you will see me in town?  I hope your mother's health
will be perfected as you wish; but I dare not promise myself so great a
favour; so great a blessing, I will call it--and indeed I know not if I
should be able to bear it now!

Yet one comfort it is in your power to give me; and that is, let me know,
and very speedily it must be, if you wish to oblige me, that all matters
are made up between you and Mr. Hickman; to whom, I see, you are
resolved, with all your bravery of spirit, to owe a multitude of
obligations for his patience with your flightiness.  Think of this, my
dear proud friend! and think, likewise, of what I have often told you,
that PRIDE, in man or woman, is an extreme that hardly ever fails, sooner
or later, to bring forth its mortifying CONTRARY.

May you, my dear Miss Howe, have no discomforts but what you make to
yourself! as it will be in your own power to lessen such as these, they
ought to be your punishment if you do not.  There is no such thing as
perfect happiness here, since the busy mind will make to itself evils,
were it to find none.  You will, therefore, pardon this limited wish,
strange as it may appear, till you consider it: for to wish you no
infelicity, either within or without you, were to wish you what can never
happen in this world; and what perhaps ought not to be wished for, if by
a wish one could give one's friend such an exemption; since we are not to
live here always.

We must not, in short, expect that our roses will grow without thorns:
but then they are useful and instructive thorns: which, by pricking the
fingers of the too-hasty plucker, teach future caution.  And who knows
not that difficulty gives poignancy to our enjoyments; which are apt to
lose their relish with us when they are over easily obtained?

I must conclude--

God for ever bless you, and all you love and honour, and reward you here
and hereafter for your kindness to

Your ever obliged and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LVI

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[IN ANSWER TO HER'S OF THURSDAY, AUGUST 24.  SEE LETTER XXX. OF THIS
VOLUME.]
THURSDAY, AUG. 31.


I had written sooner, my dearest young lady, but that I have been
endeavouring, ever since the receipt of your last letter, to obtain a
private audience of your mother, in hopes of leave to communicate it to
her.  But last night I was surprised by an invitation to breakfast at
Harlowe-place this morning; and the chariot came early to fetch me--an
honour I did not expect.

When I came, I found there was to be a meeting of all your family with
Col. Morden, at Harlowe-place; and it was proposed by your mother, and
consented to, that I should be present.  Your cousin, I understand, had
with difficulty brought this meeting to bear; for your brother had before
industriously avoided all conversation with him on the affecting subject;
urging that it was not necessary to talk to Mr. Morden upon it, who,
being a remoter relation than themselves, had no business to make himself
a judge of their conduct to their daughter, their niece, and their
sister; especially as he had declared himself in her favour; adding, that
he should hardly have patience to be questioned by Mr. Morden on that
head.

I was in hopes that your mother would have given me an opportunity of
talking with her alone before the company met; but she seemed studiously
to avoid it; I dare say, however, not with her inclination.

I was ordered in just before Mr. Morden came; and was bid to sit down--
which I did in the window.

The Colonel, when he came, began the discourse, by renewing, as he called
it, his solicitations in your favour.  He set before them your penitence;
your ill health; your virtue, though once betrayed, and basely used; he
then read to them Mr. Lovelace's letter, a most contrite one indeed,* and
your high-souled answer;** for that was what he justly called it; and he
treated as it deserved Mr. Brand's officious information, (of which I had
before heard he had made them ashamed,) by representations founded upon
inquiries made by Mr. Alston,*** whom he had procured to go up on purpose
to acquaint himself with your manner of life, and what was meant by the
visits of that Mr. Belford.


* See Vol. VII. LXXIX.
** Ibid. Letter LXXXIII.
*** See Vol. VIII. Letter XXIII.


He then told them, that he had the day before waited upon Miss Howe, and
had been shown a letter from you to her,* and permitted to take some
memorandums from it, in which you appeared, both by handwriting, and the
contents, to be so very ill, that it seemed doubtful to him, if it were
possible for you to get over it.  And when he read to them that passage,
where you ask Miss Howe, 'What can be done for you now, were your friends
to be ever so favourable? and wish for their sakes, more than for your
own, that they would still relent;' and then say, 'You are very ill--you
must drop your pen--and ask excuse for your crooked writing; and take, as
it were, a last farewell of Miss Howe;--adieu, my dear, adieu,' are your
words--


* Ibid. Letter XXXIII.


O my child! my child! said you mamma, weeping, and clasping her hands.

Dear Madam, said your brother, be so good as to think you have more
children than this ungrateful one.

Yet your sister seemed affected.

Your uncle Harlowe, wiping his eyes, O cousin, said he, if one thought
the poor girl was really so ill--

She must, said your uncle Antony.  This is written to her private friend.
God forbid she should be quite lost!

Your uncle Harlowe wished they did not carry their resentments too far.

I begged for God's sake, wringing my hands, and with a bended knee, that
they would permit me to go up to you; engaging to give them a faithful
account of the way you were in.  But I was chidden by your brother; and
this occasioned some angry words between him and Mr. Morden.

I believe, Sir, I believe, Madam, said your sister to her father and
mother, we need not trouble my cousin to read any more.  It does but
grieve and disturb you.  My sister Clary seems to be ill: I think, if
Mrs. Norton were permitted to go up to her, it would be right; wickedly
as she has acted, if she be truly penitent--

Here she stopt; and every one being silent, I stood up once more, and
besought them to let me go; and then I offered to read a passage or two
in your letter to me of the 24th.  But I was taken up again by your
brother, and this occasioned still higher words between the Colonel and
him.

Your mother, hoping to gain upon your inflexible brother, and to divert
the anger of the two gentlemen from each other, proposed that the Colonel
should proceed in reading the minutes he had taken from your letter.

He accordingly read, 'of your resuming your pen; that you thought you had
taken your last farewell; and the rest of that very affecting passage, in
which you are obliged to break off more than once, and afterwards to take
an airing in a chair.'  Your brother and sister were affected at this;
and he had recourse to his snuff-box.  And where you comfort Miss Howe,
and say, 'You shall be happy;' It is more, said he, than she will let any
body else be.

Your sister called you sweet soul! but with a low voice: then grew
hard-hearted again; set said [sic], Nobody could help being affected by
your pathetic grief--but that it was your talent.

The Colonel then went on to the good effect your airing had upon you; to
your good wishes to Miss Howe and Mr. Hickman; and to your concluding
sentence, that when the happy life you wished to her comes to be wound
up, she may be as calm and as easy at quitting it, as you hope in God you
shall be.  Your mother could not stand this; but retired to a corner of
the room, and sobbed, and wept.  Your father for a few minutes could not
speak, though he seemed inclined to say something.

Your uncles were also both affected; but your brother went round to each,
and again reminded your mother that she had other children.--What was
there, he said, in what was read, but the result of the talent you had of
moving the passions?  And he blamed them for choosing to hear read what
they knew their abused indulgence could not be a proof against.

This set Mr. Morden up again--Fie upon you, Cousin Harlowe, said he, I
see plainly to whom it is owing that all relationship and ties of blood,
with regard to this sweet sufferer, are laid aside.  Such rigours as
these make it difficult for a sliding virtue ever to recover itself.

Your brother pretended the honour of the family; and declared, that no
child ought to be forgiven who abandoned the most indulgent of parents
against warning, against the light of knowledge, as you had done.

But, Sir, and Ladies, said I, rising from the seat in the window, and
humbly turning round to each, if I may be permitted to speak, my dear
Miss asks only for a blessing.  She does not beg to be received to
favour; she is very ill, and asks only for a last blessing.

Come, come, good Norton, [I need not tell you who said this,] you are
up again with your lamentables!--A good woman, as you are, to forgive
so readily a crime, that has been as disgraceful to your part in her
education as to her family, is a weakness that would induce one to
suspect your virtue, if you were to be encountered by a temptation
properly adapted.

By some such charitable logic, said Mr. Morden, as this, is my cousin
Arabella captivated, I doubt not.  If virtue, you, Mr. James Harlowe,
are the most virtuous young man in the world.

I knew how it would be, replied your brother, in a passion, if I met Mr.
Morden upon this business.  I would have declined it; but you, Sir, to
his father, would not permit me to do so.

But, Sir, turning to the Colonel, in no other presence----

Then, Cousin James, interrupted the other gentleman, that which is your
protection, it seems, is mine.  I am not used to bear defiances thus--
you are my Cousin, Sir, and the son and nephew of persons as dear as near
to me--There he paused--

Are we, said your father, to be made still more unhappy among ourselves,
when the villain lives that ought to be the object of every one's
resentment who has either a value for the family, or for this ungrateful
girl?

That's the man, said your cousin, whom last Monday, as you know, I went
purposely to make the object of mine.  But what could I say, when I found
him so willing to repair his crime?--And I give it as my opinion, and
have written accordingly to my poor cousin, that it is best for all round
that his offer should be accepted; and let me tell you--

Tell me nothing, said your father, quite enraged, or that very vile
fellow!  I have a rivetted hatred to him.  I would rather see the rebel
die an hundred deaths, were it possible, than that she should give such a
villain as him a relation to my family.

Well, but there is no room to think, said you mother, that she will give
us such a relation, my dear.  The poor girl will lessen, I fear, the
number of our relations not increase it.  If she be so ill as we are told
she is, let us send Mrs. Norton up to her.--That's the least we can do--
let us take her, however, out of the hands of that Belford.

Both your uncles supported this motion; the latter part of it especially.

Your brother observed, in his ill-natured way, what a fine piece of
consistency it was in you to refuse the vile injurer, and the amends he
offered; yet to throw yourself upon the protection of his fast friend.

Miss Harlowe was apprehensive, she said, that you would leave all you
could leave to that pert creature, Miss Howe, [so she called her,] if you
should die.

O do not, do not suppose that, my Bella, said your poor mother.  I cannot
think of parting with my Clary--with all her faults, she is my child--her
reasons for her conduct are not heard--it would break my heart to lose
her.--I think, my dear, to your father, none so fit as I to go up, if you
will give me leave, and Mrs. Norton shall accompany me.

This was a sweet motion, and your father paused upon it.  Mr. Morden
offered his service to escort her; your uncles seemed to approve of it;
but your brother dashed all.  I hope, Sir, said he, to his father--I
hope, Madam, to his mother--that you will not endeavour to recover a
faulty daughter by losing an unculpable son.  I do declare, that if ever
my sister Clary darkens these doors again, I never will.  I will set out,
Madam, the same hour you go to London, (on such an errand,) to Edinburgh;
and there I will reside, and try to forget that I have relations in
England, so near and so dear as you are now all to me.

Good God, said the Colonel, what a declaration is this!  And suppose,
Sir, and suppose, Madam, [turning to your father and mother,] this should
be the case, whether it is better, think you, that you should lose for
ever such a daughter as my cousin Clary, or that your son should go to
Edinburgh, and reside there upon an estate which will be the better for
his residence upon it?--

Your brother's passionate behaviour hereupon is hardly to be described.
He resented it as promising an alienation of the affection of the family
to him.  And to such an height were resentments carried, every one siding
with him, that the Colonel, with hands and eyes lifted up, cried out,
What hearts of flint am I related to!--O, Cousin Harlowe, to your father,
are you resolved to have but one daughter?--Are you, Madam, to be taught,
by a son, who has no bowels, to forget you are a mother?

The Colonel turned from them to draw out his handkerchief, and could not
for a minute speak.  The eyes of every one, but the hard-hearted brother,
caught tears from his.

But then turning to them, (with the more indignation, as it seemed, as he
had been obliged to show a humanity, which, however, no brave heart
should be ashamed of,) I leave ye all, said he, fit company for one
another.  I will never open my lips to any of you more upon this subject.
I will instantly make my will, and in me shall the dear creature have the
father, uncle, brother, she has lost.  I will prevail upon her to take
the tour of France and Italy with me; nor shall she return till ye know
the value of such a daughter.

And saying this, he hurried out of the room, went into the court-yard,
and ordered his horse.

Mr. Antony Harlowe went to him there, just as he was mounting, and said
he hoped he should find him cooler in the evening, (for he, till then,
had lodged at his house,) and that then they would converse calmly, and
every one, mean time, would weigh all matters well.--But the angry
gentleman said, Cousin Harlowe, I shall endeavour to discharge the
obligations I owe to your civility since I have been in England; but I
have been so treated by that hot-headed young man, (who, as far as I
know, has done more to ruin his sister than Lovelace himself, and this
with the approbation of you all,) that I will not again enter into your
doors, or theirs.  My servants shall have orders whither to bring what
belongs to me from your house.  I will see my dear cousin Clary as soon
as I can.  And so God bless you altogether!--only this one word to your
nephew, if you please--That he wants to be taught the difference between
courage and bluster; and it is happy for him, perhaps, that I am his
kinsman; though I am sorry he is mine.

I wondered to hear your uncle, on his return to them all, repeat this;
because of the consequences it may be attended with, though I hope it
will not have bad ones; yet it was considered as a sort of challenge, and
so it confirmed every body in your brother's favour; and Miss Harlowe
forgot not to inveigh against that error which had brought on all these
evils.

I took the liberty again, but with fear and trembling, to desire leave to
attend you.

Before any other person could answer, your brother said, I suppose you
look upon yourself, Mrs. Norton, to be your own mistress.  Pray do you
want our consents and courtship to go up?--If I may speak my mind, you
and my sister Clary are the fittest to be together.--Yet I wish you would
not trouble your head about our family matters, till you are desired to
do so.

But don't you know, brother, said Miss Harlowe, that the error of any
branch of a family splits that family into two parties, and makes not
only every common friend and acquaintance, but even servants judges over
both?--This is one of the blessed effects of my sister Clary's fault!

There never was a creature so criminal, said your father, looking with
displeasure at me, who had not some weak heads to pity and side with her.

I wept.  Your mother was so good as to take me by the hand; come, good
woman, said she, come along with me.  You have too much reason to be
afflicted with what afflicts us, to want additions to your grief.

But, my dearest young lady, I was more touched for your sake than for my
own; for I have been low in the world for a great number of years; and,
of consequence, have been accustomed to snubs and rebuffs from the
affluent.  But I hope that patience is written as legibly on my forehead,
as haughtiness on that of any of my obligers.

Your mother led me to her chamber; and there we sat and wept together for
several minutes, without being able to speak either of us one word to the
other.  At last she broke silence, asking me, if you were really and
indeed so ill as it was said you were?

I answered in the affirmative; and would have shown her your last letter;
but she declined seeing it.

I would fain have procured from her the favour of a line to you, with her
blessing.  I asked, what was intended by your brother and sister?  Would
nothing satisfy them but your final reprobation?--I insinuated, how easy
it would be, did not your duty and humility govern you, to make yourself
independent as to circumstances; but that nothing but a blessing, a last
blessing, was requested by you.  And many other thins I urged in your
behalf.  The following brief repetition of what she was pleased to say in
answer to my pleas, will give you a notion of it all; and of the present
situation of things.

She said, 'She was very unhappy!--She had lost the little authority she
once had over her other children, through one child's failing! and all
influence over Mr. Harlowe and his brothers.  Your father, she said, had
besought her to leave it to him to take his own methods with you; and,
(as she valued him,) to take no step in your favour unknown to him and
your uncles; yet she owned, that they were too much governed by your
brother.  They would, however, give way in time, she knew, to a
reconciliation--they designed no other, for they all still loved you.

'Your brother and sister, she owned, were very jealous of your coming
into favour again;--yet could but Mr. Morden have kept his temper, and
stood her son's first sallies, who (having always had the family grandeur
in view) had carried his resentment so high, that he knew not how to
descend, the conferences, so abruptly broken off just now, would have
ended more happily; for that she had reason to think that a few
concessions on your part, with regard to your grandfather's estate, and
your cousin's engaging for your submission as from proper motives, would
have softened them all.

'Mr. Brand's account of your intimacy with the friend of the obnoxious
man, she said, had, for the time very unhappy effects; for before that
she had gained some ground: but afterwards dared not, nor indeed had
inclination, to open her lips in your behalf.  Your continued intimacy
with that Mr. Belford was wholly unaccountable, and as wholly
inexcusable.

'What made the wished-for reconciliation, she said, more difficult, was,
first, that you yourself acknowledged yourself dishonoured; (and it was
too well known, that it was your own fault that you ever were in the
power of so great a profligate;) of consequence, that their and your
disgrace could not be greater than it was; yet, that you refuse to
prosecute the wretch.  Next, that the pardon and blessing hoped for must
probably be attended with your marriage to the man they hate, and who
hates them as much: very disagreeable circumstances, she said, I must
allow, to found a reconciliation upon.

'As to her own part, she must needs say, that if there were any hope that
Mr. Lovelace would become a reformed man, the letter her cousin Morden
had read to them from him to you, and the justice (as she hoped it was)
he did your character, though to his own condemnation, (his family and
fortunes being unexceptionable,) and all his relations earnest to be
related to you, were arguments that would weigh with her, could they have
any with your father and uncles.'

To my plea of your illness, 'she could not but flatter herself, she
answered, that it was from lowness of spirits, and temporary dejection.
A young creature, she said, so very considerate as you naturally were,
and fallen so low, must have enough of that.  Should they lose you, which
God forbid! the scene would then indeed be sadly changed; for then those
who now most resented, would be most grieved; all your fine qualities
would rise to their remembrance, and your unhappy error would be quite
forgotten.

'She wished you would put yourself into your cousin's protection
entirely, and have nothing to more to say to Mr. Belford.

And I would recommend it to your most serious consideration, my dear Miss
Clary, whether now, as your cousin (who is your trustee for your
grandfather's estate,) is come, you should not give over all thoughts of
Mr. Lovelace's intimate friend for your executor; more especially, as
that gentleman's interfering in the concerns of your family, should the
sad event take place (which my heart aches but to think of) might be
attended with those consequences which you are so desirous, in other
cases, to obviate and prevent.  And suppose, my dear young lady, you were
to write one letter more to each of your uncles, to let them know how ill
you are?--And to ask their advice, and offer to be governed by it, in
relation to the disposition of your estate and effects?--Methinks I wish
you would.

I find they will send you up a large part of what has been received from
that estate since it was your's; together with your current cash which
you left behind you: and this by your cousin Morden, for fear you should
have contracted debts which may make you uneasy.

They seem to expect, that you will wish to live at your grandfather's
house, in a private manner, if your cousin prevail not upon you to go
abroad for a year or two.


FRIDAY MORNING.

Betty was with me just now.  She tells me, that your cousin Morden is so
much displeased with them all, that he has refused to lodge any more at
your uncle Antony's; and has even taken up with inconvenient lodgings,
till he is provided with others to his mind.  This very much concerns
them; and they repent their violent treatment of him: and the more, as he
is resolved, he says, to make you his sole executrix, and heir to all his
fortune.

What noble fortunes still, my dearest young lady, await you!  I am
thoroughly convinced, if it please God to preserve your life and your
health, that every body will soon be reconciled to you, and that you will
see many happy days.

Your mother wished me not to attend you as yet, because she hopes that I
may give myself that pleasure soon with every body's good liking, and
even at their desire.  Your cousin Morden's reconciliation with them,
which they are very desirous of, I am ready to hope will include theirs
with you.

But if that should happen which I so much dread, and I not with you, I
should never forgive myself.  Let me, therefore, my dearest young lady,
desire you to command my attendance, if you find any danger, and if you
wish me peace of mind; and no consideration shall withhold me.

I hear that Miss Howe has obtained leave from her mother to see you; and
intends next week to go to town for that purpose; and (as it is believed)
to buy clothes for her approaching nuptials.

Mr. Hickman's mother-in-law is lately dead.  Her jointure of 600L. a-year
is fallen to him; and she has, moreover, as an acknowledgement of his
good behaviour to her, left him all she was worth, which was very
considerable, a few legacies excepted to her own relations.

These good men are uniformly good: indeed could not else be good; and
never fare the worse for being so.  All the world agrees he will make
that fine young lady an excellent husband: and I am sorry they are not as
much agreed in her making him an excellent wife.  But I hope a woman of
her principles would not encourage his address, if, whether she at
present love him or not, she thought she could not love him; or if she
preferred any other man to him.

Mr. Pocock undertakes to deliver this; but fears it will be Saturday
night first, if not Sunday morning.

May the Almighty protect and bless you!--I long to see you--my dearest
young lady, I long to see you; and to fold you once more to my fond
heart.  I dare to say happy days are coming.  Be but cheerful.  Give way
to hope.

Whether for this world, or the other, you must be happy.  Wish to live,
however, were it only because you are so well fitted in mind to make
every one happy who has the honour to know you.  What signifies this
transitory eclipse?  You are as near perfection, by all I have heard,
as any creature in this world can be: for here is your glory--you are
brightened and purified, as I may say, by your sufferings!--How I long to
hear your whole sad, yet instructive story, from your own lips!

For Miss Howe's sake, who, in her new engagements will so much want you;
for your cousin Morden's sake, for your mother's sake, if I must go on
farther in your family; and yet I can say, for all their sakes; and for
my sake, my dearest Miss Clary; let your resumed and accustomed
magnanimity bear you up.  You have many things to do which I know not the
person who will do if you leave us.

Join your prayers then to mine, that God will spare you to a world that
wants you and your example; and, although your days may seem to have been
numbered, who knows but that, with the good King Hezekiah, you may have
them prolonged?  Which God grant, if it be his blessed will, to the
prayers of

Your
JUDITH NORTON



LETTER LVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, SEPT. 4.


The lady would not read the letter she had from Mrs. Norton till she had
received the Communion, for fear it should contain any thing that might
disturb that happy calm, which she had been endeavouring to obtain for
it.  And when that solemn office was over, she was so composed, she said,
that she thought she could receive any news, however affecting, with
tranquillity.

Nevertheless, in reading it, she was forced to leave off several times
through weakness and a dimness in her sight, of which she complained; if
I may say complained; for so easy and soft were her complaints, that they
could hardly be called such.

She was very much affected at divers parts of this letter.  She wept
several times, and sighed often.  Mrs. Lovick told me, that these were
the gentle exclamations she broke out into, as she read:--Her unkind, her
cruel brother!--How unsisterly!--Poor dear woman! seeming to speak of
Mrs. Norton.  Her kind cousin!--O these flaming spirits!  And then
reflecting upon herself more than once--What a deep error is mine!--What
evils have I been the occasion of!--

When I was admitted to her presence, I have received, said she, a long
and not very pleasing letter from my dear Mrs. Norton.  It will soon be
in your hands.  I am advised against appointing you to the office you
have so kindly accepted of: but you must resent nothing of these things.
My choice will have an odd appearance to them: but it is now too late to
alter it, if I would.

I would fain write an answer to it, continued she: but I have no distinct
sight, Mr. Belford, no steadiness of fingers.--This mistiness, however,
will perhaps be gone by-and-by.--Then turning to Mrs. Lovick, I don't
think I am dying yet--not actually dying, Mrs. Lovick--for I have no
bodily pain--no numbnesses; no signs of immediate death, I think.--And my
breath, which used of late to be so short, is now tolerable--my head
clear, my intellects free--I think I cannot be dying yet--I shall have
agonies, I doubt--life will not give up so blessedly easy, I fear--yet
how merciful is the Almighty, to give his poor creature such a sweet
serenity!--'Tis what I have prayed for!--What encouragement, Mrs. Lovick,
so near one's dissolution, to have it to hope that one's prayers are
answered.

Mrs. Smith, as well as Mrs. Lovick, was with her.  They were both in
tears; nor had I, any more than they, power to say a word in answer: yet
she spoke all this, as well as what follows, with a surprising composure
of mind and countenance.

But, Mr. Belford, said she, assuming a still sprightlier air and accent,
let me talk a little to you, while I am thus able to say what I have to
say.

Mrs. Lovick, don't leave us, [for the women were rising to go,] pray sit
down; and do you, Mrs. Smith, sit down too.--Dame Shelbourne, take this
key, and open the upper drawer.  I will move to it.

She did, with trembling knees.  Here, Mr. Belford, is my will.  It is
witnessed by three persons of Mr. Smith's acquaintance.

I dare to hope, that my cousin Morden will give you assistance, if you
request it of him.  My cousin Morden continued his affection for me: but
as I have not seen him, I leave all the trouble upon you, Mr. Belford.
This deed may want forms; and it does, no doubt: but the less, as I have
my grandfather's will almost by heart, and have often enough heard that
canvassed.  I will lay it by itself in this corner; putting it at the
further end of the drawer.

She then took up a parcel of letters, enclosed in one cover, sealed with
three seals of black wax: This, said she, I sealed up last night.  The
cover, Sir, will let you know what is to be done with what it encloses.
This is the superscription [holding it close to her eyes, and rubbing
them]; As soon as I am certainly dead, this to be broke open by Mr.
Belford.--Here, Sir, I put it [placing it by the will].--These folded
papers are letters, and copies of letters, disposed according to their
dates.  Miss Howe will do with those as you and she shall think fit.
If I receive any more, or more come when I cannot receive them, they may
be put into this drawer, [pulling out and pushing in the looking-glass
drawer,] to be given to Mr. Belford, be they from whom they will.  You'll
be so kind as to observe that, Mrs. Lovick, and dame Shelbourne.

Here, Sir, proceeded she, I put the keys of my apparel [putting them into
the drawer with her papers].  All is in order, and the inventory upon
them, and an account of what I have disposed of: so that nobody need to
ask Mrs. Smith any questions.

There will be no immediate need to open or inspect the trunks which
contain my wearing apparel.  Mrs. Norton will open them, or order
somebody to do it for her, in your presence, Mrs. Lovick; for so I have
directed in my will.  They may be sealed up now: I shall never more have
occasion to open them.

She then, though I expostulated with her to the contrary, caused me to
seal them up with my seal.

After this, she locked up the drawer where were her papers; first taking
out her book of meditations, as she called it; saying, she should,
perhaps, have use for that; and then desired me to take the key of that
drawer; for she should have no further occasion for that neither.

All this in so composed and cheerful a manner, that we were equally
surprised and affected with it.

You can witness for me, Mrs. Smith, and so can you, Mrs. Lovick,
proceeded she, if any one ask after my life and conversation, since you
have known me, that I have been very orderly; have kept good hours; and
never have lain out of your house but when I was in prison; and then you
know I could not help it.

O, Lovelace! that thou hadst heard her or seen her, unknown to herself,
on this occasion!--Not one of us could speak a word.

I shall leave the world in perfect charity, proceeded she.  And turning
towards the women, don't be so much concerned for me, my good friends.
This is all but needful preparation; and I shall be very happy.

Then again rubbing her eyes, which she said were misty, and looked more
intently round upon each, particularly on me--God bless you all! said
she; how kindly are you concerned for me!--Who says I am friendless?  Who
says I am abandoned, and among strangers?--Good Mr. Belford, don't be so
generously humane!--Indeed [putting her handkerchief to her charming
eyes,] you will make me less happy, than I am sure you wish me to be.

While we were thus solemnly engaged, a servant came with a letter from
her cousin Morden:--Then, said she, he is not come himself!

She broke it open; but every line, she said, appeared two to her: so
that, being unable to read it herself, she desired I would read it to
her.  I did so; and wished it were more consolatory to her: but she was
all patient attention: tears, however, often trickling down her cheeks.
By the date, it was written yesterday; and this is the substance of it.

He tells her, 'That the Thursday before he had procured a general meeting
of her principal relations, at her father's; though not without
difficulty, her haughty brother opposing it, and, when met, rendering all
his endeavours to reconcile them to her ineffectual.  He censures him, as
the most ungovernable young man he ever knew: some great sickness, he
says, some heavy misfortune, is wanted to bring him to a knowledge of
himself, and of what is due from him to others; and he wishes that he
were not her brother, and his cousin.  Nor doe he spare her father and
uncles for being so implicitly led by him.'

He tells her, 'That he parted with them all in high displeasure, and
thought never more to darken any of their doors: that he declared as much
to her two uncles, who came to him on Saturday, to try to accommodate
with him; and who found him preparing to go to London to attend her; and
that, notwithstanding their pressing entreaties, he determined so to do,
and not to go with them to Harlowe-place, or to either of their own
houses; and accordingly dismissed them with such an answer.

'But that her noble letter,' as he calls it, of Aug. 31,* 'being brought
him about an hour after their departure, he thought it might affect them
as much as it did him; and give them the exalted opinion of her virtue
which was so well deserved; he therefore turned his horse's head back
to her uncle Antony's, instead of forwards toward London.


* See Letter XLV. of this volume.


'That accordingly arriving there, and finding her two uncles together, he
read to them the affecting letter; which left none of the three a dry
eye: that the absent, as is usual in such cases, bearing all the load,
they accused her brother and sister; and besought him to put off his
journey to town, till he could carry with him the blessings which she had
formerly in vain solicited for; and (as they hoped) the happy tidings of
a general reconciliation.

'That not doubting but his visit would be the more welcome to her, if
these good ends could be obtained, he the more readily complied with
their desires.  But not being willing to subject himself to the
possibility of receiving fresh insult from her brother, he had given her
uncles a copy of her letter, for the family to assemble upon; and desired
to know, as soon as possible, the result of their deliberations.

'He tells her, that he shall bring her up the accounts relating to the
produce of her grandfather's estate, and adjust them with her; having
actually in his hands the arrears due to her from it.

'He highly applauds the noble manner in which she resents your usage of
her.  It is impossible, he owns, that you can either deserve her, or to
be forgiven.  But as you do justice to her virtue, and offer to make her
all the reparation now in your power; and as she is so very earnest with
him not to resent that usage; and declares, that you could not have been
the author of her calamities but through a strange concurrence of unhappy
causes; and as he is not at a loss to know how to place to a proper
account that strange concurrence; he desires her not to be apprehensive
of any vindictive measures from him.'

Nevertheless (as may be expected) 'he inveighs against you; as he finds
that she gave you no advantage over her.  But he forbears to enter
further into this subject, he says, till he has the honour to see her;
and the rather, as she seems so much determined against you.  However, he
cannot but say, that he thinks you a gallant man, and a man of sense; and
that you have the reputation of being thought a generous man in every
instance but where the sex is concerned.  In such, he owns, that you have
taken inexcusable liberties.  And he is sorry to say, that there are very
few young men of fortune but who allow themselves in the same.  Both
sexes, he observes, too much love to have each other in their power: yet
he hardly ever knew man or woman who was very fond of power make a right
use of it.

'If she be so absolutely determined against marrying you, as she declares
she is, he hopes, he says, to prevail upon her to take (as soon as her
health will permit) a little tour abroad with him, as what will probably
establish it; since traveling is certainly the best physic for all those
disorders which owe their rise to grief or disappointment.  An absence of
two or three years will endear her to every one, on her return, and every
one to her.

'He expresses his impatience to see her.  He will set out, he says, the
moment he knows the result of her family's determination; which, he
doubts not, will be favourable.  Nor will he wait long for that.'

When I had read the letter through to the languishing lady, And so, my
friends, said she, have I heard of a patient who actually died, while
five or six principal physicians were in a consultation, and not agreed
upon what name to give his distemper.  The patient was an emperor, the
emperor Joseph, I think.

I asked, if I should write to her cousin, as he knew not how ill she was,
to hasten up?

By no means, she said; since, if he were not already set out, she was
persuaded that she should be so low by the time he could receive my
letter, and come, that his presence would but discompose and hurry her,
and afflict him.

I hope, however, she is not so very near her end.  And without saying any
more to her, when I retired, I wrote to Colonel Morden, that if he
expects to see his beloved cousin alive, he must lose no time in setting
out.  I sent this letter by his own servant.

Dr. H. sent away his letter to her father by a particular hand this
morning.

Mrs. Walton the milliner has also just now acquainted Mrs. Smith, that
her husband had a letter brought by a special messenger from Parson
Brand, within this half hour, enclosing the copy of one he had written to
Mr. John Harlowe, recanting his officious one.

And as all these, and the copy of the lady's letter to Col. Morden, will
be with them pretty much at a time, the devil's in the family if they are
not struck with a remorse that shall burst open the double-barred doors
of their hearts.

Will. engages to reach you with this (late as it will be) before you go
to rest.  He begs that I will testify for him the hour and the minute I
shall give it him.  It is just half an hour after ten.

I pretend to be (now by use) the swiftest short-hand writer in England,
next to yourself.  But were matter to arise every hour to write upon, and
I had nothing else to do, I cannot write so fast as you expect.  And let
it be remembered, that your servants cannot bring letters or messages
before they are written or sent.



LETTER LVIII

DR. H. TO JAMES HARLOWE, SENIOR, ESQ.
LONDON, SEPT. 4.


SIR,

If I may judge of the hearts of other parents by my own, I cannot doubt
but you will take it well to be informed that you have yet an opportunity
to save yourself and family great future regret, by dispatching hither
some one of it with your last blessing, and your lady's, to the most
excellent of her sex.

I have some reason to believe, Sir, that she has been represented to you
in a very different light from the true one.  And this it is that induces
me to acquaint you, that I think her, on the best grounds, absolutely
irreproachable in all her conduct which has passed under my eye, or come
to my ear; and that her very misfortunes are made glorious to her, and
honourable to all that are related to her, by the use she has made of
them; and by the patience and resignation with which she supports herself
in a painful, lingering, and dispiriting decay! and by the greatness of
mind with which she views her approaching dissolution.  And all this from
proper motives; from motives in which a dying saint might glory.

She knows not that I write.  I must indeed acknowledge, that I offered to
do so some days ago, and that very pressingly: nor did she refuse me from
obstinacy--she seemed not to know what that is--but desired me to forbear
for two days only, in hopes that her newly-arrived cousin, who, as she
heard, was soliciting for her, would be able to succeed in her favour.

I hope I shall not be thought an officious man on this occasion; but, if
I am, I cannot help it, being driven to write, by a kind of parental and
irresistible impulse.

But, Sir, whatever you think fit to do, or permit to be done, must be
speedily done; for she cannot, I verily think, live a week: and how long
of that short space she may enjoy her admirable intellects to take
comfort in the favours you may think proper to confer upon her cannot be
said.  I am, Sir,

Your most humble servant,

R.H.



LETTER LIX

MR. BELFORD, TO WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
LONDON, SEPT. 4.


SIR,

The urgency of the case, and the opportunity by your servant, will
sufficiently apologize for this trouble from a stranger to your person,
who, however, is not a stranger to your merit.

I understand you are employing your good offices with the parents of
Miss Clarissa Harlowe, and other relations, to reconcile them to the most
meritorious daughter and kinswoman that ever family had to boast of.

Generously as this is intended by you, we here have too much reason to
think all your solicitudes on this head will be unnecessary: for it is
the opinion of every one who has the honour of being admitted to her
presence, that she cannot lie over three days: so that, if you wish to
see her alive, you must lose no time to come up.

She knows not that I write.  I had done it sooner, if I had had the least
doubt that before now she would not have received from you some news of
the happy effects of your kind mediation in her behalf.  I am, Sir,

Your most humble servant,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER LX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTER LVII.]
UXBRIDGE, TUESDAY MORN, BETWEEN 4 AND 5.


And can it be, that this admirable creature will so soon leave this
cursed world!  For cursed I shall think it, and more cursed myself, when
she is gone.  O, Jack! thou who canst sit so cool, and, like Addison's
Angel, direct, and even enjoy, the storm, that tears up my happiness by
the roots; blame me not for my impatience, however unreasonable!  If thou
knowest, that already I feel the torments of the damned, in the remorse
that wrings my heart, on looking back upon my past actions by her, thou
wouldst not be the devil thou art, to halloo on a worrying conscience,
which, without my merciless aggravations, is altogether intolerable.

I know not what to write, nor what I would write.  When the company that
used to delight me is as uneasy to me as my reflections are painful, and
I can neither help nor divert myself, must not every servant about me
partake in a perturbation so sincere!

Shall I give thee a faint picture of the horrible uneasiness with which
my mind struggles?  And faint indeed it must be; for nothing but
outrageous madness can exceed it; and that only in the apprehension of
others; since, as to the sufferer, it is certain, that actual distraction
(take it out of its lucid intervals) must be an infinitely more happy
state than the state of suspense and anxiety, which often brings it on.

Forbidden to attend the dear creature, yet longing to see her, I would
give the world to be admitted once more to her beloved presence.  I ride
towards London three or four times a day, resolving pro and con, twenty
times in two or three miles; and at last ride back; and, in view of
Uxbridge, loathing even the kind friend, and hospitable house, turn my
horse's head again towards the town, and resolve to gratify my humour,
let her take it as she will; but, at the very entrance of it, after
infinite canvassings, once more alter my mind, dreading to offend and
shock her, lest, by that means, I should curtail a life so precious.

Yesterday, in particular, to give you an idea of the strength of that
impatience, which I cannot avoid suffering to break out upon my servants,
I had no sooner dispatched Will., than I took horse to meet him on his
return.

In order to give him time, I loitered about on the road, riding up this
lane to the one highway, down that to the other, just as my horse
pointed; all the way cursing my very being; and though so lately looking
down upon all the world, wishing to change conditions with the poorest
beggar that cried to me for charity as I rode by him--and throwing him
money, in hopes to obtain by his prayers the blessing my heart pants
after.

After I had sauntered about an hour or two, (which seemed three or four
tedious ones,) fearing I had slipt the fellow, I inquired at every
turnpike, whether a servant in such a livery had not passed through in
his return from London, on a full gallop; for woe had been to the dog,
had I met him on a sluggish trot!  And lest I should miss him at one end
of Kensingtohn, as he might take either the Acton or Hammersmith road; or
at the other, as he might come through the Park, or not; how many score
times did I ride backwards and forwards from the Palace to the Gore,
making myself the subject of observation to all passengers whether on
horseback or on foot; who, no doubt, wondered to see a well-dressed and
well-mounted man, sometimes ambling, sometimes prancing, (as the beast
had more fire than his master) backwards and forwards in so short a
compass!

Yet all this time, though longing to espy the fellow, did I dread to meet
him, lest he should be charged with fatal tidings.

When at distance I saw any man galloping towards me, my
resemblance-forming fancy immediately made it to be him; and then my
heart choked me.  But when the person's nearer approach undeceived me,
how did I curse the varlet's delay, and thee, by turns!  And how ready
was I to draw my pistol at the stranger, for having the impudence to
gallop; which none but my messenger, I thought, had either right or
reason to do!  For all the business of the world, I am ready to imagine,
should stand still on an occasion so melancholy and so interesting to me.
Nay, for this week past, I could cut the throat of any man or woman I see
laugh, while I am in such dejection of mind.

I am now convinced that the wretches who fly from a heavy scene, labour
under ten times more distress in the intermediate suspense and
apprehension, than they could have, were they present at it, and to see
and know the worst: so capable is fancy or imagination, the more
immediate offspring of the soul, to outgo fact, let the subject be either
joyous or grievous.

And hence, as I conceive, it is, that all pleasures are greater in the
expectation, or in the reflection, than in fruition; as all pains, which
press heavy upon both parts of that unequal union by which frail
mortality holds its precarious tenure, are ever most acute in the time of
suffering: for how easy sit upon the reflection the heaviest misfortunes,
when surmounted!--But most easy, I confess, those in which body has more
concern than soul.  This, however, is a point of philosophy I have
neither time nor head just now to weigh: so take it as it falls from a
madman's pen.

Woe be to either of the wretches who shall bring me the fatal news that
she is no more!  For it is but too likely that a shriek-owl so hated will
never hoot or scream again; unless the shock, that will probably disorder
my whole frame on so sad an occasion, (by unsteadying my hand,) shall
divert my aim from his head, heart, or bowels, if it turn not against my
own.

But, surely, she will not, she cannot yet die!  Such a matchless
excellence,

            ----whose mind
      Contains a world, and seems for all things fram'd,

could not be lent to be so soon demanded back again!

But may it not be, that thou, Belford, art in a plot with the dear
creature, (who will not let me attend her to convince myself,) in order
to work up my soul to the deepest remorse; and that, when she is
convinced of the sincerity of my penitence, and when my mind is made such
wax, as to be fit to take what impression she pleases to give it, she
will then raise me up with the joyful tidings of her returning health and
acceptance of me!

What would I give to have it so!  And when the happiness of hundreds, as
well as the peace and reconciliation of several eminent families, depend
upon her restoration and happiness, why should it not be so?

But let me presume it will.  Let me indulge my former hope, however
improbable--I will; and enjoy it too.  And let me tell thee how ecstatic
my delight would be on the unravelling of such a plot as this!

Do, dear Belford, let it be so!--And, O, my dearest, and ever-dear
Clarissa, keep me no loner in this cruel suspense; in which I suffer a
thousand times more than ever I made thee suffer.  Nor fear thou that I
will resent, or recede, on an ecclaircissement so desirable; for I will
adore thee for ever, and without reproaching thee for the pangs thou hast
tortured me with, confess thee as much my superior in virtue and honour!

But once more, should the worst happen--say not what that worst is--and I
am gone from this hated island--gone for ever--and may eternal--but I am
crazed already--and will therefore conclude myself,

Thine more than my own,
(and no great compliment neither)
R.L.



LETTER LXI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUES. SEPT. 9 IN THE MORN. AT MR. SMITH'S.


When I read yours of this morning, I could not help pitying you for the
account you give of the dreadful anxiety and suspense you labour under.
I wish from my heart all were to end as you are so willing to hope: but
it will not be; and your suspense, if the worst part of your torment, as
you say it is, will soon be over; but, alas! in a way you wish not.

I attended the lady just now.  She is extremely ill: yet is she aiming
at an answer to her Norton's letter, which she began yesterday in her own
chamber, and has written a good deal: but in a hand not like her own fine
one, as Mrs. Lovick tells me, but larger, and the lines crooked.

I have accepted of the offer of a room adjoining to the widow Lovick's,
till I see how matters go; but unknown to the lady; and I shall go home
every night, for a few hours.  I would not lose a sentence that I could
gain from lips so instructive, nor the opportunity of receiving any
command from her, for an estate.

In this my new apartment I now write, and shall continue to write, as
occasions offer, that I may be the more circumstantial: but I depend upon
the return of my letters, or copies of them, on demand, that I may have
together all that relates to this affecting story; which I shall
re-peruse with melancholy pleasure to the end of my life.

I think I will send thee Brand's letter to Mr. John Harlowe, recanting
his base surmises.  It is a matchless piece of pedantry; and may perhaps
a little divert thy deep chagrin: some time hence at least it may, if not
now.

What wretched creatures are there in the world!  What strangely mixed
creatures!--So sensible and so silly at the same time!  What a various,
what a foolish creature is man!--


THREE O'CLOCK.

The lady has just finished her letter, and has entertained Mrs. Lovick,
Mrs. Smith, and me, with a noble discourse on the vanity and brevity of
life, to which I cannot do justice in the repetition: and indeed I am so
grieved for her, that, ill as she is, my intellects are not half so clear
as her's.

A few things which made the strongest impression upon me, as well from
the sentiments themselves as from her manner of uttering them, I
remember.  She introduced them thus:

I am thinking, said she, what a gradual and happy death God Almighty
(blessed be his name) affords me!  Who would have thought, that, suffering
what I have suffered, and abandoned as I have been, with such a
tender education as I have had, I should be so long a dying!--But see now
by little and little it had come to this.  I was first take off from the
power of walking; then I took a coach--a coach grew too violent an
exercise: then I took up a chair--the prison was a large DEATH-STRIDE
upon me--I should have suffered longer else!--Next, I was unable to go to
church; then to go up or down stairs; now hardly can move from one room
to another: and a less room will soon hold me.--My eyes begin to fail me,
so that at times I cannot see to read distinctly; and now I can hardly
write, or hold a pen.--Next, I presume, I shall know nobody, nor be able
to thank any of you; I therefore now once more thank you, Mrs. Lovick,
and you, Mrs. Smith, and you, Mr. Belford, while I can thank you, for all
your kindness to me.  And thus by little and little, in such a gradual
sensible death as I am blessed with, God dies away in us, as I may say,
all human satisfaction, in order to subdue his poor creatures to himself.

Thou mayest guess how affected we all were at this moving account of her
progressive weakness.  We heard it with wet eyes; for what with the
women's example, and what with her moving eloquence, I could no more help
it than they.  But we were silent nevertheless; and she went on applying
herself to me.

O Mr. Belford!  This is a poor transitory life in the best enjoyments.
We flutter about here and there, with all our vanities about us, like
painted butterflies, for a gay, but a very short season, till at last we
lay ourselves down in a quiescent state, and turn into vile worms: And
who knows in what form, or to what condition we shall rise again?

I wish you would permit me, a young creature, just turned of nineteen
years of age, blooming and healthy as I was a few months ago, now nipt by
the cold hand of death, to influence you, in these my last hours, to a
life of regularity and repentance for any past evils you may have been
guilty of.  For, believe me, Sir, that now, in this last stage, very few
things will bear the test, or be passed as laudable, if pardonable, at
our own bar, much less at a more tremendous one, in all we have done, or
delighted in, even in a life not very offensive neither, as we may think!
--Ought we not then to study in our full day, before the dark hours
approach, so to live, as may afford reflections that will soften the
agony of the last moments when they come, and let in upon the departing
soul a ray of Divine mercy to illuminate its passage into an awful
eternity?

She was ready to faint, and choosing to lie down, I withdrew; I need not
say with a melancholy heart: and when I got to my new-taken apartment, my
heart was still more affected by the sight of the solemn letter the
admirable lady had so lately finished.  It was communicated to me by Mrs.
Lovick; who had it to copy for me; but it was not to be delivered to me
till after her departure.  However, I trespassed so far, as to prevail
upon the widow to let me take a copy of it; which I did directly in
character.

I send it enclosed.  If thou canst read it, and thy heart not bleed at
thy eyes, thy remorse can hardly be so deep as thou hast inclined me to
think it is.



LETTER LXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MRS. NORTON
[IN ANSWER TO LETTER LVI.*]


* Begun on Monday Sept. 4, and by piecemeal finished on Tuesday; but not
sent till the Thursday following.


MY DEAREST MRS. NORTON,

I am afraid I shall not be able to write all that is upon my mind to say
to you upon the subject of your last.  Yet I will try.

As to my friends, and as to the sad breakfasting, I cannot help being
afflicted for them.  What, alas! has not my mother, in particular,
suffered by my rashness!--Yet to allow so much for a son!--so little for
a daughter!--But all now will soon be over, as to me.  I hope they will
bury all their resentments in my grave.

As to your advice, in relation to Mr. Belford, let me only say, that the
unhappy reprobation I have met with, and my short time, must be my
apology now.--I wish I could have written to my mother and my uncles as
you advise.  And yet, favours come so slowly from them.

The granting of one request only now remains as a desirable one from
them.  Which nevertheless, when granted, I shall not be sensible of.  It
is that they will be pleased to permit my remains to be laid with those
of my ancestors--placed at the feet of my dear grandfather, as I have
mentioned in my will.  This, however, as they please.  For, after all,
this vile body ought not so much to engage my cares.  It is a weakness--
but let it be called a natural weakness, and I shall be excused;
especially when a reverential gratitude shall be known to be the
foundation of it.   You know, my dear woman, how my grandfather loved me.
And you know how much I honoured him, and that from my very infancy to
the hour of his death.  How often since have I wished, that he had not
loved me so well!

I wish not now,  at the writing of this, to see even my cousin Morden.
O, my blessed woman!  My dear maternal friend!  I am entering upon a
better tour than to France or Italy either!--or even than to settle at my
once-beloved Dairy-house!--All these prospects and pleasures, which used
to be so agreeable to me in health, how poor seem they to me now!--

Indeed, indeed, my dear Mamma Norton, I shall be happy!  I know I shall!
--I have charming forebodings of happiness already!--Tell all my dear
friends, for their comfort, that I shall!--Who would not bear the
punishments I have borne, to have the prospects and assurances I rejoice
in!--Assurances I might not have had, were my own wishes to have been
granted to me!

Neither do I want to see even you, my dear Mrs. Norton.  Nevertheless I
must, in justice to my own gratitude, declare, that there was a time,
could you have been permitted to come, without incurring displeasure from
those whose esteem it is necessary for you to cultivate and preserve,
that your presence and comfortings would have been balm to my wounded
mind.  But were you now, even by consent, and with reconciliatory
tidings, to come, it would but add to your grief; and the sight of one I
so dearly love, so happily fraught with good news, might but draw me back
to wishes I have had great struggles to get above.  And let me tell you
for your comfort, that I have not left undone any thing that ought to be
done, either respecting mind or person; no, not to the minutest
preparation: so that nothing is left for you to do for me.  Every one has
her direction as to the last offices.--And my desk, that I now write upon
--O my dearest Mrs. Norton, all is provided!--All is ready!  And all will
be as decent as it should be!

And pray let my Miss Howe know, that by the time you will receive this,
and she your signification of the contents of it, will, in all
probability, be too late for her to do me the inestimable favour, as I
should once have thought it, to see me.  God will have no rivals in the
hearts of those he sanctifies.  By various methods he deadens all other
sensations, or rather absorbs them all in the love of him.

I shall nevertheless love you, my Mamma Norton, and my Miss Howe, whose
love to me has passed the love of woman, to my latest hour!--But yet, I
am now above the quick sense of those pleasures which once delighted me,
and once more I say, that I do not wish to see objects so dear to me,
which might bring me back again into sense, and rival my supreme love.


***


Twice have I been forced to leave off.  I wished, that my last writing
might be to you, or to Miss Howe, if it might not be to my dearest Ma----

Mamma, I would have wrote--is the word distinct?--My eyes are so misty!--
If, when I apply to you, I break off in half-words, do you supply them--
the kindest are your due.--Be sure take the kindest, to fill up chasms
with, if any chasms there be--


***


Another breaking off!--But the new day seems to rise upon me with healing
in its wings.  I have gotten, I think, a recruit of strength: spirits, I
bless God, I have not of late wanted.

Let my dearest Miss Howe purchase her wedding-garments--and may all
temporal blessings attend the charming preparation!--Blessings will, I
make no question, notwithstanding the little cloudiness that Mr. Hickman
encounters with now and then, which are but prognostications of a future
golden day to him: for her heart is good, and her head not wrong.--But
great merit is coy, and that coyness had not always its foundation in
pride: but if it should seem to be pride, take off the skin-deep
covering, and, in her, it is noble diffidence, and a love that wants but
to be assured!

Tell Mr. Hickman I write this, and write it, as I believe, with my last
pen; and bid him bear a little at first, and forbear; and all the future
will be crowning gratitude, and rewarding love: for Miss Howe had great
sense, fine judgment, and exalted generosity; and can such a one be
ungrateful or easy under those obligations which his assiduity and
obligingness (when he shall be so happy as to call her his) will lay her
under to him?

As for me, never bride was so ready as I am.  My wedding garments are
bought---and though not fine or gawdy to the sight, though not adorned
with jewels, and set off with gold and silver, (for I have no beholders'
eyes to wish to glitter in,) yet will they be the easiest, the happiest
suit, that ever bridal maiden wore--for they are such as carry with them
a security against all those anxieties, pains, and perturbations, which
sometimes succeed to the most promising outsettings.

And now, my dear Mrs. Norton, do I wish for no other.

O hasten, good God, if it be thy blessed will, the happy moment that I am
to be decked out in his all-quieting garb!  And sustain, comfort, bless,
and protect with the all-shadowing wing of thy mercy, my dear parents, my
uncles, my brother, my sister, my cousin Morden, my ever-dear and
ever-kind Miss Howe, my good Mrs. Norton, and every deserving person to
whom they wish well! is the ardent prayer, first and last, of every
beginning hour, as the clock tells it me, (hours now are days, nay,
years,) of

Your now not sorrowing or afflicted, but happy,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER LXIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WED. MORN. SEPT. 6, HALF AN HOUR AFTER THREE.


I am not the savage which you and my worst enemies think me.  My soul is
too much penetrated by the contents of the letter which you enclosed in
your last, to say one word more to it, than that my heart has bled over
it from every vein!--I will fly from the subject--but what other can I
choose, that will not be as grievous, and lead into the same?

I could quarrel with all the world; with thee, as well as the rest;
obliging as thou supposest thyself for writing to me hourly.  How darest
thou, (though unknown to her,) to presume to take an apartment under the
sane roof with her?--I cannot bear to think that thou shouldest be seen,
at all hours passing to and repassing from her apartments, while I, who
have so much reason to call her mine, and one was preferred by her to all
the world, am forced to keep aloof, and hardly dare to enter the city
where she is!

If there be any thing in Brand's letter that will divert me, hasten it to
me.  But nothing now will ever divert me, will ever again give me joy or
pleasure!  I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep.  I am sick of all the
world.

Surely it will be better when all is over--when I know the worst the
Fates can do against me--yet how shall I bear that worst?--O Belford,
Belford! write it not to me!--But if it must happen, get somebody else to
write; for I shall curse the pen, the hand, the head, and the heart,
employed in communicating to me the fatal tidings.  But what is this
saying, when already I curse the whole world except her--myself most?

In fine, I am a most miserable being.  Life is a burden to me.  I would
not bear it upon these terms for one week more, let what would be my lot;
for already is there a hell begun in my own mind.  Never more mention it
to me, let her, or who will say it, the prison--I cannot bear it--May
d----n----n seize quick the cursed woman, who could set death upon taking
that large stride, as the dear creature calls it!--I had no hand in it!--
But her relations, her implacable relations, have done the business.  All
else would have been got over.  Never persuade me but it would.  The fire
of youth, and the violence of passion, would have pleaded for me to good
purpose, with an individual of a sex, which loves to be addressed with
passionate ardour, even to tumult, had it not been for that cruelty and
unforgivingness, which, (the object and the penitence considered,) have
no example, and have aggravated the heinousness of my faults.

Unable to rest, though I went not to bed till two, I dispatch this ere
the day dawn--who knows what this night, this dismal night, may have
produced!

I must after my messenger.  I have told the varlet I will meet him,
perhaps at Knightsbridge, perhaps in Piccadilly; and I trust not myself
with pistols, not only on his account, but my own--for pistols are too
ready a mischief.

I hope thou hast a letter ready for him.  He goes to thy lodgings first--
for surely thou wilt not presume to take thy rest in an apartment near
her's. If he miss thee there, he flies to Smith's, and brings me word
whether in being, or not.

I shall look for him through the air as I ride, as well as on horseback;
for if the prince of it serve me, as well as I have served him, he will
bring the dog by his ears, like another Habakkuk, to my saddle-bow, with
the tidings that my heart pants after.

Nothing but the excruciating pangs the condemned soul fells, at its
entrance into the eternity of the torments we are taught to fear, can
exceed what I now feel, and have felt for almost this week past; and
mayest thou have a spice of those, if thou hast not a letter ready
written for thy

LOVELACE.



LETTER LXIV

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUEDAY, SEPT. 5, SIX O'CLOCK.


The lady remains exceedingly weak and ill.  Her intellects, nevertheless,
continue clear and strong, and her piety and patience are without
example.  Every one thinks this night will be her last.  What a shocking
thing is that to say of such an excellence!  She will not, however, send
away her letter to her Norton, as yet.  She endeavoured in vain to
superscribe it: so desired me to do it.  Her fingers will not hold the
pen with the requisite steadiness.--She has, I fear, written and read her
last!


EIGHT O'CLOCK.

She is somewhat better than she was.  The doctor had been here, and
thinks she will hold out yet a day or two.  He has ordered her, as for
some time past, only some little cordials to take when ready to faint.
She seemed disappointed, when he told her she might yet live two or three
days; and said, she longed for dismission!--Life was not so easily
extinguished, she saw, as some imagined.--Death from grief, was, she
believed, the slowest of deaths.  But God's will must be done!--Her only
prayer was now for submission to it: for she doubted not but by the
Divine goodness she should be an happy creature, as soon as she could be
divested of these rags of mortality.

Of her own accord she mentioned you; which, till then, she had avoided to
do.  She asked, with great serenity, where you were?

I told her where, and your motives for being so near; and read to her a
few lines of your's of this morning, in which you mention your wishes to
see her, your sincere affliction, and your resolution not to approach her
without her consent.

I would have read more; but she said, Enough, Mr. Belford, enough!--Poor
man, does his conscience begin to find him!--Then need not any body to
wish him a greater punishment!--May it work upon him to an happy purpose!

I took the liberty to say, that as she was in such a frame that nothing
now seemed capable of discomposing her, I could wish that you might have
the benefit of her exhortations, which, I dared to say, while you were so
seriously affected, would have a greater force upon you than a thousand
sermons; and how happy you would think yourself, if you could but receive
her forgiveness on your knees.

How can you think of such a thing, Mr. Belford? said she, with some
emotion; my composure is owing, next to the Divine goodness blessing my
earnest supplications for it, to the not seeing him.  Yet let him know
that I now again repeat, that I forgive him.--And may God Almighty,
clasping her fingers, and lifting up her eyes, forgive him too; and
perfect repentance, and sanctify it to him!--Tell him I say so!  And tell
him, that if I could not say so with my whole heart, I should be very
uneasy, and think that my hopes of mercy were but weakly founded; and
that I had still, in my harboured resentment, some hankerings after a
life which he has been the cause of shortening.

The divine creature then turning aside her head--Poor man, said she!  I
once could have loved him.  This is saying more than ever I could say of
any other man out of my own family!  Would he have permitted me to have
been an humble instrument to have made him good, I think I could have
made him happy!  But tell him not this if he be really penitent--it may
too much affect him!--There she paused.--

Admirable creature!--Heavenly forgiver!--Then resuming--but pray tell
him, that if I could know that my death might be a mean to reclaim and
save him, it would be an inexpressible satisfaction to me!

But let me not, however, be made uneasy with the apprehension of seeing
him.  I cannot bear to see him!

Just as she had done speaking, the minister, who had so often attended
her, sent up his name; and was admitted.

Being apprehensive that it would be with difficulty that you could
prevail upon that impetuous spirit of your's not to invade her in her
dying hours, and of the agonies into which a surprise of this nature
would throw her, I thought this gentleman's visit afforded a proper
opportunity to renew the subject; and, (having asked her leave,)
acquainted him with the topic we had been upon.

The good man urged that some condescensions were usually expected, on
these solemn occasions, from pious souls like her's, however satisfied
with themselves, for the sake of showing the world, and for example-sake,
that all resentments against those who had most injured them were
subdued; and if she would vouchsafe to a heart so truly penitent, as I
had represented Mr. Lovelace's to be, that personal pardon, which I had
been pleading for there would be no room to suppose the least lurking
resentment remained; and it might have very happy effects upon the
gentleman.

I have no lurking resentment, Sir, said she--this is not a time for
resentment: and you will be the readier to believe me, when I can assure
you, (looking at me,) that even what I have most rejoiced in, the truly
friendly love that has so long subsisted between my Miss Howe and her
Clarissa, although to my last gasp it will be the dearest to me of all
that is dear in this life, has already abated of its fervour; has already
given place to supremer fervours; and shall the remembrance of Mr.
Lovelace's personal insults, which I bless God never corrupted that mind
which her friendship so much delighted, be stronger in these hours with
me, then the remembrance of a love as pure as the human heart ever
boasted?  Tell, therefore, the world, if you please, and (if, Mr.
Belford, you think what I said to you before not strong enough,) tell the
poor man, that I not only forgive him, but have such earnest wishes for
the good of his soul, and that from consideration of its immortality,
that could my penitence avail for more sins than my own, my last tear
should fall for him by whom I die!

Our eyes and hands expressed to us both what our lips could not utter.

Say not, then, proceeded she, nor let it be said, that my resentments are
unsubdued!--And yet these eyes, lifted up to Heaven as witness to the
truth of what I have said, shall never, if I can help it, behold him
more!--For do you not consider, Sirs, how short my time is; what much
more important subjects I have to employ it upon; and how unable I should
be, (so weak as I am,) to contend even with the avowed penitence of a
person in strong health, governed by passions unabated, and always
violent?--And now I hope you will never urge me more on this subject?

The minister said, it were pity ever to urge this plea again.

You see, Lovelace, that I did not forget the office of a friend, in
endeavouring to prevail upon her to give you her last forgiveness
personally.  And I hope, as she is so near her end, you will not invade
her in her last hours; since she must be extremely discomposed at such an
interview; and it might make her leave the world the sooner for it.

This reminds me of an expression which she used on your barbarous hunting
of her at Smith's, on her return to her lodgings; and that with a
serenity unexampled, (as Mrs. Lovick told me, considering the occasion,
and the trouble given her by it, and her indisposition at the time;) he
will not let me die decently, said the angelic sufferer!--He will not let
me enter into my Maker's presence with the composure that is required in
entering into the drawing-room of an earthly prince!

I cannot, however, forbear to wish, that the heavenly creature could have
prevailed upon herself, in these her last hours, to see you; and that for
my sake, as well as yours; for although I am determined never to be
guilty of the crimes, which, till within these few past weeks have
blackened my former life; and for which, at present, I most heartily hate
myself; yet should I be less apprehensive of such a relapse, if wrought
upon by the solemnity which such an interview must have been attended
with, you had become a reformed man: for no devil do I fear, but one in
your shape.


***


It is now eleven o'clock at night.  The lady who retired to rest an hour
ago, is, as Mrs. Lovick tells me, in a sweet slumber.

I will close here.  I hope I shall find her the better for it in the
morning.  Yet, alas! how frail is hope--How frail is life; when we are
apt to build so much on every shadowy relief; although in such a
desperate case as this, sitting down to reflect, we must know, that it is
but shadowy!

I will enclose Brand's horrid pedantry.  And for once am aforehand with
thy ravenous impatience.



LETTER LXV

MR. BRAND, TO MR. JOHN WALTON
SAT. NIGHT, SEPT. 2.


DEAR MR. WALTON,

I am obliged to you for the very 'handsomely penned', (and 'elegantly
written,') letter which you have sent me on purpose to do 'justice' to
the 'character' of the 'younger' Miss Harlowe; and yet I must tell you
that I had reason, 'before that came,' to 'think,' (and to 'know'
indeed,) that we were 'all wrong.'  And so I had employed the 'greatest
part' of this 'week,' in drawing up an 'apologetical letter' to my worthy
'patron,' Mr. John Harlowe, in order to set all 'matters right' between
'me and them,' and, ('as far as I could,') between 'them' and 'Miss.'
So it required little more than 'connection' and 'transcribing,' when I
received 'your's'; and it will be with Mr. Harlowe aforesaid, 'to-morrow
morning'; and this, and the copy of that, will be with you on 'Monday
morning.'

You cannot imagine how sorry I am that 'you' and Mrs. Walton, and Mrs.
Barker, and 'I myself,' should have taken matters up so lightly,
(judging, alas-a-day! by appearance and conjecture,) where 'character'
and 'reputation' are concerned.  Horace says truly,

      'Et semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum.'

That is, 'Words one spoken cannot be recalled.'  But, Mr. Walton, they
may be 'contradicted' by 'other' words; and we may confess ourselves
guilty of a 'mistake,' and express our 'concern' for being 'mistaken';
and resolve to make our 'mistake' a 'warning' to us for the 'future': and
this is all that 'can be done,' and what every 'worthy mind will do'; and
what nobody can be 'readier to do' than 'we four undesigning offenders,'
(as I see by 'your letter,' on 'your part,' and as you will see by the
'enclosed copy,' on 'mine';) which, if it be received as I 'think it
ought,' (and as I 'believe it will,') must give me a 'speedy' opportunity
to see you when I 'visit the lady'; to whom, (as you will see in  it,) I
expect to be sent up with the 'olive-branch.'

The matter in which we all 'erred,' must be owned to be 'very nice'; and
(Mr. Belford's 'character considered') 'appearances' ran very strong
'against the lady.'  But all that this serveth to show is, 'that in
doubtful matters, the wisest people may be mistaken'; for so saith the
'Poet,'

      'Fallitur in dubiis hominum solertia rebus.'

If you have an 'opportunity,' you may (as if 'from yourself,' and
'unknown to me') show the enclosed to Mr. Belford, who (you tell me)
'resenteth' the matter very heinously; but not to let him 'see' or 'hear
read,' those words 'that relate to him,' in the paragraph at the 'bottom
of the second page,' beginning, ['But yet I do insist upon it,] to the
'end' of that paragraph; for one would not make one's self 'enemies,' you
know; and I have 'reason to think,' that this Mr. 'Belford' is as
'passionate' and 'fierce' a man as Mr. Lovelace.  What pity it is the
lady could find no 'worthier a protector!'  You may paste those lines
over with 'blue' or 'black paper,' before he seeth it: and if he
insisteth upon taking a copy of my letter, (for he, or any body that
'seeth it,' or 'heareth it read,' will, no doubt, be glad to have by them
the copy of a letter so full of the 'sentiments' of the 'noblest writers'
of 'antiquity,' and 'so well adapted,' as I will be bold to say they are,
to the 'point in hand'; I say, if he insisteth upon taking a copy,) let
him give you the 'strongest assurances' not to suffer it to be 'printed'
on 'any account'; and I make the same request to you, that 'you' will
not; for if any thing be to be made of a 'man's works,' who, but the
'author,' should have the 'advantage'?  And if the 'Spectators,' the
'Tatlers,' the 'Examiners,' the 'Guardians,' and other of our polite
papers, make such a 'strutting' with a 'single verse,' or so by way of
'motto,' in the 'front' of 'each day's' paper; and if other 'authors'
pride themselves in 'finding out' and 'embellishing' the 'title-pages'
of their 'books' with a 'verse' or 'adage' from the 'classical writers';
what a figure would 'such a letter as the enclosed make,' so full fraught
with 'admirable precepts,' and 'a-propos quotations,' from the 'best
authority'?

I have been told that a 'certain noble Lord,' who once sat himself down
to write a 'pamphlet' in behalf of a 'great minister,' after taking
'infinite pains' to 'no purpose' to find a 'Latin motto,' gave commission
to a friend of 'his' to offer to 'any one,' who could help him to a
'suitable one,' but of one or two lines, a 'hamper of claret.'
Accordingly, his lordship had a 'motto found him' from 'Juvenal,' which
he 'unhappily mistaking,' (not knowing 'Juvenal' was a 'poet,') printed
as a prose 'sentence' in his 'title-page.'

If, then, 'one' or 'two' lines were of so much worth, (A 'hamper of
claret'!  No 'less'!) of what 'inestimable value' would 'such a letter as
mine' be deemed?--And who knoweth but that this noble P--r, (who is now*
living,) if he should happen to see 'this letter' shining with such a
'glorious string of jewels,' might give the 'writer a scarf,' in order to
have him 'always at hand,' or be a 'mean' (some way or other) to bring
him into 'notice'?  And I would be bold to say ('bad' as the 'world' is)
a man of 'sound learning' wanteth nothing but an 'initiation' to make his
'fortune.'


* i.e. At the time this Letter was written.


I hope, my good friend, that the lady will not 'die': I shall be much
'grieved,' if she doth; and the more because of mine 'unhappy
misrepresentation': so will 'you' for the 'same cause'; so will her
'parents' and 'friends.'  They are very 'rich' and 'very worthy'
gentlefolks.

But let me tell you, 'by-the-by,' that they had carried the matter
against her 'so far,' that I believe in my heart they were glad to
'justify themselves' by 'my report'; and would have been 'less pleased,'
had I made a 'more favourable one.'  And yet in 'their hearts' they
'dote' upon her.  But now they are all (as I hear) inclined to be
'friends with her,' and 'forgive her'; her 'brother,' as well as 'the
rest.'

But their 'cousin,' Col. Morden, 'a very fine gentleman,' had had such
'high words' with them, and they with him, that they know not how to
'stoop,' lest it should look like being frighted into an 'accommodation.'
Hence it is, that 'I' have taken the greater liberty to 'press the
reconciliation'; and I hope in 'such good season,' that they will all be
'pleased' with it: for can they have a 'better handle' to save their
'pride' all round, than by my 'mediation'?  And let me tell you, (inter
nos, 'betwixt ourselves,') 'very proud they all are.'

By this 'honest means,' (for by 'dishonest ones' I would not be
'Archbishop of Canterbury,') I hope to please every body; to be
'forgiven,' in the 'first place,' by 'the lady,' (whom, being a 'lover of
learning' and 'learned men,' I shall have great 'opportunities' of
'obliging'; for, when she departed from her father's house, I had but
just the honour of her 'notice,' and she seemed 'highly pleased' with my
'conversation';) and, 'next' to be 'thanked' and 'respected' by her
'parents,' and 'all her family'; as I am (I bless God for it) by my 'dear
friend' Mr. John Harlowe: who indeed is a man that professeth a 'great
esteem' for 'men of erudition'; and who (with 'singular delight,' I know)
will run over with me the 'authorities' I have 'quoted,' and 'wonder' at
my 'memory,' and the 'happy knack' I have of recommending 'mine own sense
of things' in the words of the 'greatest sages of antiquity.'

Excuse me, my good friend, for this 'seeming vanity.'  The great Cicero
(you must have heard, I suppose) had a 'much greater' spice of it, and
wrote a 'long letter begging' and 'praying' to be 'flattered.'  But if I
say 'less of myself' than other people (who know me) 'say of me,' I think
I keep a 'medium' between 'vanity' and 'false modesty'; the latter of
which oftentimes gives itself the 'lie,' when it is 'declaring of' the
'compliments,' that 'every body' gives it as its due: an hypocrisy, as
well as folly, that, (I hope,) I shall for ever scorn to be guilty of.

I have 'another reason' (as I may tell to you, my 'old school-fellow') to
make me wish for this 'fine lady's recovery' and 'health'; and that is,
(by some distant intimations,) I have heard from Mr. John Harlowe, that
it is 'very likely' (because of the 'slur' she hath received) that she
will choose to 'live privately' and 'penitently'--and will probably (when
she cometh into her 'estate') keep a 'chaplain' to direct her in her
'devotions' and 'penitence'--If she doth, who can stand a 'better chance'
than 'myself'?--And as I find (by 'your' account, as well as by 'every
body's') that she is innocent as to 'intention,' and is resolved never to
think of Mr. 'Lovelace more,' who knoweth 'what' (in time) 'may happen'?
--And yet it must be after Mr. 'Lovelace's death,' (which may possibly
sooner happen than he 'thinketh' of, by means of his 'detestable
courses':) for, after all, a man who is of 'public utility,' ought not
(for the 'finest woman' in the world) to lay his 'throat' at the 'mercy'
of a man who boggleth at nothing.

I beseech you, let not this hint 'go farther' than to 'yourself,' your
'spouse,' and Mrs. 'Barker.'  I know I may trust my 'life' in 'your
hands' and 'theirs.'  There have been (let me tell ye) 'unlikelier'
things come to pass, and that with 'rich widows,' (some of 'quality'
truly!) whose choice, in their 'first marriages' hath (perhaps) been
guided by 'motives of convenience,' or 'mere corporalities,' as I may
say; but who by their 'second' have had for their view the 'corporal' and
'spiritual' mingled; which is the most eligible (no doubt) to 'substance'
composed 'of both,' as 'men' and 'women' are.

Nor think (Sir) that, should such a thing come to pass, 'either' would be
'disgraced,' since 'the lady' in 'me' would marry a 'gentleman' and a
'scholar': and as to 'mine own honour,' as the 'slur' would bring her
'high fortunes' down to an 'equivalence' with my 'mean ones,' (if
'fortune' only, and not 'merit,' be considered,) so hath not the 'life'
of 'this lady' been 'so tainted,' (either by 'length of time,' or
'naughtiness of practice,') as to put her on a 'foot' with the 'cast
Abigails,' that too, too often, (God knoweth,) are thought good enough
for a 'young clergyman,' who, perhaps, is drawn in by a 'poor benefice';
and (if the 'wicked one' be not 'quite worn out') groweth poorer and
poorer upon it, by an 'increase of family' he knoweth not whether 'is
most his,' or his 'noble,' ('ignoble,' I should say,) 'patrons.'

But, all this 'apart,' and 'in confidence.'

I know you made at school but a small progress in 'languages.'  So I have
restrained myself from 'many illustrations' from the 'classics,' that I
could have filled this letter with, (as I have done the enclosed one:)
and, being at a 'distance,' I cannot 'explain' them to you, as I 'do to
my friend,' Mr. John Harlowe; and who, (after all,) is obliged to 'me'
for pointing out to 'him' many 'beauties' of the 'authors I quote,' which
otherwise would lie concealed from 'him,' as they must from every 'common
observer.'--But this (too) 'inter nos'--for he would not take it well to
'have it known'--'Jays' (you know, old school-fellow, 'jays,' you know)
'will strut in peacocks' feathers.'

But whither am I running?  I never know where to end, when I get upon
'learned topics.'  And albeit I cannot compliment 'you' with the 'name of
a learned man,' yet are you 'a sensible man'; and ('as such') must have
'pleasure' in 'learned men,' and in 'their writings.'

In this confidence, (Mr. Walton,) with my 'kind respects' to the good
ladies, (your 'spouse' and 'sister,') and in hopes, for the 'young lady's
sake,' soon to follow this long, long epistle, in 'person,' I conclude
myself,

Your loving and faithful friend,
ELIAS BRAND.


You will perhaps, Mr. Walton, wonder at the meaning of the 'lines drawn
      under many of the words and sentences,' (UNDERSCORING we call it;)
      and were my letters to be printed, those would be put in a
      'different character.'  Now, you must know, Sir, that 'we learned
      men' do this to point out to the readers, who are not 'so learned,'
      where the 'jet of our arguments lieth,' and the 'emphasis' they are
      to lay upon 'those words'; whereby they will take in readily our
      'sense' and 'cogency.'  Some 'pragmatical' people have said, that
      an author who doth a 'great deal of this,' either calleth his
      readers 'fools,' or tacitly condemneth 'his own style,' as
      supposing his meaning would be 'dark' without it, or that all of
      his 'force' lay in 'words.'  But all of those with whom I have
      conversed in a learned way, 'think as I think.'  And to give a very
      'pretty,' though 'familiar illustration,' I have considered a page
      distinguished by 'different characters,' as a 'verdant field'
      overspread with 'butter-flowers' and 'daisies,' and other
      summer-flowers.  These the poets liken to 'enamelling'--have you
      not read in the poets of 'enamelled meads,' and so forth?



LETTER LXVI

MR. BRAND, TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
SAT. NIGHT, SEPT. 2.


WORTHY SIR,

I am under no 'small concern,' that I should (unhappily) be the
'occasion' (I am sure I 'intended' nothing like it) of 'widening
differences' by 'light misreport,' when it is the 'duty' of one of 'my
function' (and no less consisting with my 'inclination') to 'heal' and
'reconcile.'

I have received two letter to set me 'right': one from a 'particular
acquaintance,' (whom I set to inquire of Mr. Belford's character); and
that came on Tuesday last, informing me, that your 'unhappy niece' was
greatly injured in the account I had had of her; (for I had told 'him'
of it, and that with very 'great concern,' I am sure, apprehending it to
be 'true.')  So I 'then' set about writing to you, to 'acknowledge' the
'error.'  And had gone a good way in it, when the second letter came (a
very 'handsome one' it is, both in 'style' and 'penmanship') from my
friend Mr. Walton, (though I am sure it cannot be 'his inditing,')
expressing his sorrow, and his wife's, and his sister-in-law's likewise,
for having been the cause of 'misleading me,' in the account I gave of
the said 'young lady'; whom they 'now' say (upon 'further inquiry') they
find to be the 'most unblameable,' and 'most prudent,' and (it seems) the
most 'pious' young lady, that ever (once) committed a 'great error'; as
(to be sure) 'her's was,' in leaving such 'worthy parents' and
'relations' for so 'vile a man' as Mr. Lovelace; but what shall we say?--
Why, the divine Virgil tells us,

      'Improbe amor, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?'

For 'my part,' I was but too much afraid (for we have 'great
opportunities,' you are sensible, Sir, at the 'University,' of knowing
'human nature' from 'books,' the 'calm result' of the 'wise man's
wisdom,' as I may say,

      '(Haurit aquam cribro, qui discere vult sine libro)'

'uninterrupted' by the 'noise' and 'vanities' that will mingle with
'personal conversation,' which (in the 'turbulent world') is not to be
enjoyed but over a 'bottle,' where you have an 'hundred foolish things'
pass to 'one that deserveth to be remembered'; I was but too much afraid
'I say') that so 'great a slip' might be attended with 'still greater'
and 'worse': for 'your' Horace, and 'my' Horace, the most charming writer
that ever lived among the 'Pagans' (for the 'lyric kind of poetry,' I
mean; for, the be sure, 'Homer' and 'Virgil' would 'otherwise' be 'first'
named 'in their way') well observeth (and who understood 'human nature'
better than he?)

      'Nec vera virtus, cum semel excidit,
      Curat reponi deterioribus.'

And 'Ovid' no less wisely observeth:

      'Et mala sunt vicina bonis.  Errore sub illo
         Pro vitio virtus crimina saepe tulit.'

Who, that can draw 'knowledge' from its 'fountain-head,' the works of the
'sages of antiquity,' (improved by the 'comments' of the 'moderns,') but
would 'prefer' to all others the 'silent quiet life,' which
'contemplative men' lead in the 'seats of learning,' were they not called
out (according to their 'dedication') to the 'service' and 'instruction'
of the world?

Now, Sir, 'another' favourite poet of mine (and not the 'less a
favourite' for being a 'Christian') telleth us, that ill is the custom of
'some,' when in a 'fault,' to throw the blame upon the backs of 'others,'

      '----Hominum quoque mos est,
      Quae nos cunque premunt, alieno imponere tergo.'
                                         MANT.

But I, though (in this case) 'misled,' ('well intendedly,' nevertheless,
both in the 'misleaders' and 'misled,' and therefore entitled to lay hold
of that plea, if 'any body' is so entitled,) will not however, be classed
among such 'extenuators'; but (contrarily) will always keep in mind that
verse, which 'comforteth in mistake,' as well as 'instructeth'; and which
I quoted in my last letter;

      'Errare est hominis, sed non persistere----'

And will own, that I was very 'rash' to take up with 'conjectures' and
'consequences' drawn from 'probabilites,' where (especially) the
'character' of so 'fine a lady' was concerned.

      'Credere fallacy gravis est dementia famae.'      MANT.

Notwithstanding, Miss Clarissa Harlowe (I must be bold to say) is the
'only young lady,' that ever I heard of (or indeed read of) that, 'having
made such a false step,' so 'soon' (of 'her own accord,' as I may say)
'recovered' herself, and conquered her 'love of the deceiver'; (a great
conquest indeed!) and who flieth him, and resolveth to 'die,' rather than
to be his; which now, to her never-dying 'honour' (I am well assured) is
the case--and, in 'justice' to her, I am now ready to take to myself
(with no small vexation) that of Ovid,

      'Heu! patior telis vulnera facta meis.'

But yet I do insist upon it, that all 'that part' of my 'information,'
which I took upon mine own 'personal inquiry,' which is what relates to
Mr. 'Belford' and 'his character,' is 'literally true'; for there is not
any where to be met with a man of a more 'libertine character' as to
'women,' Mr. 'Lovelace' excepted, than he beareth.

And so, Sir, I must desire of you, that you will not let 'any blame' lie
upon my 'intention'; since you see how ready I am to 'accuse myself' of
too lightly giving ear to a 'rash information' (not knowing it to be so,
however): for I depended the more upon it, as the 'people I had it from'
are very 'sober,' and live in the 'fear of God': and indeed when I wait
upon you, you will see by their letter, that they must be 'conscientious'
good people: wherefore, Sir, let me be entitled, from 'all your good
family,' to that of my last-named poet,

      'Aspera confesso verba remitte reo.'

And now, Sir, (what is much more becoming of my 'function,') let me,
instead of appearing with the 'face of an accuser,' and a 'rash
censurer,' (which in my 'heart' I have not 'deserved' to be thought,)
assume the character of a 'reconciler'; and propose (by way of 'penance'
to myself for my 'fault') to be sent up as a 'messenger of peace' to the
'pious young lady'; for they write me word 'absolutely' (and, I believe
in my heart, 'truly') that the 'doctors' have 'given her over,' and that
she 'cannot live.'  Alas! alas! what a sad thing would that be, if the
'poor bough,' that was only designed (as I 'very well know,' and am
'fully assured') 'to be bent, should be broken!'

Let it not, dear Sir, seem to the 'world' that there was any thing in
your 'resentments' (which, while meant for 'reclaiming,' were just and
fit) that hath the 'appearance' of 'violence,' and 'fierce wrath,' and
'inexorability'; (as it would look to some, if carried to extremity,
after 'repentance' and 'contrition,' and 'humiliation,' on the 'fair
offender's' side:) for all this while (it seemeth) she hat been a 'second
Magdalen' in her 'penitence,' and yet not so bad as a 'Magdalen' in her
'faults'; (faulty, nevertheless, as she hath been once, the Lord knoweth!

      'Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille est,
      Qui minimis urgentur'----saith Horace).

Now, Sir, if I may be named for this 'blessed' employment, (for, 'Blessed
is the peace-maker!') I will hasten to London; and (as I know Miss had
always a 'great regard' to the 'function' I have the honour to be of) I
have no doubt of making myself acceptable to her, and to bring her, by
'sound arguments,' and 'good advice,' into a 'liking of life,' which must
be the 'first step' to her 'recovery': for, when the 'mind' is 'made
easy,' the 'body' will not 'long suffer'; and the 'love of life' is a
'natural passion,' that is soon 'revived,' when fortune turneth about,
and smileth:

      'Vivere quisque diu, quamvis & egenus & ager,
      Optat.---- ---- ----' OVID.

And the sweet Lucan truly observeth,

      '---- ---- Fatis debentibus annos
      Mors invita subit.---- ----'

And now, Sir, let me tell you what shall be the 'tenor' of my 'pleadings'
with her, and 'comfortings' of her, as she is, as I may say, a 'learned
lady'; and as I can 'explain' to her 'those sentences,' which she cannot
so readily 'construe herself': and this in order to convince 'you' (did
you not already 'know' my 'qualifications') how well qualified I 'am' for
the 'christian office' to which I commend myself.

I will, IN THE FIRST PLACE, put her in mind of the 'common course of
things' in this 'sublunary world,' in which 'joy' and 'sorrow, sorrow'
and joy,' succeed one another by turns'; in order to convince her, that
her griefs have been but according to 'that' common course of things:

      'Gaudia post luctus veniunt, post gaudia luctus.'

SECONDLY, I will remind her of her own notable description of 'sorrow,'
whence she was once called upon to distinguish wherein 'sorrow, grief,'
and 'melancholy,' differed from each other; which she did 'impromptu,' by
their 'effects,' in a truly admirable manner, to the high satisfaction of
every one: I myself could not, by 'study,' have distinguished 'better,'
nor more 'concisely'--SORROW, said she, 'wears'; GRIEF 'tears'; but
MELANCHOLY 'sooths.'

My inference to her shall be, that since a happy reconciliation will take
place, 'grief' will be banished; 'sorrow' dismissed; and only sweet
'melancholy' remain to 'sooth' and 'indulge' her contrite 'heart,' and
show to all the world the penitent sense she hath of her great error.

THIRDLY, That her 'joys,'* when restored to health and favour, will be
the greater, the deeper her griefs were.


* 'Joy,' let me here observe, my dear Sir, by way of note, is not
absolutely inconsistent with 'melancholy'; a 'soft gentle joy,' not a
'rapid,' not a 'rampant joy,' however; but such a 'joy,' as shall lift
her 'temporarily' out of her 'soothing melancholy,' and then 'let her
down gently' into it again; for 'melancholy,' to be sure, her
'reflection' will generally make to be her state.


      'Gaudia, quae multo parta labore, placent.'

FOURTHLY, That having 'really' been guilty of a 'great error,' she should
not take 'impatiently' the 'correction' and 'anger' with which she hath
been treated.

      'Leniter, ex merito quicquid patiare ferundum est.'

FIFTHLY, That 'virtue' must be established by 'patience'; as saith
Prudentius:

      'Haec virtus vidua est, quam non patientia firmat.'

SIXTHLY, That in the words of Horace, she may 'expect better times,' than
(of late) she had 'reason' to look for.

      'Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur, hora.'

SEVENTHLY, That she is really now in 'a way' to be 'happy,' since,
according to 'Ovid,' she 'can count up all her woe':

      'Felix, qui patitur quae numerare potest.'

And those comforting lines,

      'Estque serena dies post longos gratior imbres,
          Et post triste malum gratior ipsa salus.'

EIGHTHLY, That, in the words of Mantuan, her 'parents' and 'uncles' could
not 'help loving her' all the time they were 'angry at her':

      'AEqua tamen mens est, & amica voluntas,
      Sit licet in natos austere parentum.'

NINTHLY, That the 'ills she hath met with' may be turned (by the 'good
use' to be made of them) to her 'everlasting benefit'; for that,

      'Cum furit atque ferit, Deus olim parcere quaerit.'

TENTHLY, That she will be able to give a 'fine lesson' (a 'very' fine
lesson) to all the 'young ladies' of her 'acquaintance,' of the 'vanity'
of being 'lifted up' in 'prosperity,' and the 'weakness' of being 'cast
down' in 'adversity'; since no one is so 'high,' as to be above being
'humbled'; so 'low,' as to 'need to despair': for which purpose the
advice of 'Ausonius,'

      'Dum fortuna juvat, caveto tolli:
      Dum fortuna tonat, caveto mergi.'

I shall tell her, that Lucan saith well, when he calleth 'adversity the
element of patience';

      '----Gaudet patientia duris:'

That

      'Fortunam superat virtus, prudential famam.'

That while weak souls are 'crushed by fortune,' the 'brave mind' maketh
the fickle deity afraid of it:

      'Fortuna fortes metuit, ignavos permit.'

ELEVENTHLY, That if she take the advice of 'Horace,'

      'Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus,'

it will delight her 'hereafter' (as 'Virgil' saith) to 'revoke her past
troubles':

      '----Forsan & haec olim meminisse juvabit.'

And, to the same purpose, 'Juvenal' speaking of the 'prating joy' of
mariners, after all their 'dangers are over':

      'Gaudent securi narrare pericula nautae.'

Which suiting the case so well, you'll forgive me, Sir, for 'popping
down' in 'English metre,' as the 'translative impulse' (pardon a new
word, and yet we 'scholars' are not fond of 'authenticating new' words)
came upon me 'uncalled for':

      The seaman, safe on shore, with joy doth tell
      What cruel dangers him at sea befell.

With 'these,' Sir, and an 'hundred more' wise 'adages,' which I have
always at my 'fingers' end,' will I (when reduced to 'form' and 'method')
entertain Miss; and as she is a 'well-read,' and (I might say, but for
this 'one' great error) a 'wise' young lady, I make no doubt but I shall
'prevail' upon her, if not by 'mine own arguments,' by those of 'wits'
and 'capacities' that have a 'congeniality' (as I may say) to 'her own,'
to take to heart,

      ----Nor of the laws of fate complain,
      Since, though it has been cloudy, now't clears up again.----

Oh! what 'wisdom' is there in these 'noble classical authors!'  A 'wise
man' will (upon searching into them,) always find that they speak 'his'
sense of 'men' and 'things.'  Hence it is, that they so readily occur to
my 'memory' on every occasion--though this may look like 'vanity,' it is
too true to be omitted; and I see not why a man may not 'know these
things of himself,' which 'every body' seeth and 'saith of him'; who,
nevertheless, perhaps know not 'half so much as he,' in other matters.

I know but of 'one objection,' Sir, that can lie against my going; and
that will arise from your kind 'care' and 'concern' for the 'safety of my
person,' in case that 'fierce' and 'terrible man,' the wicked Mr.
Lovelace, (of whom every one standeth in fear,) should come cross me, as
he may be resolved to try once more to 'gain a footing in Miss's
affections': but I will trust in 'Providence' for 'my safety,' while I
shall be engaged in a 'cause so worthy of my function'; and the 'more'
trust in it, as he is a 'learned man' as I am told.

Strange too, that so 'vile a rake' (I hope he will never see this!)
should be a 'learned man'; that is to say, that a 'learned man' may be a
'sly sinner,' and take opportunities, 'as they come in his way'--which,
however, I do assure you, 'I never did,'

I repeat, that as he is a 'learned man,' I shall 'vest myself,' as I may
say, in 'classical armour'; beginning 'meekly' with him (for, Sir,
'bravery' and 'meekness' are qualities 'very consistent with each other,'
and in no persons so shiningly 'exert' themselves, as in the 'Christian
priesthood'; beginning 'meekly' with him, I say) from Ovid,

      'Corpora magnanimo satis est protrasse leoni:'

So that, if I should not be safe behind the 'shield of mine own
prudence,' I certainly should be behind the 'shields' of the
'ever-admirable classics': of 'Horace' particularly; who, being a 'rake'
(and a 'jovial rake' too,) himself, must have great weight with all
'learned rakes.'

And who knoweth but I may be able to bring even this 'Goliath in
wickedness,' although in 'person' but a 'little David' myself, (armed
with the 'slings' and 'stones' of the 'ancient sages,') to a due sense of
his errors?  And what a victory would that be!

I could here, Sir, pursuing the allegory of David and Goliath, give you
some of the 'stones' ('hard arguments' may be called 'stones,' since they
'knock down a pertinacious opponent') which I could 'pelt him with,' were
he to be wroth with me; and this in order to take from you, Sir, all
apprehensions for my 'life,' or my 'bones'; but I forbear them till you
demand them of me, when I have the honour to attend you in person.

And now, (my dear Sir,) what remaineth, but that having shown you (what
yet, I believe, you did not doubt) how 'well qualified' I am to attend
the lady with the 'olive-branch,' I beg of you to dispatch me with it
'out of hand'?  For if she be so 'very ill,' and if she should not live
to receive the grace, which (to my knowledge) all the 'worthy family'
design her, how much will that grieve you all!  And then, Sir, of what
avail will be the 'eulogies' you shall all, peradventure, join to give to
her memory?  For, as Martial wisely observeth,

      '---- Post cineres gloria sera venit.'

Then, as 'Ausonius' layeth it down with 'equal propriety,' that 'those
favours which are speedily conferred are the most grateful and obliging'
----

And to the same purpose Ovid:

      'Gratia ab officio, quod mora tar dat, abest.'

And, Sir, whatever you do, let the 'lady's pardon' be as 'ample,' and as
'cheerfully given,' as she can 'wish for it': that I may be able to tell
her, that it hath your 'hands,' your 'countenances,' and your 'whole
hearts,' with it--for, as the Latin verse hath it, (and I presume to
think I have not weakened its sense by my humble advice),

      'Dat bene, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum.'

And now, Sir, when I survey this long letter,* (albeit I see it
enamelled, as a  'beautiful meadow' is enamelled by the 'spring' or
'summer' flowers, very glorious to behold!) I begin to be afraid that I
may have tired you; and the more likely, as I have written without that
'method' or 'order,' which I think constituteth the 'beauty' of 'good
writing': which 'method' or 'order,' nevertheless, may be the 'better
excused' in a 'familiar epistle,' (as this may be called,) you pardoning,
Sir, the 'familiarity' of the 'word'; but yet not altogether 'here,' I
must needs own; because this is 'a letter' and 'not a letter,' as I may
say; but a kind of 'short' and 'pithy discourse,' touching upon 'various'
and 'sundry topics,' every one of which might be a 'fit theme' to enlarge
upon of volumes; if this 'epistolary discourse' (then let me call it)
should be pleasing to you, (as I am inclined to think it will, because of
the 'sentiments' and 'aphorisms' of the 'wisest of the antients,' which
'glitter through it' like so many dazzling 'sunbeams,') I will (at my
leisure) work it up into a 'methodical discourse'; and perhaps may one
day print it, with a 'dedication' to my 'honoured patron,' (if, Sir, I
have 'your' leave,) 'singly' at first, (but not till I have thrown out
'anonymously,' two or three 'smaller things,' by the success of which I
shall have made myself of 'some account' in the 'commonwealth of
letters,') and afterwards in my 'works'--not for the 'vanity' of the
thing (however) I will say, but for the 'use' it may be of to the
'public'; for, (as one well observeth,) 'though glory always followeth
virtue, yet it should be considered only as its shadow.'


* And here, by way of note, permit me to say, that no 'sermon' I ever
composed cost me half the 'pains' that this letter hath done--but I knew
your great 'appetite' after, as well as 'admiration' of, the 'antient
wisdom,' which you so justly prefer to the 'modern'--and indeed I join
with you to think, that the 'modern' is only 'borrowed,' (as the 'moon'
doth its light from the 'sun,') at least, that we 'excel' them in
nothing; and that our 'best cogitations' may be found, generally
speaking, more 'elegantly' dressed and expressed by them.


      'Contemnit laudem virtus, licet usque sequatur
          Gloria virtutem, corpus ut umbra suum.'

A very pretty saying, and worthy of all men's admiration.

And now, ('most worthy Sir,' my very good friend and patron,) referring
the whole to 'your's,' and to your 'two brothers,' and to 'young Mr.
Harlowe's' consideration, and to the wise consideration of good 'Madam
Harlowe,' and her excellent daughter, 'Miss Arabella Harlowe'; I take the
liberty to subscribe myself, what I 'truly am,' and 'every shall delight
to be,' in 'all cases,' and at 'all times,'

Your and their most ready and obedient
as well as faithful servant,
ELIAS BRAND.



LETTER LXVII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[IN ANSWER TO LETTER LXIV. OF THIS VOLUME.]
WEDN. MORN. SEPT. 6.


And is she somewhat better?--Blessings upon thee without number or
measure!  Let her still be better and better!  Tell me so at least, if
she be not so: for thou knowest not what a joy that poor temporary
reprieve, that she will hold out yet a day or two, gave me.

But who told this hard-hearted and death-pronouncing doctor that she will
hold it no longer?  By what warrant says he this?  What presumption in
these parading solemn fellows of a college, which will be my contempt to
the latest hour of my life, if this brother of it (eminent as he is
deemed to be) cannot work an ordinary miracle in her favour, or rather in
mine!

Let me tell thee, Belford, that already he deserves the utmost contempt,
for suffering this charming clock to run down so low.  What must be his
art, if it could not wind it up in a quarter of the time he has attended
her, when, at his first visits, the springs and wheels of life and motion
were so god, that they seemed only to want common care and oiling!

I am obliged to you for endeavouring to engage her to see me.  'Twas
acting like a friend.  If she had vouchsafed me that favour, she should
have seen at her feet the most abject adorer that ever kneeled to
justly-offended beauty.

What she bid you, and what she forbid you, to tell me, (the latter for
tender considerations:) that she forgives me; and that, could she have
made me a good man, she would have made me a happy one!  That she even
loved me!  At such a moment to own that she once loved me!  Never before
loved any man!  That she prays for me!  That her last tear should be shed
for me, could she by it save a soul, doomed, without her, to perdition!--
O Belford! Belford! I cannot bear it!--What a dog, what a devil have I
been to a goodness so superlative!--Why does she not inveigh against me?
--Why does she not execrate me?--O the triumphant subduer!  Ever above
me!--And now to leave me so infinitely below her!

Marry and repair, at any time; this, wretch that I was, was my plea to
myself.  To give her a lowering sensibility; to bring her down from among
the stars which her beamy head was surrounded by, that my wife, so
greatly above me, might not despise me; this was one of my reptile
motives, owing to my more reptile envy, and to my consciousness of
inferiority to her!--Yet she, from step to step, from distress to
distress, to maintain her superiority; and, like the sun, to break out
upon me with the greater refulgence for the clouds that I had contrived
to cast about her!--And now to escape me thus!--No power left me to
repair her wrongs!--No alleviation to my self-reproach!--No dividing of
blame with her!--

Tell her, O tell her, Belford, that her prayers and wishes, her
superlatively-generous prayers and wishes, shall not be vain: that I can,
and do repent--and long have repented.--Tell her of my frequent deep
remorses--it was impossible that such remorses should not at last produce
effectual remorse--yet she must not leave me--she must live, if she would
wish to have my contrition perfect--For what can despair produce?


***


I will do every thing you would have me do, in the return of your
letters.  You have infinitely obliged me by this last, and by pressing
for an admission for me, though it succeeded not.

Once more, how could I be such a villain to so divine a creature!  Yet
love her all the time, as never man loved woman!--Curse upon my
contriving genius!--Curse upon my intriguing head, and upon my seconding
heart!--To sport with the fame, with the honour, with the life, of such
an angel of a woman!--O my d----d incredulity!  That, believing her to be
a woman, I must hope to find her a woman!  On my incredulity, that there
could be such virtue (virtue for virtue's sake) in the sex, founded I my
hope of succeeding with her.

But say not, Jack, that she must leave us yet.  If she recover, and if I
can but re-obtain her favour, then, indeed, will life be life to me.  The
world never saw such an husband as I will make.  I will have no will but
her's.  She shall conduct me in all my steps.  She shall open and direct
my prospects, and turn every motion of my heart as she pleases.

You tell me, in your letter, that at eleven o'clock she had sweet rest;
and my servant acquaints me, from Mrs. Smith, that she has had a good
night.  What hopes does this fill me with!  I have given the fellow five
guineas for his good news, to be divided between him and his
fellow-servant.

Dear, dear Jack! confirm this to me in thy next--for Heaven's sake, do!--
Tell the doctor I'll make a present of a thousand guineas if he recover
her.  Ask if a consultation then be necessary.

Adieu, dear Belford!  Confirm, I beseech thee, the hopes that now, with
sovereign gladness, have taken possession of a heart, that, next to
her's, is

Thine.



LETTER LXVIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDN. MORN. EIGHT O'CLOCK, (6 SEPT.)


Your servant arrived here before I was stirring.  I sent him to Smith's
to inquire how the lady was; and ordered him to call upon me when he came
back.  I was pleased to hear she had tolerable rest.  As soon as I had
dispatched him with the letter I had written over night, I went to attend
her.

I found hr up, and dressed; in a white sattin night-gown.  Ever elegant;
but now more so than I had seen her for a week past: her aspect serenely
cheerful.

She mentioned the increased dimness of her eyes, and the tremor which had
invaded her limbs.  If this be dying, said she, there is nothing at all
shocking in it.  My body hardly sensible of pain, my mind at ease, my
intellects clear and perfect as ever.  What a good and gracious God have
I!--For this is what I always prayed for.

I told her it was not so serene with you.

There is not the same reason for it, replied she.  'Tis a choice comfort,
Mr. Belford, at the winding up of our short story, to be able to say, I
have rather suffered injuries myself, than offered them to others.  I
bless God, though I have bee unhappy, as the world deems it, and once I
thought more so than at present I think I ought to have done, since my
calamities were to work out for me my everlasting happiness; yet have I
not wilfully made any one creature so.  I have no reason to grieve for
any thing but for the sorrow I have given my friends.

But pray, Mr. Belford, remember me in the best manner to my cousin
Morden; and desire him to comfort them, and to tell them, that all would
have been the same, had they accepted of my true penitence, as I wish and
as I trust the Almighty has done.

I was called down: it was to Harry, who was just returned from Miss
Howe's, to whom he carried the lady's letter.  The stupid fellow being
bid to make haste with it, and return as soon as possible, staid not
until Miss Howe had it, she being at the distance of five minutes,
although Mrs. Howe would have had him stay, and sent a man and horse
purposely with it to her daughter.


WEDNESDAY MORNING, TEN O'CLOCK.

The poor lady is just recovered from a fainting fit, which has left her
at death's door.  Her late tranquillity and freedom from pain seemed but
a lightening, as Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith call it.

By my faith, Lovelace, I had rather part with all the friends I have in
the world, than with this lady.  I never knew what a virtuous, a holy
friendship, as I may call mine to her, was before.  But to be so new to
it, and to be obliged to forego it so soon, what an affliction!  Yet,
thank Heaven, I lose her not by my own fault!--But 'twould be barbarous
not to spare thee now.

She has sent for the divine who visited her before, to pray with her.



LETTER LXIX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
KENSINGTON, WEDNESDAY NOON.


Like AEsop's traveller, thou blowest hot and cold, life and death, in the
same breath, with a view, no doubt, to distract me.  How familiarly dost
thou use the words, dying, dimness, tremor?  Never did any mortal ring so
many changes on so few bells.  Thy true father, I dare swear, was a
butcher, or an undertaker, by the delight thou seemest to take in scenes
of death and horror.  Thy barbarous reflection, that thou losest her not
by thy own fault, is never to be forgiven.  Thou hast but one way to
atone for the torments thou hast given me, and that is, by sending me
word that she is better, and will recover.  Whether it be true or not,
let me be told so, and I will go abroad rejoicing and believing it, and
my wishes and imaginations shall make out all the rest.

If she live but one year, that I may acquit myself to myself (no matter
for the world!) that her death is not owing to me, I will compound for
the rest.

Will neither vows nor prayers save her?  I never prayed in my life, put
all the years of it together, as I have done for this fortnight past: and
I have most sincerely repented of all my baseness to her--And will
nothing do?

But after all, if she recovers not, this reflection must be my comfort;
and it is truth; that her departure will be owing rather to wilfulness,
to downright female wilfulness, than to any other cause.

It is difficult for people, who pursue the dictates of a violent
resentment, to stop where first they designed to stop.

I have the charity to believe, that even James and Arabella Harlowe, at
first, intended no more by the confederacy they formed against this their
angel sister, than to disgrace and keep her down, lest (sordid wretches!)
their uncles should follow the example their grandfather had set, to
their detriment.

So this lady, as I suppose, intended only at first to vex and plague me;
and, finding she could do it to purpose, her desire of revenge insensibly
became stronger in her than the desire of life; and now she is willing to
die, as an event which she thinks will cut my heart-strings asunder.  And
still, the more to be revenged, puts on the Christian, and forgives me.

But I'll have none of her forgiveness!  My own heart tells me I do not
deserve it; and I cannot bear it!--And what is it but a mere verbal
forgiveness, as ostentatiously as cruelly given with a view to magnify
herself, and wound me deeper!  A little, dear, specious--but let me stop
--lest I blaspheme!


***


Reading over the above, I am ashamed of my ramblings; but what wouldest
have me do?--Seest thou not that I am but seeking to run out of myself,
in hope to lose myself; yet, that I am unable to do either?

If ever thou lovedst but half so fervently as I love--but of that thy
heavy soul is not capable.

Send me word by the next, I conjure thee, in the names of all her kindred
saints and angels, that she is living, and likely to live!--If thou
sendest ill news, thou wilt be answerable for the consequences, whether
it be fatal to the messenger, or to

Thy
LOVELACE.



LETTER LXX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.


Dr. H. has just been here.  He tarried with me till the minister had done
praying by the lady; and then we were both admitted.  Mr. Goddard, who
came while the doctor and the clergyman were with her, went away with
them when they went.  They took a solemn and everlasting leave of her, as
I have no scruple to say; blessing her, and being blessed by her; and
wishing (when it came to be their lot) for an exit as happy as her's is
likely to be.

She had again earnestly requested of the doctor his opinion how long it
was now probable that she could continue; and he told her, that he
apprehended she would hardly see to-morrow night.  She said, she should
number the hours with greater pleasure than ever she numbered any in her
life on the most joyful occasion.

How unlike poor Belton's last hours her's!  See the infinite differences
in the effects, on the same awful and affecting occasion, between a good
and a bad conscience!

This moment a man is come from Miss Howe with a letter.  Perhaps I shall
be able to send you the contents.


***


She endeavoured several times with earnestness, but in vain, to read the
letter of her dear friend.  The writing, she said, was too fine for her
grosser sight, and the lines staggered under her eye.  And indeed she
trembled so, she could not hold the paper; and at last desired Mrs.
Lovick to read it to her, the messenger waiting for an answer.

Thou wilt see in Miss Howe's letter, how different the expression of the
same impatience, and passionate love, is, when dictated by the gentler
mind of a woman, from that which results from a mind so boisterous and
knotty as thine.  For Mrs. Lovick will transcribe it, and I shall send
it--to be read in this place, if thou wilt.


MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, SEPT. 5.


O MY DEAREST FRIEND!

What will become of your poor Anna Howe!  I see by your writing, as well
as read by your own account, (which, were you not very, very ill, you
would have touched more tenderly,) how it is with you!  Why have I thus
long delayed to attend you!  Could I think, that the comfortings of a
faithful friend were as nothing to a gentle mind in distress, that I
could be prevailed upon to forbear visiting you so much as once in all
this time!  I, as well as every body else, to desert and abandon my dear
creature to strangers!  What will become of you, if you be as bad as my
apprehensions make you!

I will set out this moment, little as the encouragement is that you give
me to do so!  My mother is willing I should!  Why, O why was she not
before willing?

Yet she persuades me too, (lest I should be fatally affected were I to
find my fears too well justified,) to wait the return of this messenger,
who rides our swiftest horse.--God speed him with good news to me--One
line from your hand by him!--Send me but one line to bid me attend you!
I will set out the moment, the very moment I receive it.  I am now
actually ready to do so!  And if you love me, as I love you, the sight
of me will revive you to my hopes.--But why, why, when I can think this,
did I not go up sooner!

Blessed Heaven! deny not to my prayers, my friend, my admonisher, my
adviser, at a time so critical to myself.

But methinks, your style and sentiments are too well connected, too
full of life and vigour, to give cause for so much despair as thy
staggering pen seems to forbode.

I am sorry I was not at home, [I must add thus much, though the servant
is ready mounted at the door,] when Mr. Belford's servant came with your
affecting letter.  I was at Miss Lloyd's.  My mamma sent it to me--and I
came home that instant.  But he was gone: he would not stay, it seems.
Yet I wanted to ask him an hundred thousand questions.  But why delay I
thus my messenger?  I have a multitude of things to say to you--to advise
with you about!--You shall direct me in every thing.  I will obey the
holding up of your finger.  But, if you leave me--what is the world, or
any thing in it, to your

ANNA HOWE?


The effect this letter had on the lady, who is so near the end which the
fair writer so much apprehends and deplores, obliged Mrs. Lovick to make
many breaks in reading it, and many changes of voice.

This is a friend, said the divine lady, (taking the letter in her hand,
and kissing it,) worth wishing to live for.--O my dear Anna Howe! how
uninterruptedly sweet and noble has been our friendship!--But we shall
one day meet, (and this hope must comfort us both,) never to part again!
Then, divested of the shades of body, shall be all light and all mind!--
Then how unalloyed, how perfect, will be our friendship!  Our love then
will have one and the same adorable object, and we shall enjoy it and
each other to all eternity!

She said, her dear friend was so earnest for a line or two, that she fain
would write, if she could: and she tried--but to no purpose.  She could
dictate, however, she believed; and desired Mrs. Lovick would take pen
and paper.  Which she did, and then she dictated to her.  I would have
withdrawn; but at her desire staid.

She wandered a good deal at first.  She took notice that she did.  And
when she got into a little train, not pleasing herself, she apologized to
Mrs. Lovick for making her begin again and again; and said, that the
third time should go, let it be as it would.

She dictated the farewell part without hesitation; and when she came to
blessing and subscription, she took the pen, and dropping on her knees,
supported by Mrs. Lovick, wrote the conclusion; but Mrs. Lovick was
forced to guide her hand.

You will find the sense surprisingly entire, her weakness considered.

I made the messenger wait while I transcribed it.  I have endeavoured to
imitate the subscriptive part; and in the letter made pauses where, to
the best of my remembrance, she paused.  In nothing that relates to this
admirable lady can I be too minute.


WEDN. NEAR THREE O'CLOCK.


MY DEAREST MISS HOWE,

You must not be surprised--nor grieved--that Mrs. Lovick writes for me.
Although I cannot obey you, and write with my pen, yet my heart writes
by her's--accept it so--it is the nearest to obedience I can!

And now, what ought I to say?  What can I say?--But why should not you
know the truth? since soon you must--very soon.

Know then, and let your tears be those, if of pity, of joyful pity! for
I permit you to shed a few, to embalm, as I may say, a fallen blossom--
know then, that the good doctor, and the pious clergyman, and the worthy
apothecary, have just now--with joint benedictions--taken their last
leave of me; and the former bids me hope--do, my dearest, let me say hope
--hope for my enlargement before to-morrow sun-set.

Adieu, therefore, my dearest friend!--Be this your consolation, as it is
mine, that in God's good time we shall meet in a blessed eternity, never
more to part!--Once more, then, adieu!--and be happy!--Which a generous
nature cannot be, unless--to its power--it makes others so too.

God for ever bless you!--prays, dropt on my bended knees, although
supported upon them,

Your obliged, grateful, affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.


***


When I had transcribed and sealed this letter, by her direction, I gave
it to the messenger myself, who told me that Miss Howe waited for nothing
but his return to set out for London.

Thy servant is just come; so I will close here.  Thou art a merciless
master.  These two fellows are battered to death by thee, to use a female
word; and all female words, though we are not sure of their derivation,
have very significant meanings.  I believe, in their hearts, they wish
the angel in the Heaven that is ready to receive her, and thee at the
proper place, that there might be an end of their flurries--another word
of the same gender.

What a letter hast thou sent me!--Poor Lovelace!--is all the answer I
will return.


FIVE O'CLOCK.] Col. Morden is this moment arrived.



LETTER LXXI

MR. BELFORD
[IN CONTINUATION.]
EIGHT IN THE EVENING.


I had but just time, in my former, to tell you that Col. Morden was
arrived.  He was on horseback, attended by two servants, and alighted
at the door just as the clock struck five.  Mrs. Smith was then below in
her back-shop, weeping, her husband with her, who was as much affected as
she; Mrs. Lovick having left them a little before, in tears likewise; for
they had been bemoaning one another; joining in opinion that the
admirable lady would not live the night over.  She had told them, it was
her opinion too, from some numbnesses, which she called the forerunners
of death, and from an increased inclination to doze.

The Colonel, as Mrs. Smith told me afterwards, asked with great
impatience, the moment he alighted, how Miss Harlowe was?  She answered--
Alive!--but, she feared, drawing on apace.--Good God! said he, with his
hands and eyes lifted up, can I see her?  My name is Morden.  I have the
honour to be nearly related to her.--Step up, pray, and let her know,
(she is sensible, I hope,) that I am here--Who is with her?

Nobody but her nurse, and Mrs. Lovick, a widow gentlewoman, who is as
careful of her as if she were her mother.

And more careful too, interrupted he, or she is not careful at all----

Except a gentleman be with her, one Mr. Belford, continued Mrs. Smith,
who has been the best friend she has had.

If Mr. Belford be with her, surely I may--but pray step up, and let Mr.
Belford know that I shall take it for a favour to speak with him first.

Mrs. Smith came up to me in my new apartment.  I had but just dispatched
your servant, and was asking her nurse if I might be again admitted?  Who
answered, that she was dozing in the elbow chair, having refused to lie
down, saying, she should soon, she hoped, lie down for good.

The Colonel, who is really a fine gentleman, received me with great
politeness.  After the first compliments--My kinswoman, Sir, said he, is
more obliged to you than to any of her own family.  For my part, I have
been endeavouring to move so many rocks in her favour; and, little
thinking the dear creature so very bad, have neglected to attend her, as
I ought to have done the moment I arrived; and would, had I known how ill
she was, and what a task I should have had with the family.  But, Sir,
your friend has been excessively to blame; and you being so intimately
his friend, has made her fare the worse for your civilities to her.  But
are there no hopes of her recovery?

The doctors have left her, with the melancholy declaration that there are
none.

Has she had good attendance, Sir?  A skilful physician?  I hear these
good folks have been very civil and obliging to her.

Who could be otherwise? said Mrs. Smith, weeping.--She is the sweetest
lady in the world!

The character, said the Colonel, lifting up his eyes and one hand, that
she has from every living creature!--Good God!  How could your accursed
friend--

And how could her cruel parents? interrupted I.--We may as easily account
for him, as for them.

Too true! returned me, the vileness of the profligates of our sex
considered, whenever they can get any of the other into their power.

I satisfied him about the care that had been taken of her, and told him
of the friendly and even paternal attendance she had had from Dr. H. and
Mr. Goddard.

He was impatient to attend her, having not seen her, as he said, since
she was twelve years old; and that then she gave promises of being one of
the finest women in England.

She was so, replied I, a very few months ago: and, though emaciated, she
will appear to you to have confirmed those promises; for her features are
so regular and exact, her proportions so fine, and her manner so
inimitably graceful, that, were she only skin and bone, she must be a
beauty.

Mrs. Smith, at his request, stept up, and brought us down word that Mrs.
Lovick and her nurse were with her; and that she was in so sound a sleep,
leaning upon the former in her elbow-chair, that she had neither heard
her enter the room, nor go out.  The Colonel begged, if not improper,
that he might see her, though sleeping.  He said, that his impatience
would not let him stay till he awaked.  Yet he would not have her
disturbed; and should be glad to contemplate her sweet features, when she
saw not him; and asked, if she thought he could not go in, and come out,
without disturbing her?

She believed he might, she answered; for her chair's back was towards the
door.

He said he would take care to withdraw, if she awoke, that his sudden
appearance might not surprise her.

Mrs. Smith, stepping up before us, bid Mrs. Lovick and nurse not stir,
when we entered; and then we went up softly together.

We beheld the lady in a charming attitude.  Dressed, as I told you
before, in her virgin white.  She was sitting in her elbow-chair, Mrs.
Lovick close by her, in another chair, with her left arm round her neck,
supporting it, as it were; for, it seems, the lady had bid her do so,
saying, she had been a mother to her, and she would delight herself in
thinking she was in her mamma's arms; for she found herself drowsy;
perhaps, she said, for the last time she should be so.

One faded cheek rested upon the good woman's bosom, the kindly warmth of
which had overspread it with a faint, but charming flush; the other paler
and hollow, as if already iced over by death.  Her hands white as the
lily, with her meandering veins more transparently blue than ever I had
seen even her's, (veins so soon, alas! to be choked up by the congealment
of that purple stream, which already so languidly creeps, rather than
flows, through them!) her hands hanging lifelessly, one before her, the
other grasped by the right-hand of the kind widow, whose tears bedewed
the sweet face which her motherly boson supported, though unfelt by the
fair sleeper; and either insensibly to the good woman, or what she would
not disturb her to wipe off, or to change her posture: her aspect was
sweetly calm and serene: and though she started now and then, yet her
sleep seemed easy; her breath, indeed short and quick; but tolerably
free, and not like that of a dying person.

In this heart-moving attitude she appeared to us when we approached her,
and came to have her lovely face before us.

The Colonel, sighing often, gazed upon her with his arms folded, and with
the most profound and affectionate attention; till at last, on her
starting, and fetching her breath with greater difficulty than before, he
retired to a screen, that was drawn before her house, as she calls it,
which, as I have heretofore observed, stands under one of the windows.
This screen was placed there at the time she found herself obliged to
take to her chamber; and in the depth of our concern, and the fulness of
other discourse at our first interview, I had forgotten to apprize the
Colonel of what he would probably see.

Retiring thither, he drew out his handkerchief, and, overwhelmed with
grief, seemed unable to speak; but, on casting his eye behind the screen,
he soon broke silence; for, struck with the shape of the coffin, he
lifted up a purplish-coloured cloth that was spread over it, and,
starting back, Good God! said he, what's here?

Mrs. Smith standing next him, Why, said he, with great emotion, is my
cousin suffered to indulge her sad reflections with such an object before
her?

Alas! Sir, replied the good woman, who should controul her?  We are all
strangers about her, in a manner: and yet we have expostulated with her
upon this sad occasion.

I ought, said I, (stepping softly up to him, the lady again falling into
a doze,) to have apprized you of this.  I was here when it was brought
in, and never was so shocked in my life.  But she had none of her friends
about her, and no reason to hope for any of them to come near her; and,
assured she should not recover, she was resolved to leave as little as
possible, especially as to what related to her person, to her executor.
But it is not a shocking object to her, though it be to every body else.

Curse upon the hard-heartedness of those, said he, who occasioned her to
make so sad a provision for herself!--What must her reflections have been
all the time she was thinking of it, and giving orders about it?  And
what must they be every time she turns her head towards it?  These
uncommon genius's--but indeed she should have been controuled in it, had
I been here.

The lady fetched a profound sigh, and, starting, it broke off our talk;
and the Colonel then withdrew farther behind the screen, that his sudden
appearance might not surprise her.

Where am I?--said she.  How drowsy I am!  How long have I dozed?  Don't
go, Sir, (for I was retiring,) I am very stupid, and shall be more and
more so, I suppose.

She then offered to raise herself; but being ready to faint through
weakness, was forced to sit down again, reclining her head on her chair
back; and, after a few moments, I believe now, my good friends, said she,
all your kind trouble will soon be over.  I have slept, but am not
refreshed, and my fingers' ends seem numbed--have no feeling! (holding
them up,)--'tis time to send the letter to my good Norton.

Shall I, Madam, send my servant post with it?

O no, Sir, I thank you.  It will reach the dear woman too soon, (as she
will think,) by the post.

I told her this was not post-day.

Is it Wednesday still, said she; bless me!  I know not how the time goes
--but very tediously, 'tis plain.  And now I think I must soon take to my
bed.  All will be most conveniently, and with least trouble, over there--
will it not, Mrs. Lovick?--I think, Sir, turning to me, I have left
nothing to these last incapacitating hours.  Nothing either to say, or to
do--I bless God, I have not.  If I had, how unhappy should I be!  Can
you, Sir, remind me of any thing necessary to be done or said to make
your office easy?

If, Madam, your cousin Morden should come, you would be glad to see him,
I presume?

I am too weak to wish to see my cousin now.  It would but discompose me,
and him too.  Yet, if he come while I can see him, I will see him, were
it but to thank him for former favours, and for his present kind
intentions to me.  Has any body been here from him?

He has called, and will be here, Madam, in half an hour; but he feared to
surprise you.

Nothing can surprise me now, except my mamma were to favour me with her
last blessing in person.  That would be a welcome surprise to me, even
yet.  But did my cousin come purposely to town to see me?

Yes, Madam, I took the liberty to let him know, by a line last Monday,
how ill you were.

You are very kind, Sir.  I am, and have been greatly obliged to you.  But
I think I shall be pained to see him now, because he will be concerned to
see me.  And yet, as I am not so ill as I shall presently be--the sooner
he comes the better.  But if he come, what shall I do about the screen?
He will chide me, very probably, and I cannot bear chiding now.  Perhaps,
[leaning upon Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith,] I can walk into the next
apartment to receive him.

She motioned to rise, but was ready to faint again, and forced to sit
still.

The Colonel was in a perfect agitation behind the screen to hear this
discourse; and twice, unseen by his cousin, was coming from it towards
her; but retreated for fear of surprising her too much.

I stept to him, and favoured his retreat; she only saying, Are you going,
Mr. Belford?  Are you sent for down?  Is my cousin come?  For she heard
somebody step softly across the room, and thought it to be me; her
hearing being more perfect than her sight.

I told her, I believed he was; and she said, We must make the best of it,
Mrs. Lovick, and Mrs. Smith.  I shall otherwise most grievously shock my
poor cousin: for he loved me dearly once.--Pray give me a few of the
doctor's last drops in water, to keep up my spirits for this one
interview; and that is all, I believe, that can concern me now.

The Colonel, (who heard all this,) sent in his name; and I, pretending to
go down to him, introduced the afflicted gentleman; she having first
ordered the screen to be put as close to the window as possible, that he
might not see what was behind it; while he, having heard what she had
said about it, was determined to take no notice of it.

He folded the angel in his arms as she sat, dropping down on one knee;
for, supporting herself upon the two elbows of the chair, she attempted
to rise, but could not.  Excuse, my dear Cousin, said she, excuse me,
that I cannot stand up--I did not expect this favour now.  But I am glad
of this opportunity to thank you for all your generous goodness to me.

I never, my best-beloved and dearest Cousin, said he, (with eyes running
over,) shall forgive myself, that I did not attend you sooner.  Little
did I think you were so ill; nor do any of your friends believe it.  If
they did--

If they did, repeated she, interrupting him, I should have had more
compassion from them.  I am sure I should--But pray, Sir, how did you
leave them?  Are you reconciled to them?  If you are not, I beg, if you
love your poor Clarissa, that you will; for every widened difference
augments but my fault; since that is the foundation of all.

I had been expecting to hear from them in your favour, my dear Cousin,
said he, for some hours, when this gentleman's letter arrived, which
hastened me up; but I have the account of your grandfather's estate to
make up with you, and have bills and drafts upon their banker for the
sums due to you; which they desire you may receive, lest you should have
occasion for money.  And this is such an earnest of an approaching
reconciliation, that I dare to answer for all the rest being according to
your wishes, if----

Ah! Sir, interrupted she, with frequent breaks and pauses--I wish--I wish
this does not rather show that, were I to live, they would have nothing
more to say to me.  I never had any pride in being independent of them;
all my actions, when I might have made myself more independent, show this
--But what avail these reflections now?--I only beg, Sir, that you, and
this gentleman--to whom I am exceedingly obliged--will adjust those
matters--according to the will I have written.  Mr. Belford will excuse
me; but it was in truth more necessity than choice that made me think of
giving him the trouble he so kindly accepts.  Had I the happiness to see
you, my Cousin, sooner--or to know that you still honoured me with your
regard--I should not have had the assurance to ask this favour of him.--
But, though the friend of Mr. Lovelace, he is a man of honour, and he
will make peace rather than break it.  And, my dear Cousin, let me beg
of you while I have nearer relations than my Cousin Morden, dear as you
are, and always were to me, you have no title to avenge my wrongs upon
him who has been the occasion of them.  But I wrote to you my mind on
this subject, and my reasons--and I hope I need not further urge them.

I must do Mr. Lovelace so much justice, answered he, wiping his eyes, as
to witness how sincerely he repents him of his ungrateful baseness to
you, and how ready he is to make you all the amends in his power.  He
owns his wickedness, and your merit.  If he did not, I could not pass it
over, though you have nearer relations; for, my dear Cousin, did not your
grandfather leave me in trust for you?  And should I think myself
concerned for your fortune, and not for your honour?  But since he is so
desirous to do you justice, I have the less to say; and you may make
yourself entirely easy on that account.

I thank you, thank you, Sir, said she;--all is now as I wished.--But I am
very faint, very weak.  I am sorry I cannot hold up; that I cannot better
deserve the honour of this visit--but it will not be--and saying this, she
sunk down in her chair, and was silent.

Hereupon we both withdrew, leaving word that we would be at the Bedford
Head, if any thing extraordinary happened.

We bespoke a little repast, having neither of us dined; and, while it was
getting ready, you may guess at the subject of our discourse.  Both
joined in lamentation for the lady's desperate state; admired her
manifold excellencies; severely condemned you and her friends.  Yet, to
bring him into better opinion of you, I read to him some passages from
your last letters, which showed your concern for the wrongs you had done
her, and your deep remorse: and he said it was a dreadful thing to labour
under the sense of a guilt so irredeemable.

We procured Mr. Goddard, (Dr. H. not being at home,) once more to visit
her, and to call upon us in his return.  He was so good as to do so; but
he tarried with her not five minutes; and told us, that she was drawing
on apace; that he feared she would not live till morning; and that she
wished to see Colonel Morden directly.

The Colonel made excuses where none were needed; and though our little
refection was just brought in, he went away immediately.

I could not touch a morsel; and took pen and ink to amuse myself, and
oblige you; knowing how impatient you would be for a few lines: for, from
what I have recited, you see it was impossible I could withdraw to write
when your servant came at half an hour after five, or have an opportunity
for it till now; and this is accidental; and yet your poor fellow was
afraid to go away with the verbal message I sent; importing, as no doubt
he told you, that the Colonel was with us, the lady excessively ill, and
that I could not stir to write a line.


TEN O'CLOCK.

The Colonel sent to me afterwards, to tell me that the lady having been
in convulsions, he was so much disordered that he could not possibly
attend me.

I have sent every half hour to know how she does--and just now I have the
pleasure to hear that her convulsions have left her; and that she is gone
to rest in a much quieter way than could be expected.

Her poor cousin is very much indisposed; yet will not stir out of the
house while she is in such a way; but intends to lie down on a couch,
having refused any other accommodation.

END OF VOL. 8.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Clarissa, Or The History Of A Young
Lady, Volume 8, by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOL. 8 ***

***** This file should be named 12180.txt or 12180.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/1/8/12180/

Produced by Julie C. Sparks.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


Project Gutenberg's Clarissa Harlowe, Volume 9 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Clarissa Harlowe, Volume 9 (of 9)
       The History Of A Young Lady

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: May 20, 2004 [EBook #12398]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA HARLOWE, VOLUME 9 (OF 9) ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks




CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

Nine Volumes
Volume IX.



CONTENTS OF VOLUME IX


LETTER I.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Her silent devotion.  Strong symptoms of her approaching dissolution.
Comforts her cousin and him.  Wishes she had her parents' last blessing:
but God, she says, would not let her depend for comfort on any but
Himself.  Repeats her request to the Colonel, that he will not seek to
avenge her wrongs; and to Belford, that he will endeavour to heal all
breaches.

LETTER II.  From the same.--
The Colonel writes to Mr. John Harlowe that they may now spare themselves
the trouble of debating about a reconciliation.  The lady takes from her
bosom a miniature picture of Miss Howe, to be given to Mr. Hickman after
her decease.  Her affecting address to it, on parting with it.

LETTER III.  Belford to Mowbray.--
Desires him and Tourville to throw themselves in the way of Lovelace, in
order to prevent him doing either mischief to himself or others, on the
receipt of the fatal news which he shall probably send him in an hour or
two.

LETTER IV.  Lovelace to Belford.--
A letter filled with rage, curses, and alternate despair and hope.

LETTER V.  Belford to Lovelace.--
With the fatal hint, that he may take a tour to Paris, or wherever else
his destiny shall lead him.

LETTER VI.  Mowbray to Belford.--
With the particulars, in his libertine manner, of Lovelace's behaviour
on his receiving the fatal breviate, and of the distracted way he is in.

LETTER VII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Particulars of Clarissa's truly christian behaviour in her last hours.  A
short sketch of her character.

LETTER VIII.  From the same.--
The three next following letters brought by a servant in livery, directed
to the departed lady, viz.

LETTER IX.  From Mrs. Norton.--
With the news of a general reconciliation upon her own conditions.

LETTER X.  From Miss Arabella.--
In which she assures her of all their returning love and favour.

LETTER XI.  From Mr. John Harlowe.--
Regretting that things have been carried so far; and desiring her to
excuse his part in what had passed.

LETTER XII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
His executorial proceedings.  Eleven posthumous letters of the lady.
Copy of one of them written to himself.  Tells Lovelace of one written to
him, in pursuance of her promise in her allegorical letter.  (See Letter
XVIII. of Vol. VIII.)  Other executorial proceedings.  The Colonel's
letter to James Harlowe, signifying Clarissa's request to be buried at
the feet of her grandfather.

LETTER XIII.  From the same.--
Mrs. Norton arrives.  Her surprise and grief to find her beloved young
lady departed.  The posthumous letters calculated to give comfort, and
not to reproach.

LETTER XIV. XV. XVI. XVII. XVIII.
Copies of Clarissa's posthumous letters to her father, mother, brother,
sister, and uncle.

Substance of her letter to her aunt Hervey, concluding with advice to her
cousin Dolly.

Substance of her letter to Miss Howe, with advice in favour of Mr.
Hickman.

LETTER XIX.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The wretched Sinclair breaks her leg, and dispatches Sally Martin to beg
a visit from him, and that he will procure for her the
forgiveness.  Sally's remorse for the treatment she gave her at
Rowland's.  Acknowledges the lady's ruin to be in a great measure owing
to their instigations.

LETTER XX.  From the same.--
Miss Howe's distress on receiving the fatal news, and the posthumous
letters directed to her.  Copy of James Harlowe's answer to Colonel
Morden's letter, in which he relates the unspeakable distress of the
family; endeavours to exculpate himself; desires the body may be sent
down to Harlowe-place; and that the Colonel will favour them with his
company.

LETTER XXI.  Belford to Lovelace.--
The corpse sent down, attended by the Colonel and Mrs. Norton.

LETTER XXII.  Mowbray to Belford.--
An account of Lovelace's delirious unmanageableness, and extravagant
design, had they not all interposed.  They have got Lord M. to him.  He
endeavours to justify Lovelace by rakish principles, and by a true story
of a villany which he thinks greater than that of Lovelace by Clarissa.

LETTER XXIII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Written in the height of his delirium.  The whole world, he says, is but
one great Bedlam.  Every one in it mad but himself.

LETTER XXIV.  Belford to Mowbray.--
Desires that Lovelace, on his recovery, may be prevailed upon to go
abroad; and why.  Exhorts him and Tourville to reform, as he is resolved
to do.

LETTER XXV.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Describing the terrible impatience, despondency, and death of the
wretched Sinclair.

[As the bad house is often mentioned in this work, without any other
stigma than what arises from the wicked principles and actions
occasionally given of the wretches who inhabit it; Mr. Belford here
enters into the secret retirements of those creatures, and exposes them
in the appearances they are supposed to make, before they are tricked out
to ensnare weak and inconsiderate minds.]

LETTER XXVI.  Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
With an account of his arrival at Harlowe-place before the body.  The
dreadful distress of the whole family in expectation of its coming.  The
deep remorse of James and Arabella Harlowe.  Mutual recriminations on
recollecting the numerous instances of their inexorable cruelty.  Mrs.
Norton so ill he was forced to leave her at St. Alban's.  He dates again
to give a farther account of their distress on the arrival of the hearse.
Solemn respect paid to her memory by crowds of people.

LETTER XXVII.  From the same.--
Farther interesting accounts of what passed among the Harlowes.  Miss
Howe expected to see, for the last time, her beloved friend.

LETTER XXVIII.  From the same.--
Miss Howe arrives.  The Colonel receives her.  Her tender woe; and
characteristic behaviour.

LETTER XXIX.  Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
Mrs. Norton arrives.  Amended in spirits.  To what owing.  Farther
recriminations of the unhappy parents.  They attempt to see the corpse;
but cannot.  Could ever wilful hard-heartedness, the Colonel asks, be
more severely punished?  Substance of the lady's posthumous letter to
Mrs. Norton.

LETTER XXX.  From the same.--
Account of the funeral solemnity.  Heads of the eulogium.  The universal
justice done to the lady's great and good qualities.  Other affecting
particulars.

LETTER XXXI.  Belford to Colonel Morden.--
Compliments him on his pathetic narratives.  Farther account of his
executorial proceedings.

LETTER XXXII.  James Harlowe to Belford.

LETTER XXXIII.  Mr. Belford.  In answer.

The lady's LAST WILL.  In the preamble to which, as well as in the body
of it, she gives several instructive hints; and displays, in an exemplary
manner, her forgiving spirit, her piety, her charity, her gratitude, and
other christian and heroic virtues.

LETTER XXXIV.  Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
The will read.  What passed on the occasion.

LETTER XXXV.  Belford to Lord M.--
Apprehends a vindictive resentment from the Colonel.--Desires that Mr.
Lovelace may be prevailed upon to take a tour.

LETTER XXXVI.  Miss Montague.  In answer.

Summary account of proceedings relating to the execution of the lady's
will, and other matters.  Substance of a letter from Mr. Belford to Mr.
Hickman; of Mr. Hickman's answer; and of a letter from Miss Howe to Mr.
Belford.

LETTER XXXVII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Describing his delirium as dawning into sense and recollection.  All is
conscience and horror with him, he says.  A description of his misery at
its height.

LETTER XXXVIII.  From the same.--
Revokes his last letter, as ashamed of it.  Yet breaks into fits and
starts, and is ready to go back again.  Why, he asks, did his mother
bring him up to know no controul?  His heart sickens at the recollection
of what he was.  Dreads the return of his malady.  Makes an effort to
forget all.

LETTER XXXIX.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Is preparing to leave the kingdom.  His route.  Seasonable warnings,
though delivered in a ludicrous manner, on Belford's resolution to
reform.  Complains that he has been strangely kept in the dark of late.
Demands a copy of the lady's will.

LETTER XL.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Justice likely to overtake his instrument Tomlinson.  On what occasion.
The wretched man's remorse on the lady's account.  Belford urges Lovelace
to go abroad for his health.  Answers very seriously to the warnings he
gives him.  Amiable scheme for the conduct of his future life.

LETTER XLI.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Pities Tomlinson.  Finds that he is dead in prison.  Happy that he lived
not to be hanged.  Why.  No discomfort so great but some comfort may be
drawn from it.  Endeavours to defend himself by a whimsical case which
he puts between A. a miser, and B. a thief.

LETTER XLII.  From the same.--
Ridicules him on the scheme of life he has drawn out for himself.  In his
manner gives Belford some farther cautions and warnings.  Reproaches him
for not saving the lady.  A breach of confidence in some cases is more
excusable than to keep a secret.  Rallies him on his person and air, on
his cousin Charlotte, and the widow Lovick.

LETTER XLIII.  Mr. Belford to Colonel Morden.--
On a declaration he had made, of taking vengeance of Mr. Lovelace.  His
arguments with him on that subject, from various topics.

LETTER XLIV.  The Lady's posthumous letter to her cousin Morden.--
Containing arguments against DUELLING, as well as with regard to her
particular case, as in general.  See also Letter XVI. to her brother, on
the same subject.

LETTER XLV.  Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
In answer to his pleas against avenging his cousin.  He paints in very
strong colours the grief and distress of the whole family, on the loss of
a child, whose character and excellencies rise upon them to their
torment.

LETTER XLVI.  Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
Farther particulars relating to the execution of the lady's will.  Gives
his thoughts of women's friendships in general; of that of Miss Howe and
his cousin, in particular.  An early habit of familiar letter-writing,
how improving.  Censures Miss Howe for her behaviour to Mr. Hickman.  Mr.
Hickman's good character.  Caution to parents who desire to preserve
their children's veneration for them.  Mr. Hickman, unknown to Miss Howe,
puts himself and equipage in mourning for Clarissa.  Her lively turn upon
him on that occasion.  What he, the Colonel, expects from the generosity
of Miss Howe, in relation to Mr. Hickman.  Weakness of such as are afraid
of making their last wills.

LETTER XLVII.  Belford to Miss Howe.--
With copies of Clarissa's posthumous letters; and respectfully, as from
Colonel Morden and himself, reminding her of her performing her part of
her dear friend's last desires, in making one of the most deserving men
in England happy.  Informs her of the delirium of Lovelace, in order to
move her compassion for him, and of the dreadful death of Sinclair and
Tomlinson.

LETTER XLVIII.  Miss Howe to Mr. Belford.--
Observations on the letters and subjects he communicates to her.  She
promises another letter, in answer to his and Colonel Morden's call upon
her in Mr. Hickman's favour.  Applauds the Colonel for purchasing her
beloved friend's jewels, in order to present them to Miss Dolly Hervey.

LETTER XLIX.  From the same.--
She accounts for, though not defends, her treatment of Mr. Hickman.  She
owns that he is a man worthy of a better choice; that she values no man
more than him: and assures Mr. Belford and the Colonel that her
endeavours shall not be wanting to make him happy.

LETTER L.  Mr. Belford to Miss Howe.--
A letter full of grateful acknowledgements for the favour of her's.

LETTER LI.  Lord M. to Mr. Belford.--
Acquainting him with his kinsman's setting out for London, in order to
embark.  Wishes him to prevent a meeting between him and Mr. Morden.

LETTER LII.  Mr. Belford to Lord M.--
Has had a visit from Mr. Lovelace.  What passed between them on the
occasion.  Has an interview with Colonel Morden.

LETTER LIII.  Mr. Belford to Lord M.--
Just returned from attending Mr. Lovelace part of his way towards Dover.
Their solemn parting.

LETTER LIV.  From the same.--
An account of what passed between himself and Colonel Morden at their
next meeting.  Their affectionate parting.

LETTER LV.  Miss Howe to Mr. Belford.--
Gives, at his request, the character of her beloved friend at large; and
an account of the particular distribution of her time in the twenty-four
hours of the natural day.

LETTER LVI.  Lovelace to Belford, from Paris.--
Conscience the conqueror of souls.  He cannot run away from his
reflections.  He desires a particular account of all that has passed
since he left England.

LETTER LVII.  Belford to Lovelace.--
Answers him as to all the particulars he writes about.

LETTER LVIII.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Has received a letter from Joseph Leman (who, he says, is
conscience-ridden) to inform him that Colonel Morden resolves to have his
will of him.  He cannot bear to be threatened.  He will write to the
Colonel to know his purpose.  He cannot get off his regrets on account of
the dear lady for the blood of him.

LETTER LIX.  Belford to Lovelace.--
It would be matter of serious reflection to him, he says, if that very
Leman, who had been his machine, should be the instrument of his fall.

LETTER LX.  Lovelace to Belford.--
Has written to the Colonel to know his intention: but yet in such a
manner that he may handsomely avoid taking it as a challenge; though, in
the like case, he owns that he himself should not.  Copy of his letter to
the Colonel.

LETTER LXI.  From the same.--
He is now in his way to Trent, in order to meet Colonel Morden.  He is
sure of victory: but will not, if he can help it, out of regard to
Clarissa, kill the Colonel.

LETTER LXII.  From the same.--
Interview with Colonel Morden.  To-morrow, says he, is the day that will,
in all probability, send either one or two ghosts to attend the manes of
my Clarissa.  He doubts not to give the Colonel his life, or his death;
and to be able, by next morning eleven, to write all the particulars.

LETTER LXIV.  THE ISSUE OF THE DUEL.

CONCLUSION

POSTSCRIPT



THE HISTORY

OF

CLARISSA HARLOWE



LETTER I

MR. BELFORD
[IN CONTINUATION.]
SOHO, SIX O'CLOCK, SEPT. 7.


The lady is still alive.  The Colonel having just sent his servant to let
me know that she inquired after me about an hour ago, I am dressing to
attend her.  Joel begs of me to dispatch him back, though but with one
line to gratify your present impatience.  He expects, he says, to find
you at Knightsbridge, let him make what haste he can back; and, if he has
not a line or two to pacify you, he is afraid you will pistol him; for he
apprehends that you are hardly yourself.  I therefore dispatch this, and
will have another ready, as soon as I can, with particulars.--But you
must have a little patience; for how can I withdraw myself every half
hour to write, if I am admitted to the lady's presence, or if I am with
the Colonel?


SMITH'S, EIGHT IN THE MORNING.

The lady is in a slumber.  Mrs. Lovick, who sat up with her, says she had
a better night than was expected; for although she slept little, she
seemed easy; and the easier for the pious frame she was in; all her
waking moments being taken up in devotion, or in an ejaculatory silence;
her hands and eyes often lifted up, and her lips moving with a fervour
worthy of these her last hours.


TEN O'CLOCK.

The Colonel being earnest to see his cousin as soon as she awoke, we were
both admitted.  We observed in her, as soon as we entered, strong
symptoms of her approaching dissolution, notwithstanding what the women
had flattered us with from her last night's tranquillity.--The Colonel
and I, each loth to say what we thought, looked upon one another with
melancholy countenances.

The Colonel told her he should send a servant to her uncle Antony's for
some papers he had left there; and asked if she had any commands that
way.

She thought not, she said, speaking more inwardly than she did the day
before.  She had indeed a letter ready to be sent to her good Norton; and
there was a request intimated in it.  But it was time enough, if the
request were signified to those whom it concerned when all was over.
--However, it might be sent them by the servant who was going that way.
And she caused it to be given to the Colonel for that purpose.

Her breath being very short, she desired another pillow. Having two
before, this made her in a manner sit up in her bed; and she spoke then
with more distinctness; and, seeing us greatly concerned, forgot her own
sufferings to comfort us; and a charming lecture she gave us, though a
brief one, upon the happiness of a timely preparation, and upon the
hazards of a late repentance, when the mind, as she observed, was so much
weakened, as well as the body, as to render a poor soul hardly able to
contend with its natural infirmities.

I beseech ye, my good friends, proceeded she, mourn not for one who
mourns not, nor has cause to mourn, for herself.  On the contrary,
rejoice with me, that all my worldly troubles are so near to their end.
Believe me, Sirs, that I would not, if I might, choose to live, although
the pleasantest part of my life were to come over again: and yet eighteen
years of it, out of nineteen, have been very pleasant.  To be so much
exposed to temptation, and to be so liable to fail in the trial, who
would not rejoice that all her dangers are over?--All I wished was pardon
and blessing from my dear parents.  Easy as my departure seems promised
to be, it would have been still easier, had I that pleasure.  BUT GOD
ALMIGHTY WOULD NOT LET ME DEPEND FOR COMFORT UPON ANY BUT HIMSELF.

She then repeated her request, in the most earnest manner, to her cousin,
that he would not heighten her fault, by seeking to avenge her death; to
me, that I would endeavour to make up all breaches, and use the power I
had with my friend, to prevent all future mischiefs from him, as well as
that which this trust might give me to prevent any to him.

She made some excuses to her cousin, for not having been able to alter
her will, to join him in the executorship with me; and to me, for the
trouble she had given, and yet should give me.

She had fatigued herself so much, (growing sensibly weaker) that she sunk
her head upon her pillows, ready to faint; and we withdrew to the window,
looking upon one another; but could not tell what to say; and yet both
seemed inclinable to speak: but the motion passed over in silence.  Our
eyes only spoke; and that in a manner neither's were used to--mine, at
least, not till I knew this admirable creature.

The Colonel withdrew to dismiss his messenger, and send away the letter
to Mrs. Norton.  I took the opportunity to retire likewise; and to write
thus far.  And Joel returning to take it, I now close here.

ELEVEN O'CLOCK.



LETTER II

MR. BELFORD
[IN CONTINUATION.]


The Colonel tells me that he had written to Mr. John Harlowe, by his
servant, 'That they might spare themselves the trouble of debating about
a reconciliation; for that his dear cousin would probably be no more
before they could resolve.'

He asked me after his cousin's means of subsisting; and whether she had
accepted of any favour from me; he was sure, he said, she would not from
you.

I acquainted him with the truth of her parting with some of her apparel.

This wrung his heart; and bitterly did he exclaim as well against you as
against her implacable relations.

He wished he had not come to England at all, or had come sooner; and
hoped I would apprize him of the whole mournful story, at a proper
season.  He added, that he had thoughts, when he came over, of fixing
here for the remainder of his days; but now, as it was impossible his
cousin could recover, he would go abroad again, and re-settle himself at
Florence or Leghorn.

The lady has been giving orders, with great presence of mind, about her
body! directing her nurse and the maid of the house to put her in the
coffin as soon as she is cold.  Mr. Belford, she said, would know the
rest by her will.


***


She has just now given from her bosom, where she always wore it, a
miniature picture, set in gold, of Miss Howe.  She gave it to Mrs.
Lovick, desiring her to fold it up in white paper, and direct it, To
Charles Hickman, Esq. and to give it to me, when she was departed, for
that gentleman.

She looked upon the picture, before she gave it her--Sweet and
ever-amiable friend!--Companion!--Sister!--Lover! said she--and kissed
it four several times, once at each tender appellation.


***


Your other servant is come.--Well may you be impatient!--Well may you!
--But do you think I can leave off, in the middle of a conversation, to
run and set down what offers, and send it away piece-meal as I write?
--If I could, must I not lose one half, while I put down the other?

This event is nearly as interesting to me as it is to you.  If you are
more grieved than I, there can be but one reason for it; and that's at
your heart!--I had rather lose all the friends I have in the world,
(yourself in the number,) than this divine lady; and shall be unhappy
whenever I think of her sufferings, and of her merit; though I have
nothing to reproach myself by reason of the former.

I say not this, just now, so much to reflect upon you as to express my
own grief; though your conscience I suppose, will make you think
otherwise.

Your poor fellow, who says that he begs for his life, in desiring to be
dispatched back with a letter, tears this from me--else, perhaps, (for
I am just sent for down,) a quarter of an hour would make you--not easy
indeed--but certain--and that, in a state like your's, to a mind like
your's, is a relief.

THURSDAY AFTERNOON, FOUR O'CLOCK.



LETTER III

MR. BELFORD, TO RICHARD MOWBRAY, ESQ.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON.


DEAR MOWBRAY,

I am glad to hear you are in town.  Throw yourself the moment this comes
to your hand, (if possible with Tourville,) in the way of the man who
least of all men deserves the love of the worthy heart; but most that of
thine and Tourville; else the news I shall most probably send him within
an hour or two, will make annihilation the greatest blessing he has to
wish for.

You will find him between Piccadilly and Kensington, most probably on
horseback, riding backwards and forwards in a crazy way; or put up,
perhaps, at some inn or tavern in the way--a waiter possibly, if so,
watching for his servant's return to him from me.


***


His man Will. is just come to me.  He will carry this to you in his way
back, and be your director.  Hie away in a coach, or any how.  Your being
with him may save either his or a servant's life.  See the blessed
effects of triumphant libertinism!  Sooner or later it comes home to us,
and all concludes in gall and bitterness!

Adieu.
J. BELFORD.



LETTER IV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


Curse upon the Colonel, and curse upon the writer of the last letter I
received, and upon all the world!  Thou to pretend to be as much
interested in my Clarissa's fate as myself!--'Tis well for one of us that
this was not said to me, instead of written.--Living or dying, she is
mine--and only mine.  Have I not earned her dearly?--Is not d----n----n
likely to be the purchase to me, though a happy eternity will be her's?

An eternal separation!--O God! O God!--How can I bear that thought!--But
yet there is life!--Yet, therefore, hope--enlarge my hope, and thou shalt
be my good genius, and I will forgive thee every thing.

For this last time--but it must not, shall not be the last--Let me hear,
the moment thou receivest this--what I am to be--for, at present, I am

The most miserable of Men.


ROSE, AT KNIGHTSBRIDGE, FIVE O'CLOCK.

My fellow tells me that thou art sending Mowbray and Tourville to me:--I
want them not--my soul's sick of them, and of all the world--but most of
myself.  Yet, as they send me word they will come to me immediately, I
will wait for them, and for thy next.  O Belford, let it not be--But
hasten it, be what it may!



LETTER V

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SEVEN O'CLOCK, THURSDAY EVENING, SEPT. 7.


I have only to say at present--Thou wilt do well to take a tour to
Paris; or wherever else thy destiny shall lead thee!----

JOHN BELFORD.



LETTER VI

MR. MOWBRAY, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SEPT. 7, BETWEEN ELEVEN AND TWELVE AT NIGHT.


DEAR JACK,

I send by poor Lovelace's desire, for particulars of the fatal breviate
thou sentest him this night.  He cannot bear to set pen to paper; yet
wants to know every minute passage of Miss Harlowe's departure.  Yet why
he should, I cannot see: for if she is gone, she is gone; and who can
help it?

I never heard of such a woman in my life.  What great matters has she
suffered, that grief should kill her thus?

I wish the poor fellow had never known her.  From first to last, what
trouble she has cost him!  The charming fellow had been half lost to us
ever since he pursued her.  And what is there in one woman more than
another, for matter of that?

It was well we were with him when your note came.  Your showed your true
friendship in your foresight.  Why, Jack, the poor fellow was quite
beside himself--mad as any man ever was in Bedlam.

Will. brought him the letter just after we had joined him at the Bohemia
Head; where he had left word at the Rose at Knightsbridge he should be;
for he had been sauntering up and down, backwards and forwards, expecting
us, and his fellow.  Will., as soon as he delivered it, got out of his
way; and, when he opened it, never was such a piece of scenery.  He
trembled like a devil at receiving it: fumbled at the seal, his fingers
in a palsy, like Tom. Doleman's; his hand shake, shake, shake, that he
tore the letter in two, before he could come at the contents: and, when
he had read them, off went his hat to one corner of the room, his wig to
the other--D--n--n seize the world! and a whole volley of such-like
excratious wishes; running up and down the room, and throwing up the
sash, and pulling it down, and smiting his forehead with his double fist,
with such force as would have felled as ox, and stamping and tearing,
that the landlord ran in, and faster out again.  And this was the
distraction scene for some time.

In vain was all Jemmy or I could say to him.  I offered once to take hold
of his hands, because he was going to do himself a mischief, as I
believed, looking about for his pistols, which he had laid upon the
table, but which Will., unseen, had taken out with him, [a faithful,
honest dog, that Will.!  I shall for ever love the fellow for it,] and he
hit me a d--d dowse of the chops, as made my nose bleed.  'Twas well
'twas he, for I hardly knew how to take it.

Jemmy raved at him, and told him, how wicked it was in him, to be so
brutish to abuse a friend, and run mad for a woman.  And then he said he
was sorry for it; and then Will. ventured in with water and a towel; and
the dog rejoiced, as I could see by his look, that I had it rather than
he.

And so, by degrees, we brought him a little to his reason, and he
promised to behave more like a man.  And so I forgave him: and we rode on
in the dark to here at Doleman's.  And we all tried to shame him out of
his mad, ungovernable foolishness: for we told him, as how she was but a
woman, and an obstinate perverse woman too; and how could he help it?

And you know, Jack, (as we told him, moreover,) that it was a shame to
manhood, for a man, who had served twenty and twenty women as bad or
worse, let him have served Miss Harlowe never so bad, should give himself
such obstropulous airs, because she would die: and we advised him never
to attempt a woman proud of her character and virtue, as they call it,
any more: for why?  The conquest did not pay trouble; and what was there
in one woman more than another?  Hay, you know, Jack!--And thus we
comforted him, and advised him.

But yet his d--d addled pate runs upon this lady as much now she's dead
as it did when she was living.  For, I suppose, Jack, it is no joke: she
is certainly and bona fide dead: I'n't she?  If not, thou deservest to be
doubly d--d for thy fooling, I tell thee that.  So he will have me write
for particulars of her departure.

He won't bear the word dead on any account.  A squeamish puppy!  How love
unmans and softens!  And such a noble fellow as this too!  Rot him for an
idiot, and an oaf!  I have no patience with the foolish duncical dog
--upon my soul, I have not!

So send the account, and let him howl over it, as I suppose he will.

But he must and shall go abroad: and in a month or two Jemmy, and you,
and I, will join him, and he'll soon get the better of this
chicken-hearted folly, never fear; and will then be ashamed of himself:
and then we'll not spare him; though now, poor fellow, it were pity to
lay him on so thick as he deserves.  And do thou, till then, spare all
reflections upon him; for, it seems, thou hast worked him unmercifully.

I was willing to give thee some account of the hand we have had with the
tearing fellow, who had certainly been a lost man, had we not been with
him; or he would have killed somebody or other.  I have no doubt of it.
And now he is but very middling; sits grinning like a man in straw;
curses and swears, and is confounded gloomy; and creeps into holes and
corners, like an old hedge-hog hunted for his grease.

And so, adieu, Jack.  Tourville, and all of us, wish for thee; for no one
has the influence upon him that thou hast.

R. MOWBRAY.


As I promised him that I would write for the particulars abovesaid, I
      write this after all are gone to bed; and the fellow is set out
      with it by day-break.



LETTER VII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT.


I may as well try to write; since, were I to go to bed, I shall not
sleep.  I never had such a weight of grief upon my mind in my life, as
upon the demise of this admirable woman; whose soul is now rejoicing
in the regions of light.

You may be glad to know the particulars of her happy exit.  I will try
to proceed; for all is hush and still; the family retired; but not one
of them, and least of all her poor cousin, I dare say, to rest.

At four o'clock, as I mentioned in my last, I was sent for down; and,
as thou usedst to like my descriptions, I will give thee the woeful scene
that presented itself to me, as I approached the bed.

The Colonel was the first that took my attention, kneeling on the side of
the bed, the lady's right hand in both his, which his face covered,
bathing it with his tears; although she had been comforting him, as the
women since told me, in elevated strains, but broken accents.

On the other side of the bed sat the good widow; her face overwhelmed
with tears, leaning her head against the bed's head in a most
disconsolate manner; and turning her face to me, as soon as she saw me,
O Mr. Belford, cried she, with folded hands--the dear lady--A heavy sob
permitted her not to say more.

Mrs. Smith, with clasped fingers, and uplifted eyes, as if imploring help
from the only Power which could give it, was kneeling down at the bed's
feet, tears in large drops trickling down her cheeks.

Her nurse was kneeling between the widow and Mrs. Smith, her arms
extended.  In one hand she held an ineffectual cordial, which she had
just been offering to her dying mistress; her face was swoln with weeping
(though used to such scenes as this); and she turned her eyes towards me,
as if she called upon me by them to join in the helpless sorrow; a fresh
stream bursting from them as I approached the bed.

The maid of the house with her face upon her folded arms, as she stood
leaning against the wainscot, more audibly exprest her grief than any of
the others.

The lady had been silent a few minutes, and speechless, as they thought,
moving her lips without uttering a word; one hand, as I said, in her
cousin's.  But when Mrs. Lovick, on my approach, pronounced my name, O
Mr. Belford, said she, with a faint inward voice, but very distinct
nevertheless--Now!--Now! [in broken periods she spoke]--I bless God for
his mercies to his poor creature--all will soon be over--a few--a very
few moments--will end this strife--and I shall be happy!

Comfort here, Sir--turning her head to the Colonel--comfort my cousin
--see! the blame--able kindness--he would not wish me to be happy
--so soon!

Here she stopt for two or three minutes, earnestly looking upon him.
Then resuming, My dearest Cousin, said she, be comforted--what is dying
but the common lot?--The mortal frame may seem to labour--but that is
all!--It is not so hard to die as I believed it to be!--The preparation
is the difficulty--I bless God, I have had time for that--the rest is
worse to beholders, than to me!--I am all blessed hope--hope itself.  She
looked what she said, a sweet smile beaming over her countenance.

After a short silence, Once more, my dear Cousin, said she, but still in
broken accents, commend me most dutifully to my father and mother--There
she stopt.  And then proceeding--To my sister, to my brother, to my
uncles--and tell them, I bless them with my parting breath--for all their
goodness to me--even for their displeasure, I bless them--most happy has
been to me my punishment here!  Happy indeed!

She was silent for a few moments, lifting up her eyes, and the hand her
cousin held not between his.  Then, O Death! said she, where is thy
sting! [the words I remember to have heard in the burial-service read
over my uncle and poor Belton.]  And after a pause--It is good for me
that I was afflicted!  Words of scripture, I suppose.

Then turning towards us, who were lost in speechless sorrow--O dear, dear
gentlemen, said she, you know not what foretastes--what assurances--And
there she again stopped, and looked up, as if in a  thankful rapture,
sweetly smiling.

Then turning her head towards me--Do you, Sir, tell your friend that I
forgive him!--And I pray to God to forgive him!--Again pausing, and
lifting up her eyes as if praying that He would.  Let him know how
happily I die:--And that such as my own, I wish to be his last hour.

She was again silent for a few moments: and then resuming--My sight
fails me!--Your voices only--[for we both applauded her christian, her
divine frame, though in accents as broken as her own]; and the voice of
grief is alike in all.  Is not this Mr. Morden's hand? pressing one of
his with that he had just let go.  Which is Mr. Belford's? holding out
the other.  I gave her mine.  God Almighty bless you both, said she, and
make you both--in your last hour--for you must come to this--happy as I
am.

She paused again, her breath growing shorter; and, after a few minutes
--And now, my dearest Cousin, give me your hand--nearer--still nearer
--drawing it towards her; and she pressed it with her dying lips--God
protect you, dear, dear Sir--and once more, receive my best and most
grateful thanks--and tell my dear Miss Howe--and vouchsafe to see, and to
tell my worthy Norton--she will be one day, I fear not, though now lowly
in her fortunes, a saint in Heaven--tell them both, that I remember them
with thankful blessings in my last moments!--And pray God to give them
happiness here for many, many years, for the sake of their friends and
lovers; and an heavenly crown hereafter; and such assurances of it, as I
have, through the all-satisfying merits of my blessed Redeemer.

Her sweet voice and broken periods methinks still fill my ears, and never
will be out of my memory.

After a short silence, in a more broken and faint accent--And you, Mr.
Belford, pressing my hand, may God preserve you, and make you sensible of
all your errors--you see, in me, how all ends--may you be--And down sunk
her head upon her pillow, she fainting away, and drawing from us her
hands.

We thought she was then gone; and each gave way to a violent burst of
grief.

But soon showing signs of returning life, our attention was again
engaged; and I besought her, when a little recovered, to complete in my
favour her half-pronounced blessing.  She waved her hand to us both, and
bowed her head six several times, as we have since recollected, as if
distinguishing every person present; not forgetting the nurse and the
maid-servant; the latter having approached the bed, weeping, as if
crowding in for the divine lady's blessing; and she spoke faltering and
inwardly--Bless--bless--bless--you all--and--now--and now--[holding up
her almost lifeless hands for the last time] come--O come--blessed Lord
--JESUS!

And with these words, the last but half-pronounced, expired:--such a
smile, such a charming serenity overspreading her sweet face at the
instant, as seemed to manifest her eternal happiness already begun.

O Lovelace!--But I can write no more!


***


I resume my pen to add a few lines.

While warm, though pulseless, we pressed each her hand with our lips;
and then retired into the next room.

We looked at each other, with intent to speak: but, as if one motion
governed, as one cause affected both, we turned away silent.

The Colonel sighed as if his heart would burst: at last, his face and
hands uplifted, his back towards me, Good Heaven! said he to himself,
support me!--And is it thus, O flower of nature!--Then pausing--And must
we no more--never more!--My blessed, blessed Cousin! uttering some other
words, which his sighs made inarticulate.--And then, as if recollecting
himself--Forgive me, Sir!--Excuse me, Mr. Belford!  And sliding by me,
Anon I hope to see you, Sir--And down stairs he went, and out of the
house, leaving me a statue.

When I recovered, I was ready to repine at what I then called an unequal
dispensation; forgetting her happy preparation, and still happier
departure; and that she had but drawn a common lot; triumphing in it, and
leaving behind her every one less assured of happiness, though equally
certain that the lot would one day be their own.

She departed exactly at forty minutes after six o'clock, as by her watch
on the table.

And thus died Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, in the blossom of her youth and
beauty: and who, her tender years considered, had not left behind her her
superior in extensive knowledge and watchful prudence; nor hardly her
equal for unblemished virtue, exemplary piety, sweetness of manners,
discreet generosity, and true christian charity: and these all set off by
the most graceful modesty and humility; yet on all proper occasions,
manifesting a noble presence of mind, and true magnanimity: so that she
may be said to have been not only an ornament to her sex, but to human
nature.

A better pen than mine may do her fuller justice.  Thine, I mean, O
Lovelace!  For well dost thou know how much she excelled in the graces of
both mind and person, natural and acquired, all that is woman.  And thou
also can best account for the causes of her immature death, through those
calamities which in so short a space of time, from the highest pitch of
felicity, (every one in a manner adoring her,) brought he to an exit so
happy for herself, but, that it was so early, so much to be deplored by
all who had the honour of her acquaintance.

This task, then, I leave to thee: but now I can write no more, only that
I am a sympathizer in every part of thy distress, except (and yet it is
cruel to say it) in that which arises from thy guilt.

ONE O'CLOCK, FRIDAY MORNING.



LETTER VIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
NINE, FRIDAY MORN.


I have no opportunity to write at length, having necessary orders to give
on the melancholy occasion.  Joel, who got to me by six in the morning,
and whom I dispatched instantly back with the letter I had ready from
last night, gives me but an indifferent account of the state of your
mind.  I wonder not at it; but time (and nothing else can) will make it
easier to you: if (that is to say) you have compounded with your
conscience; else it may be heavier every day than other.


***


Tourville tells us what a way you are in.  I hope you will not think of
coming hither.  The lady in her will desires you may not see her.  Four
copies are making of it.  It is a long one; for she gives her reasons for
all she wills.  I will write to you more particularly as soon as possibly
I can.


***


Three letters are just brought by a servant in livery, directed To Miss
Clarissa Harlowe.  I will send copies of them to you.  The contents are
enough to make one mad.  How would this poor lady have rejoiced to
receive them!--And yet, if she had, she would not have been enabled to
say, as she nobly did,* That God would not let her depend for comfort
upon any but Himself.--And indeed for some days past she had seemed to
have got above all worldly considerations.--Her fervent love, even for
her Miss Howe, as she acknowledged, having given way to supremer
fervours.**


* See Letter I. of this volume.
** See Vol. VIII. Letter LXII.



LETTER IX

MRS. NORTON, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 6.


At length, my best beloved Miss Clary, every thing is in the wished
train: for all your relations are unanimous in your favour.  Even your
brother and your sister are with the foremost to be reconciled to you.

I knew it must end thus!  By patience, and persevering sweetness, what a
triumph have you gained!

This happy change is owing to letters received from your physician, from
your cousin Morden, and from Mr. Brand.

Colonel Morden will be with you, no doubt, before this can reach you,
with his pocket-book filled with money-bills, that nothing may be wanting
to make you easy.

And now, all our hopes, all our prayers, are, that this good news may
restore you to spirits and health; and that (so long withheld) it may not
come too late.

I know how much your dutiful heart will be raised with the joyful tidings
I write you, and still shall more particularly tell you of, when I have
the happiness to see you: which will be by next Sunday, at farthest;
perhaps on Friday afternoon, by the time you can receive this.

For this day, being sent for by the general voice, I was received by
every one with great goodness and condescension, and entreated (for that
was the word they were pleased to use, when I needed no entreaty, I am
sure,) to hasten up to you, and to assure you of all their affectionate
regards to you: and your father bid me say all the kind things that were
in my heart to say, in order to comfort and raise you up, and they would
hold themselves bound to make them good.

How agreeable is this commission to your Norton!  My heart will overflow
with kind speeches, never fear!  I am already meditating what I shall
say, to cheer and raise you up, in the names of every one dear and near
to you.  And sorry I am that I cannot this moment set out, as I might,
instead of writing, would they favour my eager impatience with their
chariot; but as it was not offered, it would be a presumption to have
asked for it: and to-morrow a hired chaise and pair will be ready; but at
what hour I know not.

How I long once more to fold my dear, precious young lady to my fond, my
more than fond, my maternal bosom!

Your sister will write to you, and send her letter, with this, by a
particular hand.

I must not let them see what I write, because of my wish about the
chariot.

Your uncle Harlowe will also write, and (I doubt not) in the kindest
terms: for they are all extremely alarmed and troubled at the dangerous
way your doctor represents you to be in; as well as delighted with the
character he gives you.  Would to Heaven the good gentleman had written
sooner!  And yet he writes, that you know not he has now written.  But it
is all our confidence, and our consolation, that he would not have
written at all, had he thought it too late.

They will prescribe no conditions to you, my dear young lady; but will
leave all to your own duty and discretion.  Only your brother and sister
declare they will never yield to call Mr. Lovelace brother; nor will your
father, I believe, be easily brought to think of him for a son.

I am to bring you down with me as soon as your health and inclination
will permit.  You will be received with open arms.  Every one longs to
see you.  All the servants please themselves that they shall be permitted
to kiss your hands.  The pert Betty's note is already changed; and she
now runs over in your just praises.  What friends does prosperity make!
What enemies adversity!  It always was, and always will be so, in every
state of life, from the throne to the cottage.--But let all be forgotten
now on this jubilee change: and may you, my dearest Miss, be capable of
rejoicing in this good news; as I know you will rejoice, if capable of
any thing.

God preserve you to our happy meeting!  And I will, if I may say so,
weary Heaven with my incessant prayers to preserve and restore you
afterwards!

I need not say how much I am, my dear young lady,
Your ever-affectionate and devoted,
JUDITH NORTON.


An unhappy delay, as to the chaise, will make it Saturday morning before
      I can fold you to my fond heart.



LETTER X

MISS ARAB. HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE
WEDN. MORN. SEPT. 6.


DEAR SISTER,

We have just heard that you are exceedingly ill.  We all loved you as
never young creature was loved: you are sensible of that, sister Clary.
And you have been very naughty--but we could not be angry always.

We are indeed more afflicted with the news of your being so very ill than
I can express; for I see not but, after this separation, (as we
understand that your misfortune has been greater than your fault, and
that, however unhappy, you have demeaned yourself like the good young
creature you used to be,) we shall love you better, if possible, than
ever.

Take comfort, therefore, sister Clary, and don't be too much cast down
--whatever your mortifications may be from such noble prospects
over-clouded, and from the reflections you will have from within, on your
faulty step, and from the sullying of such a charming character by it,
you will receive none from any of us; and, as an earnest of your papa's
and mamma's favour and reconciliation, they assure you by me of their
blessing and hourly prayers.

If it will be any comfort to you, and my mother finds this letter is
received as we expect, (which we shall know by the good effect it will
have upon your health,) she will herself go to town to you.  Mean-time,
the good woman you so dearly love will be hastened up to you; and she
writes by this opportunity, to acquaint you of it, and of all our
returning love.

I hope you will rejoice at this good news.  Pray let us hear that you do.
Your next grateful letter on this occasion, especially if it gives us the
pleasure of hearing you are better upon this news, will be received with
the same (if not greater) delight, than we used to have in all your
prettily-penn'd epistles.  Adieu, my dear Clary!  I am,

Your loving sister, and true friend,
ARABELLA HARLOWE.



LETTER XI

TO HIS DEAR NIECE, MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 6.


We were greatly grieved, my beloved Miss Clary, at your fault; but we are
still more, if possible, to hear you are so very ill; and we are sorry
things have been carried so far.  We know your talents, my dear, and how
movingly you could write, whenever you pleased; so that nobody could ever
deny you any thing; and, believing you depended on your pen, and little
thinking you were so ill, and that you lived so regular a life, and are
so truly penitent, are must troubled every one of us, your brother and
all, for being so severe.  Forgive my part in it, my dearest Clary.  I
am your second papa, you know.  And you used to love me.

I hope you'll soon be able to come down, and, after a while, when your
indulgent parents can spare you, that you will come to me for a whole
month, and rejoice my heart, as you used to do.  But if, through illness,
you cannot so soon come down as we wish, I will go up to you; for I long
to see you.  I never more longed to see you in my life; and you was
always the darling of my heart, you know.

My brother Antony desires his hearty commendations to you, and joins with
me in the tenderest assurance, that all shall be well, and, if possible,
better than ever; for we now have been so long without you, that we know
the miss of you, and even hunger and thirst, as I may say, to see you,
and to take you once more to our hearts; whence indeed you was never
banished so far as our concern for the unhappy step made us think and you
believe you were.  Your sister and brother both talk of seeing you in
town; so does my dear sister, your indulgent mother.

God restore your health, if it be his will; else, I know not what will
become of

Your truly loving uncle, and second papa,
JOHN HARLOWE.



LETTER XII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 8, PAST TEN.


I will now take up the account of our proceedings from my letter of last
night, which contained the dying words of this incomparable lady.

As soon as we had seen the last scene closed (so blessedly for herself!)
we left the body to the care of the good women, who, according to the
orders she had given them that very night, removed her into that last
house which she had displayed so much fortitude in providing.

In the morning, between seven and eight o'clock, according to
appointment, the Colonel came to me here.  He was very much indisposed.
We went together, accompanied by Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith, into the
deceased's chamber.  We could not help taking a view of the lovely
corpse, and admiring the charming serenity of her noble aspect.  The
women declared they never say death so lovely before; and that she looked
as if in an easy slumber, the colour having not quite left her cheeks and
lips.

I unlocked the drawer, in which (as I mentioned in a former*) she had
deposited her papers.  I told you in mine of Monday last, that she had
the night before sealed up, with three black seals, a parcel inscribed,
As soon as I am certainly dead, this to be broke open by Mr. Belford.  I
accused myself for not having done it over-night.  But really I was then
incapable of any thing.


* See Vol. VIII. Letter LVII.


I broke it open accordingly, and found in it no less than eleven letters,
each sealed with her own seal, and black wax, one of which was directed
to me.

I will enclose a copy of it.


TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY EVENING, SEPT. 3.


SIR,

I take this last and solemn occasion to repeat to you my thanks for all
your kindness to me at a time when I most needed countenance and
protection.

A few considerations I beg leave, as now at your perusal of this, from
the dead, to press upon you, with all the warmth of a sincere friendship.

By the time you will see this, you will have had an instance, I humbly
trust, of the comfortable importance of a pacified conscience, in the
last hours of one, who, to the last hour, will wish your eternal welfare.

The great Duke of Luxemburgh, as I have heard, on his death-bed,
declared, that he would then much rather have had it to reflect upon,
that he had administered a cup of cold water to a worthy poor creature in
distress, than that he had won so many battles as he had triumphed for.
And, as one well observes, All the sentiments of worldly grandeur vanish
at that unavoidable moment which decides the destiny of men.

If then, Sir, at the tremendous hour it be thus with the conquerors of
armies, and the subduers of nations, let me in a very few words (many are
not needed,) ask, What, at that period, must be the reflection of those,
(if capable of reflection,) who have lived a life of sense and offence;
whose study and whose pride most ingloriously have been to seduce the
innocent, and to ruin the weak, the unguarded, and the friendless; made
still more friendless by their base seductions?--O Mr. Belford, weigh,
ponder, and reflect upon it, now that, in health, and in vigour of mind
and body, the reflections will most avail you--what an ungrateful, what
an unmanly, what a meaner than reptile pride is this!

In the next place, Sir, let me beg of you, for my sake, who AM, or, as
now you will best read it, have been, driven to the necessity of applying
to you to be the executor of my will, that you will bear, according to
that generosity which I think to be in you, with all my friends, and
particularly with my brother, (who is really a worthy young man, but
perhaps a little too headstrong in his first resentments and conceptions
of things,) if any thing, by reason of this trust, should fall out
disagreeably; and that you will study to make peace, and to reconcile all
parties; and more especially, that you, who seem to have a great
influence upon your still-more headstrong friend, will interpose, if
occasion be, to prevent farther mischief--for surely, Sir, that violent
spirit may sit down satisfied with the evils he has already wrought; and,
particularly, with the wrongs, the heinous and ignoble wrongs, he has in
me done to my family, wounded in the tenderest part of its honour.

For your compliance with this request I have already your repeated
promise.  I claim the observance of it, therefore, as a debt from you:
and though I hope I need not doubt it, yet was I willing, on this solemn,
this last occasion, thus earnestly to re-inforce it.

I have another request to make to you; it is only, that you will be
pleased, by a particular messenger, to forward the enclosed letters as
directed.

And now, Sir, having the presumption to think that an useful member is
lost to society by means of the unhappy step which has brought my life so
soon to its period, let me hope that I may be an humble instrument, in
the hands of Providence, to reform a man of your abilities; and then I
shall think that loss will be more abundantly repaired to the world,
while it will be, by God's goodness, my gain; and I shall have this
farther hope, that once more I shall have an opportunity in a blessed
eternity to thank you, as I now repeatedly do, for the good you have done
to, and the trouble you will have taken for, Sir,

Your obliged servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.


***


The other letters are directed to her father, to her mother, one to her
two uncles, to her brother, to her sister, to her aunt Hervey, to her
cousin Morden, to Miss Howe, to Mrs. Norton, and lastly one to you, in
performance of her promise, that a letter should be sent you when she
arrived at her father's house!----I will withhold this last till I can
be assured that you will be fitter to receive it than Tourville tells me
you are at present.

Copies of all these are sealed up, and entitled, Copies of my ten
posthumous letters, for J. Belford, Esq.; and put in among the bundle of
papers left to my direction, which I have not yet had leisure to open.

No wonder, while able, that she was always writing, since thus only of
late could she employ that time, which heretofore, from the long days she
made, caused so many beautiful works to spring from her fingers.  It is
my opinion, that there never was a woman so young, who wrote so much, and
with such celerity.  Her thoughts keeping pace, as I have seen, with her
pen, she hardly ever stopped or hesitated; and very seldom blotted out,
or altered.  It was a natural talent she was mistress of, among many
other extraordinary ones.  I gave the Colonel his letter, and ordered
Harry instantly to get ready to carry the others.  Mean time (retiring
into the next apartment) we opened the will.  We were both so much
affected in perusing it, that at one time the Colonel, breaking off, gave
it to me to read on; at another I gave it back to him to proceed with;
neither of us being able to read it through without such tokens of
sensibility as affected the voice of each.

Mrs. Lovick, Mrs. Smith, and her nurse, were still more touched, when we
read those articles in which they are respectively remembered: but I will
avoid mentioning the particulars, (except in what relates to the thread
of my narration,) as in proper time I shall send you a copy of it.

The Colonel told me, he was ready to account with me for the money and
bills brought up from Harlowe-place; which would enable me, as he said,
directly to execute the legacy parts of the will; and he would needs at
the instant force into my hands a paper relating to that subject.  I put
it into my pocket-book, without looking into it; telling him, that as I
hoped he would do all in his power to promote a literal performance of
the will, I must beg his advice and assistance in the execution of it.

Her request to be buried with her ancestors, made a letter of the
following import necessary, which I prevailed upon the Colonel to write;
being unwilling myself (so early at least,) to appear officious in the
eye of a family which probably wishes not any communication with me.


TO JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.


SIR,

The letter which the bearer of this brings with him, will, I presume,
make it unnecessary to acquaint you and my cousins with the death of the
most excellent of women.  But I am requested by her executor, who will
soon send you a copy of her last will, to acquaint her father (which I
choose to do by your means,) that in it she earnestly desires to be laid
in the family-vault, at the feet of her grandfather.

If her father will not admit of it, she has directed her body to be
buried in the church-yard of the parish where she died.

I need not tell you, that a speedy answer to this is necessary.

Her beatification commenced yesterday afternoon, exactly at forty minutes
after six.

I can write no more, than that I am

Your's, &c.
WM. MORDEN.

FRIDAY MORN. SEPT. 8.


By the time this was written, and by the Colonel's leave transcribed,
Harry was booted and spurred, his horse at the door; and I delivered him
the letters to the family, with those to Mrs. Norton and Miss Howe,
(eight in all,) together with the above of the Colonel to Mr. James
Harlowe; and gave him orders to use the utmost dispatch with them.

The Colonel and I have bespoke mourning for our selves and servants.



LETTER XIII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. TEN O'CLOCK.


Poor Mrs. Norton is come.  She was set down at the door; and would have
gone up stairs directly.  But Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick being together
and in tears, and the former hinting too suddenly to the truly-venerable
woman the fatal news, she sunk down at her feet in fits; so that they
were forced to breath a vein to bring her to herself, and to a capacity
of exclamation; and then she ran on to Mrs. Lovick and me, who entered
just as she recovered, in praise of the lady, in lamentations for her,
and invectives against you; but yet so circumscribed were her invectives,
that I could observe in them the woman well educated, and in her
lamentations the passion christianized, as I may say.

She was impatient to see the corpse.  The women went up with her.  But
they owned that they were too much affected themselves on this occasion
to describe her extremely-affecting behaviour.

With trembling impatience she pushed aside the coffin-lid.  She bathed
the face with her tears, and kissed her cheeks and forehead, as if she
were living.  It was she indeed! she said; her sweet young lady! her very
self!  Nor had death, which changed all things, a power to alter her
lovely features!  She admired the serenity of her aspect.  She no doubt
was happy, she said, as she had written to her she should be; but how
many miserable creatures had she left behind her!--The good woman
lamenting that she herself had lived to be one of them.

It was with difficulty they prevailed upon her to quit the corpse; and
when they went into the next apartment, I joined them, and acquainted her
with the kind legacy her beloved young lady had left her; but this rather
augmented than diminished her concern.  She ought, she said, to have
attended her in person.  What was the world to her, wringing her hands,
now the child of her bosom, and of her heart, was no more?  Her principal
consolation, however, was, that she should not long survive her.  She
hoped, she said, that she did not sin, in wishing she might not.

It was easy to observe, by the similitude of sentiments shown in this and
other particulars, that the divine lady owed to this excellent woman many
of her good notions.

I thought it would divert the poor gentlewoman, and not altogether
unsuitably, if I were to put her upon furnishing mourning for herself; as
it would rouse her, by a seasonable and necessary employment, from that
dismal lethargy of grief, which generally succeeds to the violent anguish
with which a gentle nature is accustomed to be torn upon the first
communication of the unexpected loss of a dear friend.  I gave her
therefore the thirty guineas bequeathed to her and to her son for
mourning; the only mourning which the testatrix has mentioned; and
desired her to lose no time in preparing her own, as I doubted not, that
she would accompany the corpse, if it were permitted to be carried down.

The Colonel proposes to attend the hearse, if his kindred give him not
fresh cause of displeasure; and will take with him a copy of the will.
And being intent to give the family some favourable impressions of me, he
desired me to permit him to take with him the copy of the posthumous
letter to me; which I readily granted.  He is so kind as to promise me a
minute account of all that should pass on the melancholy occasion.  And
we have begun a friendship and settled a correspondence, which but one
incident can possibly happen to interrupt to the end of our lives.  And
that I hope will not happen.

But what must be the grief, the remorse, that will seize upon the hearts
of this hitherto-inexorable family, on the receiving of the posthumous
letters, and that of the Colonel apprizing them of what has happened?  I
have given requisite orders to an undertaker, on the supposition that the
body will be permitted to be carried down; and the women intend to fill
the coffin with aromatic herbs.

The Colonel has obliged me to take the bills and draughts which he
brought up with him, for the considerable sums which accrued since the
grandfather's death from the lady's estate.

I could have shown to Mrs. Norton the copies of the two letters which she
missed by coming up.  But her grief wants not the heightenings which the
reading of them would have given her.


***


I have been dipping into the copies of the posthumous letters to the
family, which Harry has carried down.  Well may I call this lady divine.
They are all calculated to give comfort rather than reproach, though
their cruelty to her merited nothing but reproach.  But were I in any of
their places, how much rather had I, that she had quitted scores with me
by the most severe recrimination, than that she should thus nobly triumph
over me by a generosity that has no example?  I will enclose some of
them, which I desire you to return as soon as you can.



LETTER XIV

TO THE EVER-HONOURED JAS. HARLOWE, SEN. ESQ.


MOST DEAR SIR,

With exulting confidence now does your emboldened daughter come into your
awful presence by these lines, who dared not, but upon this occasion, to
look up to you with hopes of favour and forgiveness; since, when this
comes to your hands, it will be out of her power ever to offend you more.

And now let me bless you, my honoured Papa, and bless you, as I write,
upon my knees, for all the benefits I have received from your indulgence:
for your fond love to me in the days of my prattling innocence: for the
virtuous education you gave me: and for, the crown of all, the happy end,
which, through divine grace, by means of that virtuous education, I hope,
by the time you will receive this, I shall have made.  And let me beg of
you, dear, venerable Sir, to blot out from your remembrance, if possible,
the last unhappy eight months; and then I shall hope to be remembered
with advantage for the pleasure you had the goodness to take in your
Clarissa.

Still on her knees, let your poor penitent implore your forgiveness of
all her faults and follies; more especially of that fatal error which
threw her out of your protection.

When you know, Sir, that I have never been faulty in my will; that ever
since my calamity became irretrievable, I have been in a state of
preparation; that I have the strongest assurance that the Almighty has
accepted my unfeigned repentance; and that by this time you will (as I
humbly presume to hope,) have been the means of adding one to the number
of the blessed; you will have reason for joy rather than sorrow.  Since,
had I escaped the snares by which I was entangled, I might have wanted
those exercises which I look upon now as so many mercies dispensed to
wean me betimes from a world that presented itself to me with prospects
too alluring; and in that case (too easily satisfied with the worldly
felicity) I might not have attained to that blessedness, in which now,
on your reading of this, I humbly presume, (through the divine goodness,)
I am rejoicing.

That the Almighty, in his own good time, will bring you, Sir, and my
ever-honoured mother, after a series of earthly felicities, of which my
unhappy fault be the only interruption, (and very grievous I know that
must have been,) to rejoice in the same blessed state, is the repeated
prayer of, Sir,

Your now happy daughter,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XV

TO THE EVER-HONOURED MRS. HARLOWE


HONOURED MADAM,

The last time I had the boldness to write to you, it was with all the
consciousness of a self-convicted criminal, supplicating her offended
judge for mercy and pardon.  I now, by these lines, approach you with
more assurance; but nevertheless with the highest degree of reverence,
gratitude, and duty.  The reason of my assurance, my letter to my papa
will give; and as I humbly on my knees implored his pardon, so now, in
the same dutiful manner, do I supplicate your's, for the grief and
trouble I have given you.

Every vein of my heart has bled for an unhappy rashness; which, (although
involuntary as to the act,) from the moment it was committed, carried
with it its own punishment; and was accompanied with a true and sincere
penitence.

God, who has been a witness of my distresses, knows that, great as they
have been, the greatest of all was the distress that I knew I must have
given to you, Madam, and to my father, by a step that had so very ugly an
appearance in your eyes and his; and indeed in the eyes of all my family;
a step so unworthy of your daughter, and of the education you had given
her.

But HE, I presume to hope, has forgiven me; and, at the instant this will
reach your hands, I humbly trust, I shall be rejoicing in the blessed
fruits of his forgiveness.  And be this your comfort, my ever-honoured
Mamma, that the principal end of your pious care for me is attained,
though not in the way so much hoped for.

May the grief which my fatal error has given to you both, be the only
grief that shall ever annoy you in this world!--May you, Madam, long live
to sweeten the cares, and heighten the comforts, of my papa!--May my
sister's continued, and, if possible, augmented duty, happily make up to
you the loss you have sustained in me!  And whenever my brother and she
change their single state, may it be with such satisfaction to you both
as may make you forget my offence; and remember me only in those days in
which you took pleasure in me!  And, at last, may a happy meeting with
your forgiven penitent, in the eternal mansions, augment the bliss of
her, who, purified by sufferings already, when this salutes your hands,
presumes she shall be

The happy and for ever happy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XVI

TO JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.


SIR,

There was but one time, but one occasion, after the rash step I was
precipitated upon, that I would hope to be excused looking up to you
in the character of a brother and friend.  And NOW is that time, and
THIS the occasion.  NOW, at reading this, will you pity your late unhappy
sister!  NOW will you forgive her faults, both supposed and real!  And
NOW will you afford to her memory that kind concern which you refused to
her before!

I write, my Brother, in the first place, to beg your pardon for the
offence my unhappy step gave to you, and to the rest of a family so dear
to me.

Virgin purity should not so behave as to be suspected, yet, when you come
to know all my story, you will find farther room for pity, if not more
than pity, for your late unhappy sister!

O that passion had not been deaf!  That misconception would have given
way to inquiry!  That your rigorous heart, if it could not itself be
softened (moderating the power you had obtained over every one) had
permitted other hearts more indulgently to expand!

But I write not to give pain.  I had rather you should think me faulty
still, than take to yourself the consequence that will follow from
acquitting me.

Abandoning therefore a subject which I had not intended to touch upon,
(for I hope, at the writing of this, I am above the spirit of
recrimination,) let me tell you, Sir, that my next motive for writing to
you in this last and most solemn manner is, to beg of you to forego any
active resentments (which may endanger a life so precious to all your
friends) against the man to whose elaborate baseness I owe my worldly
ruin.

For, ought an innocent man to run an equal risque with a guilty one?--
A more than equal risque, as the guilty one has been long inured to acts
of violence, and is skilled in the arts of offence?

You would not arrogate to yourself God's province, who has said,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it.  If you would, I tremble for the
consequence: For will it not be suitable to the divine justice to punish
the presumptuous innocent (as you would be in this case) in the very
error, and that by the hand of the self-defending guilty--reserving him
for a future day of vengeance for his accumulated crimes?

Leave then the poor wretch to the divine justice.  Let your sister's
fault die with her.  At least, let it not be revived in blood.  Life is a
short stage where longest.  A little time hence, the now-green head will
be grey, if it lives this little time: and if Heaven will afford him time
for repentance, why should not you?

Then think, my Brother, what will be the consequence to your dear
parents, if the guilty wretch, who has occasioned to them the loss of a
daughter, should likewise deprive them of their best hope, and only son,
more worth in the family account than several daughters?

Would you add, my Brother, to those distresses which you hold your sister
so inexcusable for having (although from involuntary and undersigned
causes) given?

Seek not then, I beseech you, to extend the evil consequences of your
sister's error.  His conscience, when it shall please God to touch it,
will be sharper than your sword.

I have still another motive for writing to you in this solemn manner: it
is, to entreat you to watch over your passions.  The principal fault I
knew you to be guilty of is, the violence of your temper when you think
yourself in the right; which you would oftener be, but for that very
violence.

You have several times brought your life into danger by it.

Is not the man guilty of a high degree of injustice, who is more apt
to give contradiction, than able to bear it?  How often, with you, has
impetuosity brought on abasement?  A consequence too natural.

Let me then caution you, dear Sir, against a warmth of temper, an
impetuosity when moved, and you so ready to be moved, that may hurry you
into unforeseen difficulties; and which it is in some measure a sin not
to endeavour to restrain.  God enable you to do it for the sake of your
own peace and safety, as well present as future! and for the sake of your
family and friends, who all see your fault, but are tender of speaking to
you of it!

As for me, my Brother, my punishment has been seasonable.  God gave me
grace to make a right use of my sufferings.  I early repented.  I never
loved the man half so much as I hated his actions, when I saw what he was
capable of.  I gave up my whole heart to a better hope.  God blessed my
penitence and my reliance upon him.  And now I presume to say, I AM
HAPPY.

May Heave preserve you in safety, health, and honour, and long continue
your life for a comfort and stay to your honoured parents!  And may you,
in that change of your single state, meet with a wife as agreeable to
every one else as to yourself, and be happy in a hopeful race, and not
have one Clarissa among them, to embitter your comforts when she should
give you most comfort!  But may my example be of use to warn the dear
creatures whom once I hoped to live to see and to cherish, of the evils
with which the deceitful world abounds! are the prayers of

Your affectionate sister,
CL. HARLOWE.



LETTER XVII

TO MISS HARLOWE


Now may you, my dear Arabella, unrestrained by the severity of your
virtue, let fall a pitying tear on the past faults and sufferings of
your late unhappy sister; since, now, she can never offend you more.
The Divine mercy, which first inspired her with repentance (an early
repentance it was; since it preceded her sufferings) for an error which
she offers not to extenuate, although perhaps it were capable of some
extenuation, has now, as the instant that you are reading this, as I
humbly hope, blessed her with the fruits of it.

Thus already, even while she writes, in imagination purified and exalted,
she the more fearlessly writes to her sister; and now is assured of
pardon for all those little occasions of displeasure which her forwarder
youth might give you; and for the disgrace which her fall has fastened
upon you, and upon her family.

May you, my Sister, continue to bless those dear and honoured relations,
whose indulgence so well deserves your utmost gratitude, with those
cheerful instances of duty and obedience which have hitherto been so
acceptable to them, and praise-worthy in you!  And may you, when a
suitable proposal shall offer, fill up more worthily that chasm, which
the loss they have sustained in me has made in the family!

Thus, my Arabella! my only sister! and for many happy years, my friend!
most fervently  prays that sister, whose affection for you, no acts, no
unkindness, no misconstruction of her conduct, could cancel!  And who
NOW, made perfect (as she hopes) through sufferings, styles herself,

The happy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XVIII

TO JOHN AND ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQRS.


HONOURED SIRS,

When these lines reach your hands, your late unhappy niece will have
known the end of all her troubles; and, as she humbly hopes, will be
rejoicing in the mercies of a gracious God, who has declared, that he
will forgive the truly penitent of heart.

I write, therefore, my dear uncles, and to you both in one letter (since
your fraternal love has made you both but as one person) to give you
comfort, and not distress; for, however sharp my afflictions have been,
they have been but of short duration; and I am betimes (happily as I
hope) arrived at the end of a painful journey.

At the same time I write to thank you both for all your kind indulgence
to me, and to beg your forgiveness of my last, my only great fault to
you and to my family.

The ways of Providence are unsearchable.  Various are the means made use
of by it, to bring poor sinners to a sense of their duty.  Some are drawn
by love, others are driven by terrors, to their divine refuge.  I had for
eighteen years out of nineteen, rejoiced in the favour and affection of
every one.  No trouble came near to my heart, I seemed to be one of those
designed to be drawn by the silken cords of love.--But, perhaps, I was
too apt to value myself upon the love and favour of every one: the merit
of the good I delighted to do, and of the inclinations which were given
me, and which I could not help having, I was, perhaps, too ready to
attribute to myself; and now, being led to account for the cause of my
temporary calamities, find I had a secret pride to be punished for, which
I had not fathomed: and it was necessary, perhaps, that some sore and
terrible misfortunes should befall me, in order to mortify that my pride,
and that my vanity.

Temptations were accordingly sent.  I shrunk in the day of trial. My
discretion, which had been so cried up, was found wanting when it came to
be weighed in an equal balance.  I was betrayed, fell, and became the
by-word of my companions, and a disgrace to my family, which had prided
itself in me perhaps too much.  But as my fault was not that of a
culpable will, when my pride was sufficiently mortified, I was not
suffered (although surrounded by dangers, and entangled in snares) to be
totally lost: but, purified by sufferings, I was fitted for the change I
have NOW, at the time you will receive this, so newly, and, as I humbly
hope, so happily experienced.

Rejoice with me, then, dear Sirs, that I have weathered so great a storm.
Nor let it be matter of concern, that I am cut off in the bloom of youth.
'There is no inquisition in the grave,' says the wise man, 'whether we
lived ten or a hundred years; and the day of death is better than the day
of our birth.'

Once more, dear Sirs, accept my grateful thanks for all your goodness to
me, from my early childhood to the day, the unhappy day, of my error!
Forgive that error!--And God give us a happy meeting in a blessed
eternity; prays

Your most dutiful and obliged kinswoman,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.


Mr. Belford gives the Lady's posthumous letters to Mrs. Hervey, Miss
      Howe, and Mrs. Norton, at length likewise: but, although every
      letter varies in style as well as matter from the others; yet, as
      they are written on the same subject, and are pretty long, it is
      thought proper to abstract them.

That to her aunt Hervey is written in the same pious and generous strain
with those preceding, seeking to give comfort rather than distress.  'The
Almighty, I hope,' says she, 'has received and blessed my penitence, and
I am happy.  Could I have been more than so at the end of what is called
a happy life of twenty, or thirty, or forty years to come?  And what are
twenty, or thirty, or forty years to look back upon?  In half of any of
these periods, what friends might not I have mourned for? what
temptations from worldly prosperity might I not have encountered with?
And in such a case, immersed in earthly pleasures, how little likelihood,
that, in my last stage, I should have been blessed with such a
preparation and resignation as I have now been blessed with?'

She proceeds as follows: 'Thus much, Madam, of comfort to you and to
myself from this dispensation.  As to my dear parents, I hope they will
console themselves that they have still many blessings left, which ought
to balance the troubles my error has given them: that, unhappy as I have
been to be the interrupter of their felicities, they never, till this my
fault, know any heavy evil: that afflictions patiently borne may be
turned into blessings: that uninterrupted happiness is not to be expected
in this life: that, after all, they have not, as I humbly presume to
hope, the probability of the everlasting perdition of their child to
deplore: and that, in short, when my story comes to be fully known, they
will have the comfort to find that my sufferings redound more to my
honour than to my disgrace.

'These considerations will, I hope, make their temporary loss of but one
child out of three (unhappily circumstances too as she was) matter of
greater consolation than affliction.  And the rather, as we may hope for
a happy meeting once more, never to be separated either by time or
offences.'

She concludes this letter with an address to her cousin Dolly Hervey,
whom she calls her amiable cousin; and thankfully remembers for the part
she took in her afflictions.--'O my dear Cousin, let your worthy heart be
guarded against those delusions which have been fatal to my worldly
happiness!--That pity, which you bestowed upon me, demonstrates a
gentleness of nature, which may possibly subject you to misfortunes, if
your eye be permitted to mislead your judgment.--But a strict observance
of your filial duty, my dearest Cousin, and the precepts of so prudent a
mother as you have the happiness to have (enforced by so sad an example
in your own family as I have set) will, I make no doubt, with the Divine
assistance, be your guard and security.'


The posthumous letter to Miss Howe is extremely tender and affectionate.
She pathetically calls upon her 'to rejoice that all her Clarissa's
troubles are now at an end; that the state of temptation and trial, of
doubt and uncertainty, is now over with her; and that she has happily
escaped the snares that were laid for her soul; the rather to rejoice,
as that her misfortunes were of such a nature, that it was impossible
she could be tolerably happy in this life.'

She 'thankfully acknowledges the favours she had received from Mrs. Howe
and Mr. Hickman; and expresses her concern for the trouble she has
occasioned to the former, as well as to her; and prays that all the
earthly blessings they used to wish to each other, may singly devolve
upon her.'

She beseeches her, 'that she will not suspend the day which shall supply
to herself the friend she will have lost in her, and give to herself a
still nearer and dearer relation.'

She tells her, 'That her choice (a choice made with the approbation of
all her friends) has fallen upon a sincere, an honest, a virtuous, and,
what is more than all, a pious man; a man who, although he admires her
person, is still more in love with the graces of her mind.  And as those
graces are improvable with every added year of life, which will impair
the transitory ones of person, what a firm basis, infers she, has Mr.
Hickman chosen to build his love upon!'

She prays, 'That God will bless them together; and that the remembrance
of her, and of what she has suffered, may not interrupt their mutual
happiness; she desires them to think of nothing but what she now is; and
that a time will come when they shall meet again, never to be divided.

'To the Divine protection, mean time, she commits her; and charges her,
by the love that has always subsisted between them, that she will not
mourn too heavily for her; and again calls upon her, after a gentle tear,
which she will allow her to let fall in memory of their uninterrupted
friendship, to rejoice that she is so early released; and that she is
purified by her sufferings, and is made, as she assuredly trusts, by
God's goodness, eternally happy.'


The posthumous letters to Mr. LOVELACE and Mr. MORDEN will be inserted
      hereafter: as will also the substance of that written to Mrs.
      Norton.



LETTER XIX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. AFTERNOON, SEPT. 9.


I understand, that thou breathest nothing but revenge against me, for
treating thee with so much freedom; and against the cursed woman and her
infernal crew.  I am not at all concerned for thy menaces against myself.
It is my design to make thee feel.  It gives me pleasure to find my
intention answered.  And I congratulate thee, that thou hast not lost
that sense.

As to the cursed crew, well do they deserve the fire here, that thou
threatenest them with, and the fire hereafter, that seems to await them.
But I have this moment received news which will, in all likelihood, save
thee the guilt of punishing the old wretch for her share of wickedness as
thy agent.  But if that happens to her which is likely to happen, wilt
thou not tremble for what may befal the principal?

Not to keep thee longer in suspense; last night, it seems, the infamous
woman got so heartily intoxicated with her beloved liquor, arrack punch,
at the expense of Colonel Salter, that, mistaking her way, she fell down
a pair of stairs, and broke her leg: and now, after a dreadful night, she
lies foaming, raving, roaring, in a burning fever, that wants not any
other fire to scorch her into a feeling more exquisite and durable than
any thy vengeance could give her.

The wretch has requested me to come to her; and lest I should refuse a
common messenger, sent her vile associate, Sally Martin; who not finding
me at Soho, came hither; another part of her business being to procure
the divine lady's pardon for the old creature's wickedness to her.

This devil incarnate, Sally, declares that she never was so shocked in
her life, as when I told her the lady was dead.

She took out her salts to keep from fainting; and when a little recovered
she accused herself for her part of the injuries the lady had sustained;
as she said Polly Horton would do for her's; and shedding tears,
declared, that the world never produced such another woman.  She called
her the ornament and glory of her sex; acknowledged, that her ruin was
owing more to their instigations, than even (savage as thou art) to thy
own vileness; since thou wert inclined to have done her justice more than
once, had they not kept up thy profligate spirit to its height.

This wretch would fain have been admitted to a sight of the corpse; but I
refused the request with execrations.

She could forgive herself, she said, for every thing but her insults upon
the admirable lady at Rowland's, since all the rest was but in pursuit of
a livelihood, to which she had been reduced, as she boasted, from better
expectations, and which hundred follow as well as she.  I did not ask
her, by whom reduced?

At going away, she told me, that the old monster's bruises are of more
dangerous consequence than the fracture; that a mortification is
apprehended, and that the vile wretch has so much compunction of heart,
on recollecting her treatment of Miss Harlowe, and is so much set upon
procuring her forgiveness, that she is sure the news she is to carry her
will hasten her end.

All these things I leave upon thy reflection.



LETTER XX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. NIGHT.


Your servant gives me a dreadful account of your raving unmanageableness.
I wonder not at it.  But as nothing violent is lasting, I dare say that
your habitual gaiety of heart will quickly get the better of your
phrensy; and the rather do I judge so, as your fits are of the raving
kind, (suitable to your natural impetuosity,) and not of that melancholy
species which seizes slower souls.

For this reason I will proceed in writing to you, that my narrative may
not be broken by your discomposure; and that the contents of it may find
you, and help you to reflection, when you shall be restored.

Harry is returned from carrying the posthumous letters to the family, and
to Miss Howe; and that of the Colonel, which acquaints James Harlowe with
his sister's death, and with her desire to be interred near her
grandfather.

Harry was not admitted into the presence of any of the family.  They were
all assembled together, it seems, at Harlowe-place, on occasion of the
Colonel's letter, which informed them of the lady's dangerous way;* and
were comforting themselves, as Harry was told, with hopes that Mr. Morden
had made the worst of her state, in order to quicken their resolutions.


* See the beginning of Letter II.


It is easy to judge what must be their grief and surprise on receiving
the fatal news which the letters Harry sent in to them communicated.

He staid there long enough to find the whole house in confusion; the
servants running different ways; lamenting and wringing their hands as
they ran; the female servants particularly; as if somebody (poor Mrs.
Harlowe, no doubt; and perhaps Mrs. Hervey too) were in fits.

Every one was in such disorder, that he could get no commands, nor obtain
any notice of himself.  The servants seemed more inclined to execrate
than welcome him--O master!--O young man! cried three or four together,
what dismal tidings have you brought?--They helped him, at the very first
word, to his horse; which, with great civility, they had put up on his
arrival; and he went to an inn, and pursued on foot his way to Mrs.
Norton's; and finding her come to town, left the letter he carried don
for her with her son, (a fine youth,) who, when he heard the fatal news,
burst out into a flood of tears--first lamenting the lady's death, and
then crying out, What--what would become of his poor mother!--How would
she support herself, when she should find, on her arrival in town, that
the dear lady, who was so deservedly the darling of her heart, was no
more!

He proceeded to Miss Howe's with the letter for her.  That lady, he was
told, had just given orders for a young man, a tenant's son, to post to
London, and bring her news of her dear friend's condition, and whether
she should herself be encouraged, by an account of her being still alive,
to make her a visit; every thing being ordered to be in readiness for her
going up on his return with the news she wished and prayed for with the
utmost impatience.  And Harry was just in time to prevent the man's
setting out.

He had the precaution to desire to speak with Miss Howe's woman or maid,
and communicated to her the fatal tidings, that she might break them to
her young lady.  The maid herself was so affected, that her old lady
(who, Harry said, seemed to be every where at once) came to see what
ailed her! and was herself so struck with the communication, that she
was forced to sit down in a chair.--O the sweet creature! said she, and
is it come to this?--O my poor Nancy!--How shall I be able to break the
matter to my Nancy?

Mr. Hickman was in the house.  He hastened in to comfort the old lady--
but he could not restrain his own tears.  He feared, he said, when he was
last in town, that this sad event would soon happen; but little thought
it would be so very soon!--But she is happy, I am sure, said the good
gentleman.

Mrs. Howe, when a little recovered, went up, in order to break the news
to her daughter.  She took the letter, and her salts in her hand.  And
they had occasion for the latter.  For the housekeeper soon came hurrying
down into the kitchen, her face overspread with tears--her young mistress
had fainted away, she said--nor did she wonder at it--never did there
live a lady more deserving of general admiration and lamentation, than
Miss Clarissa Harlowe! and never was there a stronger friendship
dissolved by death than between her young lady and her.

She hurried, with a lighted wax candle, and with feathers, to burn under
the nose of her young mistress; which showed that she continued in fits.

Mr. Hickman, afterwards, with his usual humanity, directed that Harry
should be taken care of all night; it being then the close of day.  He
asked him after my health.  He expressed himself excessively afflicted,
as well for the death of the most excellent of women, as for the just
grief of the lady whom he so passionately loves.  But he called the
departed lady an Angel of Light.  We dreaded, said he, (tell your
master,) to read the letter sent--but we needed not--'tis a blessed
letter! written by a blessed hand!--But the consolation she aims to give,
will for the present heighten the sense we all shall have of the loss of
so excellent a creature!  Tell Mr. Belford, that I thank God I am not the
man who had the unmerited honour to call himself her brother.

I know how terribly this great catastrophe (as I may call it, since so
many persons are interested in it) affects thee.  I should have been glad
to have had particulars of the distress which the first communication of
it must have given to the Harlowes.  Yet who but must pity the unhappy
mother?

The answer which James Harlowe returned to Colonel Morden's letter of
notification of his sister's death, and to her request as to her
interment, will give a faint idea of what their concern must be.  Here
follows a copy of it:


TO WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 9.


DEAR COUSIN,

I cannot find words to express what we all suffer on the most mournful
news that ever was communicated to us.

My sister Arabella (but, alas! I have now no other sister) was preparing
to follow Mrs. Norton up, and I had resolved to escort her, and to have
looked in upon the dear creature.

God be merciful to us all!  To what purpose did the doctor write, if she
was so near her end?--Why, as every body says, did he not send sooner?--
Or, Why at all?

The most admirable young creature that ever swerved!  Not one friend to
be with her!--Alas! Sir, I fear my mother will never get over this shock.
--She has been in hourly fits ever since she received the fatal news.  My
poor father has the gout thrown into his stomach; and Heaven knows--O
Cousin!--O Sir!--I meant nothing but the honour of the family; yet have I
all the weight thrown upon me--[O this cursed Lovelace!--may I perish if
he escape the deserved vengeance!]*


* The words thus enclosed [] were omitted in the transcript to Mr.
Lovelace.


We had begun to please ourselves that we should soon see her here--Good
Heaven! that her next entrance into this house, after she abandoned us so
precipitately, should be in a coffin.

We can have nothing to do with her executor, (another strange step of the
dear creature's!)--He cannot expect we will--nor, if he be a gentleman,
will he think of acting.  Do you, therefore, be pleased, Sir, to order an
undertaker to convey the body down to us.  My mother says she shall be
for ever unhappy, if she may not in death see the dear creature whom she
could not see in life.  Be so kind, therefore, as to direct the lid to be
only half-screwed down--that (if my poor mother cannot be prevailed upon
to dispense with so shocking a spectacle) she may be obliged--she was the
darling of her heart!

If we know her well in relation to the funeral, it shall be punctually
complied with; as shall every thing in it that is fit or reasonable to be
performed; and this without the intervention of strangers.

Will you not, dear Sir, favour us with your presence at this melancholy
time?  Pray do--and pity and excuse, with the generosity which is natural
to the brave and the wise, what passed at our last meeting.  Every one's
respects attend you.  And I am, Sir,

Your inexpressibly afflicted cousin and servant,
JA. HARLOWE, JUN.


Every thing that's fit or reasonable to be performed! [repeated I to the
Colonel from the above letter on his reading it to me;] that is every
thing which she has directed, that can be performed.  I hope, Colonel,
that I shall have no contention with them.  I wish no more for their
acquaintance than they do for mine.  But you, Sir, must be the mediator
between them and me; for I shall insist upon a literal performance in
every article.

The Colonel was so kind as to declare that he would support me in my
resolution.



LETTER XXI

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SUNDAY MORN. EIGHT O'CLOCK, SEPT. 10.


I staid at Smith's till I saw the last of all that is mortal of the
divine lady.

As she has directed rings by her will to several persons, with her hair
to be set in crystal, the afflicted Mrs. Norton cut off, before the
coffin was closed four charming ringlets; one of which the Colonel took
for a locket, which, he says, he will cause to be made, and wear next his
heart in memory of his beloved cousin.

Between four and five in the morning, the corpse was put into the hearse;
the coffin before being filled, as intended, with flowers and aromatic
herbs, and proper care taken to prevent the corpse suffering (to the eye)
from the jolting of the hearse.

Poor Mrs. Norton is extremely ill.  I gave particular directions to Mrs.
Smith's maid (whom I have ordered to attend the good woman in a mourning
chariot) to take care of her.  The Colonel, who rides with his servants
within view of the hearse, says that he will see my orders in relation to
her enforced.

When the hearse moved off, and was out of sight, I locked up the lady's
chamber, into which all that had belonged to her was removed.

I expect to hear from the Colonel as soon as he is got down, by a servant
of his own.



LETTER XXII

MR. MOWBRAY, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SUNDAY MORN. NINE O'CLOCK.


DEAR JACK,

I send you enclosed a letter from Mr. Lovelace; which, though written in
the cursed Algebra, I know to be such a one as will show what a queer way
he is in; for he read it to us with the air of a tragedian.  You will see
by it what the mad fellow had intended to do, if we had not all of us
interposed.  He was actually setting out with a surgeon of this place, to
have the lady opened and embalmed.--Rot me if it be not my full
persuasion that, if he had, her heart would have been found to be either
iron or marble.

We have got Lord M. to him.  His Lordship is also much afflicted at the
lady's death.  His sisters and nieces, he says, will be ready to break
their hearts.  What a rout's here about a woman!  For after all she was
no more.

We have taken a pailful of black bull's blood from him; and this has
lowered him a little.  But he threatens Col. Morden, he threatens you for
your cursed reflections, [cursed reflections indeed, Jack!] and curses
all the world and himself still.

Last night his mourning (which is full as deep as for a wife) was brought
home, and his fellows' mourning too.  And, though eight o'clock, he would
put it on, and make them attend him in theirs.

Every body blames him on this lady's account.  But I see not for why.
She was a vixen in her virtue.  What a pretty fellow she has ruined--Hey,
Jack!--and her relations are ten times more to blame than he.  I will
prove this to the teeth of them all.  If they could use her ill, why
should they expect him to use her well?--You, or I, or Tourville, in his
shoes, would have done as he has done.  Are not all the girls forewarned?
--'Has he done by her as that caitiff Miles did to the farmer's daughter,
whom he tricked up to town, (a pretty girl also, just such another as
Bob.'s Rosebud,) under a notion of waiting on a lady?--Drilled her on,
pretending the lady was abroad.  Drank her light-hearted--then carried
her to a play--then it was too late, you know, to see the pretended lady
--then to a bagnio--ruined her, as they call it, and all this the same
day.  Kept her on (an ugly dog, too!) a fortnight or three weeks, then
left her to the mercy of the people of the bagnio, (never paying for any
thing,) who stript her of all her clothes, and because she would not take
on, threw her into prison; where she died in want and despair!'--A true
story, thou knowest, Jack.--This fellow deserved to be d----d.  But has
our Bob. been such a villain as this?--And would he not have married this
flinty-hearted lady?--So he is justified very evidently.

Why, then, should such cursed qualms take him?--Who would have thought he
had been such poor blood? Now [rot the puppy!] to see him sit silent in a
corner, when he has tired himself with his mock majesty, and with his
argumentation, (Who so fond of arguing as he?) and teaching his shadow to
make mouths against the wainscot--The devil fetch me if I have patience
with him!

But he has had no rest for these ten days--that's the thing!--You must
write to him; and pr'ythee coax him, Jack, and send him what he writes
for, and give him all his way--there will be no bearing him else.  And
get the lady buried as fast as you can; and don't let him know where.

This letter should have gone yesterday.  We told him it did.  But were in
hopes he would have inquired after it again.  But he raves as he has not
any answer.

What he vouchsafed to read of other of your letters has given my Lord
such a curiosity as makes him desire you to continue your accounts.  Pray
do; but not in your hellish Arabic; and we will let the poor fellow only
into what we think fitting for his present way.

I live a cursed dull poking life here.  What with I so lately saw of poor
Belton, and what I now see of this charming fellow, I shall be as crazy
as he soon, or as dull as thou, Jack; so must seek for better company in
town than either of you.  I have been forced to read sometimes to divert
me; and you know I hate reading.  It presently sets me into a fit of
drowsiness; and then I yawn and stretch like a devil.

Yet in Dryden's Palemon and Arcite have I just now met with a passage,
that has in it much of our Bob.'s case.  These are some of the lines.


Mr. Mowbray then recites some lines from that poem, describing a
      distracted man, and runs the parallel; and then, priding himself
      in his performance, says:

Let me tell you, that had I begun to write as early as you and Lovelace,
I might have cut as good a figure as either of you.  Why not?  But boy or
man I ever hated a book.  'Tis folly to lie.  I loved action, my boy.  I
hated droning; and have led in former days more boys from their book,
than ever my master made to profit by it.  Kicking and cuffing, and
orchard-robbing, were my early glory.

But I am tired of writing.  I never wrote such a long letter in my life.
My wrist and my fingers and thumb ache d----n----y.  The pen is an
hundred weight at least.  And my eyes are ready to drop out of my head
upon the paper.--The cramp but this minute in my fingers.  Rot the goose
and the goose-quill!  I will write no more long letters for a
twelve-month to come.  Yet one word; we think the mad fellow coming to.
Adieu.



LETTER XXIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SAT. SEPT. 9.


JACK,

I think it absolutely right that my ever-dear and beloved lady should be
opened and embalmed.  It must be done out of hand this very afternoon.
Your acquaintance, Tomkins, and old Anderson of this place, I will bring
with me, shall be the surgeons.  I have talked to the latter about it.

I will see every thing done with that decorum which the case, and the
sacred person of my beloved require.

Every thing that can be done to preserve the charmer from decay shall
also be done.  And when she will descend to her original dust, or cannot
be kept longer, I will then have her laid in my family-vault, between my
own father and mother.  Myself, as I am in my soul, so in person, chief
mourner.  But her heart, to which I have such unquestionable pretensions,
in which once I had so large a share, and which I will prize above my
own, I will have.  I will keep it in spirits.  It shall never be out of
my sight.  And all the charges of sepulture too shall be mine.

Surely nobody will dispute my right to her.  Whose was she living?--Whose
is she dead but mine?--Her cursed parents, whose barbarity to her, no
doubt, was the true cause of her death, have long since renounced her.
She left them for me.  She chose me therefore; and I was her husband.
What though I treated her like a villain?  Do I not pay for it now?
Would she not have been mine had I not?  Nobody will dispute but she
would.  And has she not forgiven me?--I am then in statu quo prius with
her, am I not? as if I had never offended?--Whose then can she be but
mine?

I will free you from your executorship, and all your cares.

Take notice, Belford, that I do hereby actually discharge you, and every
body, from all cares and troubles relating to her.  And as to her last
testament, I will execute it myself.

There were no articles between us, no settlements; and she is mine, as
you see I have proved to a demonstration; nor could she dispose of
herself but as I pleased.--D----n----n seize me then if I make not good
my right against all opposers!

Her bowels, if her friends are very solicitous about them, and very
humble and sorrowful, (and none have they of their own,) shall be sent
down to them--to be laid with her ancestors--unless she has ordered
otherwise.  For, except that, she shall not be committed to the unworthy
earth so long as she can be kept out of it, her will shall be performed
in every thing.

I send in the mean time for a lock of her hair.

I charge you stir not in any part of her will but by my express
direction.  I will order every thing myself.  For am I not her husband?
and, being forgiven by her, am I not the chosen of her heart?  What else
signifies her forgiveness?

The two insufferable wretches you have sent me plague me to death, and
would treat me like a babe in strings.--D--n the fellows, what end can
they mean by it?  Yet that crippled monkey Doleman joins with them.  And,
as I hear them whisper, they have sent for Lord M.--to controul me, I
suppose.

What I write to you for is,

1.   To forbid you intermeddling with any thing relating to her.  To
forbid Morden intermeddling also.  If I remember right, he has threatened
me, and cursed me, and used me ill--and let him be gone from her, if he
would avoid my resentment.

2.   To send me a lock of her hair instantly by the bearer.

3.   To engage Tomkins to have every thing ready for the opening and
embalming.  I shall bring Anderson with me.

4.   To get her will and every thing ready for my perusal and
consideration.

I will have possession of her dear heart this very night; and let Tomkins
provide a proper receptacle and spirits, till I can get a golden one made
for it.

I will take her papers.  And, as no one can do her memory justice equal
to myself, and I will not spare myself, who can better show the world
what she was, and what a villain he that could use her ill?  And the
world shall also see what implacable and unworthy parents she had.

All shall be set forth in words at length.  No mincing of the matter.
Names undisguised as well as facts.  For, as I shall make the worst
figure in it myself, and have a right to treat myself as nobody else
shall, who shall controul me? who dare call me to account?

Let me know, if the d----d mother be yet the subject of the devil's own
vengeance--if the old wretch be dead or alive?  Some exemplary mischief
I must yet do.  My revenge shall sweep away that devil, and all my
opposers of the cruel Harlowe family, from the face of the earth.  Whole
hecatombs ought to be offered up to the manes of my Clarissa Lovelace.

Although her will may in some respects cross mine, yet I expect to be
observed.  I will be the interpreter of her's.

Next to mine, her's shall be observed: for she is my wife, and shall be
to all eternity.--I will never have another.

Adieu, Jack, I am preparing to be with you.  I charge you, as you value
my life or your own, do not oppose me in any thing relating to my
Clarissa Lovelace.

My temper is entirely altered.  I know not what it is to laugh, or smile,
or be pleasant.  I am grown choleric and impatient, and will not be
controuled.

I write this in characters as I used to do, that nobody but you should
know what I write.  For never was any man plagued with impertinents as
I am.

R. LOVELACE.


IN A SEPARATE PAPER ENCLOSED IN THE ABOVE.

Let me tell thee, in characters still, that I am in a dreadful way just
now.  My brain is all boiling like a cauldron over a fiery furnace.  What
a devil is the matter with me, I wonder!  I never was so strange in my
life.

In truth, Jack, I have been a most execrable villain.  And when I
consider all my actions to the angel of a woman, and in her the piety,
the charity, the wit, the beauty, I have helped to destroy, and the good
to the world I have thereby been a mean of frustrating, I can pronounce
d----n----n upon myself.  How then can I expect mercy any where else?

I believe I shall have no patience with you when I see you.  Your d----d
stings and reflections have almost turned my brain.

But here Lord M. they tell me, is come!--D----n him, and those who sent
for him!

I know not what I have written.  But her dear heart and a lock of her
hair I will have, let who will be the gainsayers!  For is she not mine?
Whose else can she be?  She has no father nor mother, no sister, no
brother, no relations but me.  And my beloved is mine, and I am her's--
and that's enough.--But Oh!--

      She's out.  The damp of death has quench'd her quite!
      Those spicy doors, her lips, are shut, close lock'd,
      Which never gale of life shall open more!

And is it so?--Is it indeed so?--Good God!--Good God!--But they will not
let me write on.  I must go down to this officious Peer--Who the devil
sent for him?



LETTER XXIV

MR. BELFORD, TO RICHARD MOWBRAY, ESQ.
SUNDAY, SEPT. 10. FOUR IN THE AFTERNOON.


I have your's, with our unhappy friend's enclosed.  I am glad my Lord is
with him.  As I presume that his phrensy will be but of short
continuance, I most earnestly wish, that on his recovery he could be
prevailed upon to go abroad.  Mr. Morden, who is inconsolable, has seen
by the will, (as indeed he suspected before he read it,) that the case
was more than a common seduction; and has dropt hints already, that he
looks on himself, on that account, as freed from his promises made to the
dying lady, which were, that he would not seek to avenge her death.

You must make the recovery of his health the motive for urging him on
this head; for, if you hint at his own safety, he will not stir, but
rather seek the Colonel.

As to the lock of hair, you may easily pacify him, (as you once saw the
angel,) with hair near the colour, if he be intent upon it.

At my Lord's desire I will write on, and in my common hand; that you may
judge what is, and what is not, fit to be read to Mr. Lovelace at
present.  But as I shall not forbear reflections as I go along, in hopes
to reach his heart on his recovery, I think it best to direct myself to
him still, and that as if he were not disordered.

As I shall not have leisure to take copies, and yet am willing to have
the whole subject before me, for my own future contemplation, I must
insist upon a return of my letters some time hence.  Mr. Lovelace knows
that this is one of my conditions; and has hitherto complied with it.

Thy letter, Mowbray, is an inimitable performance.  Thou art a strange
impenetrable creature.  But let me most earnestly conjure thee, and the
idle flutterer, Tourville, from what you have seen of poor Belton's exit;
from our friend Lovelace's phrensy, and the occasion of it; and from the
terrible condition in which the wretched Sinclair lies; to set about an
immediate change of life and manners.  For my own part, I am determined,
be your resolutions what they may, to take the advice I give.

As witness,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XXV

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.


O Lovelace! I have a scene to paint in relation to the wretched Sinclair,
that, if I do it justice, will make thee seriously ponder and reflect, or
nothing can.  I will lead thee to it in order; and that in my usual hand,
that thy compeers may be able to read it as well as thyself.

When I had written the preceding letter, not knowing what to do with
myself, recollecting, and in vain wishing for that delightful and
improving conversation, which I had now for ever lost; I thought I had as
good begin the task, which I had for some time past resolved to begin;
that is to say, to go to church; and see if I could not reap some benefit
from what I should hear there.  Accordingly I determined to go to hear
the celebrated preacher at St. James's church.  But, as if the devil (for
so I was then ready to conclude) thought himself concerned to prevent my
intention, a visit was made me, just as I was dressed, which took me off
from my purpose.

From whom should this visit be, but from Sally Martin, accompanied by
Mrs. Carter, the sister of the infamous Sinclair! the same, I suppose I
need not tell you, who keeps the bagnio near Bloomsbury.

These told me that the surgeon, apothecary, and physician, had all given
the wretched woman over; but that she said, she should not die, nor be at
rest, till she saw me; and they besought me to accompany them in the
coach they came in, if I had one spark of charity, of christian charity,
as they called it, left.

I was very loth to be diverted from my purpose by a request so unwelcome,
and from people so abhorred; but at last went, and we got thither by ten;
where a scene so shocking presented itself to me, that the death of poor
desponding Belton is not, I think, to be compared with it.

The old wretch had once put her leg out by her rage and violence, and had
been crying, scolding, cursing, ever since the preceding evening, that
the surgeon had told her it was impossible to save her; and that a
mortification had begun to show itself; insomuch that, purely in
compassion to their own ears, they had been forced to send for another
surgeon, purposely to tell her, though against his judgment, and (being a
friend of the other) to seem to convince him, that he mistook the case;
and that if she would be patient, she might recover.  But, nevertheless,
her apprehensions of death, and her antipathy to the thoughts of dying,
were so strong, that their imposture had not the intended effect, and she
was raving, crying, cursing, and even howling, more like a wolf than a
human creature, when I came; so that as I went up stairs, I said, Surely
this noise, this howling, cannot be from the unhappy woman!  Sally said
it was; and assured me, that it was noting to the noise she had made all
night; and stepping into her room before me, dear Madam Sinclair, said
she, forbear this noise!  It is more like that of a bull than a woman!--
Here comes Mr. Belford; and you'll fright him away if you bellow at this
rate.

There were no less than eight of her cursed daughters surrounding her bed
when I entered; one of her partners, Polly Horton, at their head; and now
Sally, her other partner, and Madam Carter, as they called her, (for they
are all Madams with one another,) made the number ten; all in shocking
dishabille, and without stays, except Sally, Carter, and Polly; who, not
daring to leave her, had not been in bed all night.

The other seven seemed to have been but just up, risen perhaps from their
customers in the fore-house, and their nocturnal orgies, with faces,
three or four of them, that had run, the paint lying in streaky seams not
half blowzed off, discovering coarse wrinkled skins: the hair of some of
them of divers colours, obliged to the black-lead comb where black was
affected; the artificial jet, however, yielding apace to the natural
brindle: that of others plastered with oil and powder; the oil
predominating: but every one's hanging about her ears and neck in broken
curls, or ragged ends; and each at my entrance taken with one motion,
stroking their matted locks with both hands under their coifs, mobs, or
pinners, every one of which was awry.  They were all slip-shoed;
stockingless some; only under-petticoated all; their gowns, made to cover
straddling hoops, hanging trollopy, and tangling about their heels; but
hastily wrapt round them, as soon as I came up stairs.  And half of them
(unpadded, shoulder-bent, pallid-lips, limber-jointed wretches)
appearing, from a blooming nineteen or twenty perhaps over-night, haggard
well-worn strumpets of thirty-eight or forty.

I am the more particular in describing to thee the appearance these
creatures made in my eyes when I came into the room, because I believe
thou never sawest any of them, much less a group of them, thus unprepared
for being seen.*  I, for my part, never did before; nor had I now, but
upon this occasion, being thus favoured.  If thou hadst, I believe thou
wouldst hate a profligate woman, as one of Swift's yahoos, or Virgil's
obscene harpies, squirting their ordure upon the Trojan trenches; since
the persons of such in their retirements are as filthy as their minds.--
Hate them as much as I do; and as much as I admire, and next to adore, a
truly virtuous and elegant woman: for to me it is evident, that as a neat
and clean woman must be an angel of a creature, so a sluttish one is the
impurest animal in nature.  But these were the veterans, the chosen band;
for now-and-then flitted in to the number of half a dozen or more, by
turns, subordinate sinners, under-graduates, younger than some of the
chosen phalanx, but not less obscene in their appearance, though indeed
not so much beholden to the plastering focus; yet unpropt by stays,
squalid, loose in attire, sluggish-haired, uner-petticoated only as the
former, eyes half-opened, winking and pinking, mispatched, yawning,
stretching, as if from the unworn-off effects of the midnight revel; all
armed in succession with supplies of cordials (of which every one present
was either taster or partaker) under the direction of the busier Dorcas,
who frequently popt in, to see her slops duly given and taken.


* Whoever has seen Dean Swift's Lady's Dressing room, will think this
description of Mr. Belford's not only more natural, but more decent
painting, as well as better justified by the design, and by the use that
may be made of it.


But when I approached the old wretch, what a spectacle presented itself
to my eyes!

Her misfortune has not at all sunk, but rather, as I thought, increased
her flesh; rage and violence perhaps swelling her muscular features.
Behold her, then, spreading the whole troubled bed with her huge quaggy
carcase: her mill-post arms held up; her broad hands clenched with
violence; her big eyes, goggling and flaming ready as we may suppose
those of a salamander; her matted griesly hair, made irreverend by her
wickedness (her clouted head-dress being half off, spread about her fat
ears and brawny neck;) her livid lips parched, and working violently;
her broad chin in convulsive motion; her wide mouth, by reason of the
contraction of her forehead (which seemed to be half-lost in its own
frightful furrows) splitting her face, as it were, into two parts; and
her huge tongue hideously rolling in it; heaving, puffing as if four
breath; her bellows-shaped and various-coloured breasts ascending by
turns to her chin, and descending out of sight, with the violence of her
gaspings.

This was the spectacle, as recollection has enabled me to describe it,
that this wretch made to my eye, by her suffragans and daughters, who
surveyed her with scouling frighted attention, which one might easily
see had more in it of horror and self-concern (and self-condemnation too)
than of love or pity; as who should say, See! what we ourselves must one
day be!

As soon as she saw me, her naturally-big voice, more hoarsened by her
ravings, broke upon me: O Mr. Belford!  O Sir! see what I am come to!--
See what I am brought to!--To have such a cursed crew about me, and not
one of them to take care of me!  But to let me tumble down stairs so
distant from the room I went from! so distant from the room I meant to go
to!--Cursed, cursed be every careless devil!--May this or worse be their
fate every one of them!

And then she cursed and swore most vehemently, and the more, as two or
three of them were excusing themselves on the score of their being at
that time as unable to help themselves as she.  As soon as she had
cleared the passage of her throat by the oaths and curses which her wild
impatience made her utter, she began in a more hollow and whining strain
to bemoan herself.  And here, said she--Heaven grant me patience!
[clenching and unclenching her hands] am I to die thus miserably!--of a
broken leg in my old age!--snatched away by means of my own intemperance!
Self-do!  Self-undone!--No time for my affairs!  No time to repent!--And
in a few hours (Oh!--Oh!--with another long howling O--h!--U--gh--o! a
kind of screaming key terminating it) who knows, who can tell where I
shall be?--Oh! that indeed I never, never, had had a being!

What could one say to such a wretch as this, whose whole life had been
spent in the most diffusive wickedness, and who no doubt has numbers of
souls to answer for?  Yet I told her, she must be patient: that her
violence made her worse: and that, if she would compose herself, she
might get into a frame more proper for her present circumstances.

Who, I? interrupted she: I get into a better frame!  I, who can neither
cry, nor pray!  Yet already feel the torments of the d----d!  What mercy
can I expect?  What hope is left for me?--Then, that sweet creature! that
incomparable Miss Harlowe! she, it seems, is dead and gone!  O that
cursed man!  Had it not been for him!  I had never had this, the most
crying of all my sins, to answer for!

And then she set up another howl.

And is she dead?--Indeed dead? proceeded she, when her howl was over--O
what an angel have I been the means of destroying!  For though it was
that it was mine, and your's, and your's, and your's, devils as we all
were [turning to Sally, to Polly, and to one or two more] that he did not
do her justice!  And that, that is my curse, and will one day be yours!
And then again she howled.

I still advised patience.  I said, that if her time were to be so short
as she apprehended, the more ought she to endeavour to compose herself:
and then she would at least die with more ease to herself--and
satisfaction to her friends, I was going to say--But the word die put her
into a violent raving, and thus she broke in upon me.  Die, did you say,
Sir?--Die!--I will not, I cannot die!--I know not how to die!--Die, Sir!
--And must I then die?--Leave this world?--I cannot bear it!--And who
brought you hither, Sir?--[her eyes striking fire at me] Who brought you
hither to tell me I must die, Sir?--I cannot, I will not leave this
world.  Let others die, who wish for another! who expect a better!--I
have had my plagues in this; but would compound for all future hopes, so
as I may be nothing after this!

And then she howled and bellowed by turns.

By my faith, Lovelace, I trembled in every joint; and looking upon her
who spoke this, and roared thus, and upon the company round me, I more
than once thought myself to be in one of the infernal mansions.

Yet will I proceed, and try, for thy good, if I can shock thee but half
as much with my descriptions, as I was shocked with what I saw and heard.

Sally!--Polly!--Sister Carter! said she, did you not tell me I might
recover?  Did not the surgeon tell me I might?

And so you may, cried Sally; Monsieur Garon says you may, if you'll be
patient.  But, as I have often told you this blessed morning, you are
reader to take despair from your own fears, than comfort from all the
hope we can give you.

Yet, cried the wretch, interrupting, does not Mr. Belford (and to him you
have told the truth, though you won't to me; does not he) tell me that I
shall die?--I cannot bear it!  I cannot bear the thoughts of dying!

And then, but that half a dozen at once endeavoured to keep down her
violent hands, would she have beaten herself; as it seems she had often
attempted to do from the time the surgeon popt out the word mortification
to her.

Well, but to what purpose, said I (turning aside to her sister, and to
Sally and Polly), are these hopes given her, if the gentlemen of the
faculty give her over?  You should let her know the worst, and then she
must submit; for there is no running away from death.  If she had any
matters to settle, put her upon settling them; and do not, by telling her
she will live, when there is no room to expect it, take from her the
opportunity of doing needful things.  Do the surgeons actually give her
over?

They do, whispered they.  Her gross habit, they say, gives no hopes.  We
have sent for both surgeons, whom we expect every minute.

Both the surgeons (who are French; for Mrs. Sinclair has heard Tourville
launch out in the praise of French surgeons) came in while we were thus
talking.  I retired to the farther end of the room, and threw up a window
for a little air, being half-poisoned by the effluvia arising from so
many contaminated carcases; which gave me no imperfect idea of the stench
of gaols, which, corrupting the ambient air, gives what is called the
prison distemper.

I came back to the bed-side when the surgeons had inspected the fracture;
and asked them, If there were any expectation of her life?

One of them whispered me, there was none: that she had a strong fever
upon her, which alone, in such a habit, would probably do the business;
and that the mortification had visibly gained upon her since they were
there six hours ago.

Will amputation save her?  Her affairs and her mind want settling.  A
few days added to her life may be of service to her in both respects.

They told me the fracture was high in her leg; that the knee was greatly
bruised; that the mortification, in all probability, had spread half-way
of the femur: and then, getting me between them, (three or four of the
women joining us, and listening with their mouths open, and all the signs
of ignorant wonder in their faces, as there appeared of self-sufficiency
in those of the artists,) did they by turns fill my ears with an
anatomical description of the leg and thigh; running over with terms of
art, of the tarsus, the metatarsus, the tibia, the fibula, the patella,
the os tali, the os tibae, the tibialis posticus and tibialis anticus, up
to the os femoris, to the acetabulum of the os ischion, the great
trochanter, glutaeus, triceps, lividus, and little rotators; in short, of
all the muscles, cartilages, and bones, that constitute the leg and thigh
from the great toe to the hip; as if they would show me, that all their
science had penetrated their heads no farther than their mouths; while
Sally lifted up her hands with a Laud bless me!  Are all surgeons so
learned!--But at last both the gentlemen declared, that if she and her
friends would consent to amputation, they would whip off her leg in a
moment.

Mrs. Carter asked, To what purpose, if the operation would not save her?

Very true, they said; but it might be a satisfaction to the patient's
friends, that all was done that could be done.

And so the poor wretch was to be lanced and quartered, as I may say, for
an experiment only!  And, without any hope of benefit from the operation,
was to pay the surgeons for tormenting her!

I cannot but say I have a mean opinion of both these gentlemen, who,
though they make a figure, it seems, in their way of living, and boast
not only French extraction, but a Paris education, never will make any in
their practice.

How unlike my honest English friend Tomkins, a plain serious, intelligent
man, whose art lies deeper than in words; who always avoids parade and
jargon; and endeavours to make every one as much a judge of what he is
about as himself!

All the time that the surgeons ran on with their anatomical process, the
wretched woman most frightfully roared and bellowed; which the gentlemen
(who showed themselves to be of the class of those who are not affected
with the evils they do not feel,) took no other notice of, than by
raising their voices to be heard, as she raised her's--being evidently
more solicitous to increase their acquaintance, and to propagate the
notion of their skill, than to attend to the clamours of the poor wretch
whom they were called in to relieve; though by this very means, like the
dog and the shadow in the fable, they lost both aims with me; for I never
was deceived in one rule, which I made early; to wit, that the stillest
water is the deepest, while the bubbling stream only betrays shallowness;
and that stones and pebbles lie there so near the surface, to point out
the best place to ford a river dry shod.

As nobody cared to tell the unhappy wretch what every one apprehended
must follow, and what the surgeons convinced me soon would, I undertook
to be the denouncer of her doom.  Accordingly, the operators being
withdrawn, I sat down by the bed-side, and said, Come, Mrs. Sinclair, let
me advise you to forbear these ravings at the carelessness of those, who,
I find, at the time, could take no care of themselves; and since the
accident has happened, and cannot be remedied, to resolve to make the
best of the matter: for all this violence but enrages the malady, and you
will probably fall into a delirium, if you give way to it, which will
deprive you of that reason which you ought to make the best of for the
time it may be lent you.

She turned her head towards me, and hearing me speak with a determined
voice, and seeing me assume as determined an air, became more calm and
attentive.

I went on, telling her, that I was glad, from the hints she had given,
to find her concerned for her past misspent life, and particularly for
the part she had had in the ruin of the most excellent woman on earth:
that if she would compose herself, and patiently submit to the
consequences of an evil she had brought upon herself, it might possibly
be happy for her yet.  Meantime, continued I, tell me, with temper and
calmness, why was you so desirous to see me?

She seemed to be in great confusion of thought, and turned her head this
way and that; and at last, after much hesitation, said, Alad for me!  I
hardly know what I wanted with you.  When I awoke from my intemperate
trance, and found what a cursed way I was in, my conscience smote me, and
I was for catching like a drowning wretch, at every straw.  I wanted to
see every body and any body but those I did see; every body who I thought
could give me comfort.  Yet could I expect none from you neither; for you
had declared yourself my enemy, although I had never done you harm; for
what, Jackey, in her old tone, whining through her nose, was Miss Harlowe
to you?--But she is happy!--But oh! what will become of me?--Yet tell me,
(for the surgeons have told you the truth, no doubt,) tell me, shall I do
well again?  May I recover?  If I may, I will begin a new course of life:
as I hope to be saved, I will.  I'll renounce you all--every one of you,
[looking round her,] and scrape all I can together, and live a life of
penitence; and when I die, leave it all to charitable uses--I will, by my
soul--every doit of it to charity--but this once, lifting up her rolling
eyes, and folded hands, (with a wry-mouthed earnestness, in which every
muscle and feature of her face bore its part,) this one time--good God of
Heaven and earth, but this once! this once! repeating those words five or
six times, spare thy poor creature, and every hour of my life shall be
passed in penitence and atonement: upon my soul it shall!

Less vehement! a little less vehement! said I--it is not for me, who have
led so free a life, as you but too well know, to talk to you in a
reproaching strain, and to set before you the iniquity you have lived in,
and the many souls you have helped to destroy.  But as you are in so
penitent a way, if I might advise, you should send for a good clergyman,
the purity of whose life and manners may make all these things come from
him with a better grace than they can from me.

How, Sir!  What, Sir! interrupting me: send for a parson!--Then you
indeed think I shall die!  Then you think there is no room for hope!----A
parson, Sir!----Who sends for a parson, while there is any hope left?--
The sight of a parson would be death immediate to me!--I cannot, cannot
die!--Never tell me of it!--What! die!--What! cut off in the midst of my
sins!

And then she began again to rave.

I cannot bear, said I, rising from my seat with a stern air, to see a
reasonable creature behave so outrageously!--Will this vehemence, think
you, mend the matter?  Will it avail you any thing?  Will it not rather
shorten the life you are so desirous to have lengthened, and deprive you
of the only opportunity you can ever have to settle your affairs for both
worlds?--Death is but the common lot: and if it be your's soon, looking
at her, it will be also your's, and your's, and your's, speaking with a
raised voice, and turning to every trembling devil round her, [for they
all shook at my forcible application,] and mine too.  And you have reason
to be thankful, turning again to her, that you did not perish in that act
of intemperance which brought you to this: for it might have been your
neck, as well as your leg; and then you had not had the opportunity you
now have for repentance--and, the Lord have mercy upon you! into what a
state might you have awoke!

Then did the poor wretch set up an inarticulate frightful howl, such a
one as I never before heard of her; and seeing every one half-frighted,
and me motioning to withdraw, O pity me, pity me, Mr. Belford, cried she,
her words interrupted by groans--I find you think I shall die!--And what
may I be, and where, in a very few hours--who can tell?

I told her it was vain to flatter her: it was my opinion she would not
recover.

I was going to re-advise her to calm her spirits, and endeavour to resign
herself, and to make the beset of the opportunity yet left her; but this
declaration set her into a most outrageous raving.  She would have torn
her hair, and beaten her breast, had not some of the wretches held her
hands by force, while others kept her as steady as they could, lest she
should again put out her new-set leg; so that, seeing her thus incapable
of advice, and in a perfect phrensy, I told Sally Martin, that there was
no bearing the room; and that their best way was to send for a minister
to pray by her, and to reason with her, as soon as she should be capable
of it.  And so I left them; and never was so sensible of the benefit of
fresh air, as I was the moment I entered the street.

Nor is it to be wondered at, when it is considered that, to the various
ill smells that will always be found in a close sick bed-room, (for
generally, when the physician comes, the air is shut out,) this of Mrs.
Sinclair was the more particularly offensive, as, to the scent of
plasters, salves, and ointments, were added the stenches of spirituous
liquors, burnt and unburnt, of all denominations; for one or other of
the creatures, under pretence of colics, gripes, or qualms, were
continually calling for supplies of these, all the time I was there.
And yet this is thought to be a genteel house of the sort; and all the
prostitutes in it are prostitutes of price, and their visiters people of
note.

O, Lovelace! what lives do most of us rakes and libertines lead! what
company do we keep!  And, for such company, what society renounce, or
endeavour to make like these!

What woman, nice in her person, and of purity in her mind and manners,
did she know what miry wallowers the generality of men of our class are
in themselves, and constantly trough and sty with, but would detest the
thoughts of associating with such filthy sensualists, whose favourite
taste carries them to mingle with the dregs of stews, brothels, and
common sewers?

Yet, to such a choice are many worthy women betrayed, by that false and
inconsiderate notion, raised and propagated, no doubt, by the author of
all delusion, that a reformed rake makes the best husband.  We rakes,
indeed, are bold enough to suppose, that women in general are as much
rakes in their hearts, as the libertines some of them suffer themselves
to be take with are in their practice.  A supposition, therefore, which
it behoves persons of true honour of that sex to discountenance, by
rejecting the address of every man, whose character will not stand the
test of that virtue which is the glory of a woman: and indeed, I may
say, of a man too: why should it not?

How, indeed, can it be, if this point be duly weighed, that a man who
thinks alike of all the sex, and knows it to be in the power of a wife
to do him the greatest dishonour man can receive, and doubts not her will
to do it, if opportunity offer, and importunity be not wanting: that such
a one, from principle, should be a good husband to any woman?  And,
indeed, little do innocents think, what a total revolution of manners,
what a change of fixed habits, nay, what a conquest of a bad nature, and
what a portion of Divine GRACE, is required, to make a man a good
husband, a worthy father, and true friend, from principle; especially
when it is considered, that it is not in a man's own power to reform when
he will.  This, (to say nothing of my own experience,) thou, Lovelace,
hast found in the progress of thy attempts upon the divine Miss Harlowe.
For whose remorses could be deeper, or more frequent, yet more transient
than thine!

Now, Lovelace, let me know if the word grace can be read from my pen
without a sneer from thee and thy associates?  I own that once it sounded
oddly in my ears.  But I shall never forget what a grave man once said on
this very word--that with him it was a rake's sibboleth.*  He had always
hopes of one who could bear the mention of it without ridiculing it; and
ever gave him up for an abandoned man, who made a jest of it, or of him
who used it.


* See Judges xii. 6.


Don't be disgusted, that I mingle such grave reflections as these with my
narratives.  It becomes me, in my present way of thinking, to do so, when
I see, in Miss Harlowe, how all human excellence, and in poor Belton, how
all inhuman libertinism, and am near seeing in this abandoned woman, how
all diabolical profligacy, end.  And glad should I be for your own sake,
for your splendid family's sake, and for the sake of all your intimates
and acquaintance, that you were labouring under the same impressions,
that so we who have been companions in (and promoters of one another's)
wickedness, might join in a general atonement to the utmost of our power.

I came home reflecting upon all these things, more edifying to me than
any sermon I could have heard preached: and I shall conclude this long
letter with observing, that although I left the wretched howler in a high
phrensy-fit, which was excessively shocking to the by-standers; yet her
phrensy must be the happiest part of her dreadful condition: for when she
is herself, as it is called, what must be her reflections upon her past
profligate life, throughout which it has been her constant delight and
business, devil-like, to make others as wicked as herself!  What must her
terrors be (a hell already begun in her mind!) on looking forward to the
dreadful state she is now upon the verge of!--But I drop my trembling
pen.


To have done with so shocking a subject at once, we shall take notice,
      that Mr. Belford, in a future letter, writes, that the miserable
      woman, to the surprise of the operators themselves, (through hourly
      increasing tortures of body and mind,) held out so long as till
      Thursday, Sept. 21; and then died in such agonies as terrified into
      a transitory penitence all the wretches about her.



LETTER XXVI

COLONEL MORDEN, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 10.


DEAR SIR,

According to my promise, I send you an account of matters here.  Poor
Mrs. Norton was so very ill upon the road, that, slowly as the hearse
moved, and the chariot followed, I was afraid we should not have got her
to St. Albans.  We put up there as I had intended.  I was in hopes that
she would have been better for the stop: but I was forced to leave her
behind me.  I ordered the maid-servant you were so considerately kind as
to send down with her, to be very careful of her; and left the chariot to
attend her.  She deserves all the regard that can be paid her; not only
upon my cousin's account, but on her own--she is an excellent woman.

When we were within five miles of Harlowe-place, I put on a hand-gallop.
I ordered the hearse to proceed more slowly still, the cross-road we were
in being rough; and having more time before us than I wanted; for I
wished not the hearse to be in till near dusk.  I got to Harlowe-place
about four o'clock.  You may believe I found a mournful house.  You
desire me to be very minute.

At my entrance into the court, they were all in motion.  Every servant
whom I saw had swelled eyes, and looked with so much concern, that at
first I apprehended some new disaster had happened in the family.  Mr.
John and Mr. Antony Harlowe and Mrs. Hervey were there.  They all helped
on one another's grief, as they had before done each other's hardness of
heart.

My cousin James met me at the entrance of the hall.  His countenance
expressed a fixed concern; and he desired me to excuse his behaviour the
last time I was there.

My cousin Arabella came to me full of tears and grief.

O Cousin! said she, hanging upon my arm, I dare not ask you any
questions!--About the approach of the hearse, I suppose she meant.

I myself was full of grief; and, without going farther or speaking, sat
down in the hall in the first chair.

The brother sat on one hand of me, the sister on the other.  Both were
silent.  The latter in tears.

Mr. Antony Harlowe came to me soon after.  His face was overspread with
all the appearance of woe.  He requested me to walk into the parlour;
where, as he said, were all his fellow-mourners.

I attended him in.  My cousins James and Arabella followed me.

A perfect concert of grief, as I may say, broke out the moment I entered
the parlour.

My cousin Harlowe, the dear creature's father, as soon as he saw me,
said, O Cousin, Cousin, of all our family, you are the only one who have
nothing to reproach yourself with!--You are a happy man!

The poor mother, bowing her head to me in speechless grief, sat with her
handkerchief held to her eyes with one hand.  The other hand was held by
her sister Hervey, between both her's; Mrs. Hervey weeping upon it.

Near the window sat Mr. John Harlowe, his face and his body turned from
the sorrowing company; his eyes red and swelled.

My cousin Antony, at his re-entering the parlour, went towards Mrs.
Harlowe--Don't--dear Sister, said he!--Then towards my cousin Harlowe--
Don't--dear Brother!--Don't thus give way--And, without being able to
say another word, went to a corner of the parlour, and, wanting himself
the comfort he would fain have given, sunk into a chair, and audibly
sobbed.

Miss Arabella followed her uncle Antony, as he walked in before me, and
seemed as if she would have spoken to the pierced mother some words of
comfort.  But she was unable to utter them, and got behind her mother's
chair; and, inclining her face over it, on the unhappy lady's shoulder,
seemed to claim the consolation that indulgent parent used, but then was
unable, to afford her.

Young Mr. Harlowe, with all his vehemence of spirit, was now subdued.
His self-reproaching conscience, no doubt, was the cause of it.

And what, Sir, must their thoughts be, which, at that moment, in a
manner, deprived them of all motion, and turned their speech into sighs
and groans!--How to be pitied, how greatly to be pitied! all of them!
But how much to be cursed that abhorred Lovelace, who, as it seems, by
arts uncommon, and a villany without example, has been the sole author
of a woe so complicated and extensive!--God judge me, as--But I stop--
the man (the man can I say?) is your friend!--He already suffers, you
tell me, in his intellect.--Restore him, Heaven, to that--If I find the
matter come out, as I apprehend it will--indeed her own hint of his usage
of her, as in her will, is enough--nor think, my beloved cousin, thou
darling of my heart! that thy gentle spirit, breathing charity and
forgiveness to the vilest of men, shall avail him!--But once more I stop
--forgive me, Sir!--Who could behold such a scene, who could recollect it
in order to describe it, (as minutely as you wished me to relate how this
unhappy family were affected on this sad occasion,) every one of the
mourners nearly related to himself, and not to be exasperated against the
author of all?

As I was the only person (grieved as I was myself) from whom any of them,
at that instant, could derive comfort; Let us not, said I, my dear
Cousin, approaching the inconsolable mother, give way to a grief, which,
however just, can now avail us nothing.  We hurt ourselves, and cannot
recall the dear creature for whom we mourn.  Nor would you wish it, if
you know with what assurance of eternal happiness she left the world--She
is happy, Madam!--depend upon it, she is happy!  And comfort yourselves
with that assurance!

O Cousin, Cousin! cried the unhappy mother, withdrawing her hand from
that of her sister Hervey, and pressing mine with it, you know not what
a child I have lost!--Then in a low voice, and how lost!--That it is that
makes the loss insupportable.

They all joined in a kind of melancholy chorus, and each accused him and
herself, and some of them one another.  But the eyes of all, in turn,
were cast upon my cousin James, as the person who had kept up the general
resentment against so sweet a creature.  While he was hardly able to bear
his own remorse: nor Miss Harlowe her's; she breaking out into words, How
tauntingly did I write to her!  How barbarously did I insult her!  Yet
how patiently did she take it!--Who would have thought that she had been
so near her end!--O Brother, Brother! but for you!--But for you!--Double
not upon me, said he, my own woes!  I have every thing before me that has
passed!  I thought only to reclaim a dear creature that had erred!  I
intended not to break her tender heart!  But it was the villanous
Lovelace who did that--not any of us!--Yet, Cousin, did she not attribute
all to me?--I fear she did!--Tell me only, did she name me, did she speak
of me, in her last hours?  I hope she, who could forgive the greatest
villain on earth, and plead that he may be safe from our vengeance, I
hope she could forgive me.

She died blessing you all; and justified rather than condemned your
severity to her.

Then they set up another general lamentation.  We see, said her father,
enough we see, in her heart-piercing letters to us, what a happy frame
she was in a few days before her death--But did it hold to the last?  Had
she no repinings?  Had the dear child no heart burnings?

None at all!--I never saw, and never shall see, so blessed a departure:
and no wonder; for I never heard of such a preparation.  Every hour, for
weeks together, were taken up in it.  Let this be our comfort: we need
only to wish for so happy an end for ourselves, and for those who are
nearest to our hearts.  We may any of us be grieved for acts of
unkindness to her: but had all happened that once she wished for, she
could not have made a happier, perhaps not so happy an end.

Dear soul! and Dear sweet soul! the father, uncles, sister, my cousin
Hervey, cried out all at once, in accents of anguish inexpressibly
affecting.

We must for every be disturbed for those acts of unkindness to so sweet a
child, cried the unhappy mother!--Indeed! indeed! [softly to her sister
Hervey,] I have been too passive, much too passive in this case!--The
temporary quiet I have been so studious all my life to preserve, has cost
me everlasting disquiet!----There she stopt.

Dear Sister! was all Mrs. Hervey could say.

I have done but half my duty to the dearest and most meritorious of
children, resumed the sorrowing mother!--Nay, not half!--How have we
hardened our hearts against her!----Again her tears denied passage to her
words.

My dearest, dearest Sister!--again was all Mrs. Hervey could say.

Would to Heaven, proceeded, exclaiming, the poor mother, I had but once
seen her!  Then, turning to my cousin James, and his sister--O my son!
O my Arabella! if WE were to receive as little mercy--And there again she
stopt, her tears interrupting her farther speech; every one, all the
time, remaining silent; their countenances showing a grief in their
hearts too big for expression.

Now you see, Mr. Belford, that my dearest cousin could be allowed all her
merit!--What a dreadful thing is after-reflection upon a conduct so
perverse and unnatural?

O this cursed friend of your's, Mr. Belford!  This detested Lovelace!--To
him, to him is owing--

Pardon me, Sir.  I will lay down my pen till I have recovered my temper.


ONE IN THE MORNING.

In vain, Sir, have I endeavoured to compose myself to rest.  You wished
me to be very particular, and I cannot help it.  This melancholy subject
fills my whole mind.  I will proceed, though it be midnight.

About six o'clock the hearse came to the outward gate--the parish church
is at some distance; but the wind setting fair, the afflicted family were
struck, just before it came, into a fresh fit of grief, on hearing the
funeral bell tolled in a very solemn manner.  A respect, as it proved,
and as they all guessed, paid to the memory of the dear deceased, out of
officious love, as the hearse passed near the church.

Judge, when their grief was so great in expectation of it, what it must
be when it arrived.

A servant came in to acquaint us with what its lumbering heavy noise up
the paved inner court-yard apprized us of before.  He spoke not.  He
could not speak.  He looked, bowed, and withdrew.

I stept out.  No one else could then stir.  Her brother, however, soon
followed me.  When I came to the door, I beheld a sight very affecting.

You have heard, Sir, how universally my dear cousin was beloved.  By the
poor and middling sort especially, no young lady was ever so much
beloved.  And with reason: she was the common patroness of all the honest
poor in her neighbourhood.

It is natural for us, in every deep and sincere grief, to interest all we
know in what is so concerning to ourselves.  The servants of the family,
it seems, had told their friends, and those their's, that though, living,
their dear young lady could not be received nor looked upon, her body was
permitted to be brought home.  The space of time was so confined, that
those who knew when she died, must easily guess near the time the hearse
was to come.  A hearse, passing through country villages, and from
London, however slenderly attended, (for the chariot, as I have said,
waited upon poor Mrs. Norton,) takes every one's attention.  Nor was it
hard to guess whose this must be, though not adorned by escutcheons, when
the cross-roads to Harlowe-place were taken, as soon as it came within
six miles of it; so that the hearse, and the solemn tolling of the bell,
had drawn together at least fifty, or the neighbouring men, women, and
children, and some of good appearance.  Not a soul of them, it seems,
with a dry eye, and each lamenting the death of this admired lady, who,
as I am told, never stirred out, but somebody was the better for her.

These, when the coffin was taken out of the hearse, crowding about it,
hindered, for a few moments, its being carried in; the young people
struggling who should bear it; and yet, with respectful whisperings,
rather than clamorous contention.  A mark of veneration I had never
before seen paid, upon any occasion in all my travels, from the
under-bred many, from whom noise is generally inseparable in all their
emulations.

At last six maidens were permitted to carry it in by the six handles.

The corpse was thus borne, with the most solemn respect, into the hall,
and placed for the present upon two stools there.  The plates, and
emblems, and inscription, set every one gazing upon it, and admiring it.
The more, when they were told, that all was of her own ordering.  They
wished to be permitted a sight of the corpse; but rather mentioned this
as their wish than as their hope.  When they had all satisfied their
curiosity, and remarked upon the emblems, they dispersed with blessings
upon her memory, and with tears and lamentations; pronouncing her to be
happy; and inferring, were she not so, what would become of them?  While
others ran over with repetitions of the good she delighted to do.  Nor
were there wanting those among them, who heaped curses upon the man who
was the author of her fall.

The servants of the family then got about the coffin.  They could not
before: and that afforded a new scene of sorrow: but a silent one; for
they spoke only by their eyes, and by sighs, looking upon the lid, and
upon one another, by turns, with hands lifted up.  The presence of their
young master possibly might awe them, and cause their grief to be
expressed only in dumb show.

As for Mr. James Harlowe, (who accompanied me, but withdrew when he saw
the crowd,) he stood looking upon the lid, when the people had left it,
with a fixed attention: yet, I dare say, knew not a symbol or letter upon
it at that moment, had the question been asked him.  In a profound
reverie he stood, his arms folded, his head on one side, and marks of
stupefaction imprinted upon every feature.

But when the corpse was carried into the lesser parlour, adjoining to the
hall, which she used to call her parlour, and put upon a table in the
midst of the room, and the father and mother, the two uncles, her aunt
Hervey, and her sister, came in, joining her brother and me, with
trembling feet, and eager woe, the scene was still more affecting.  Their
sorrow was heightened, no doubt, by the remembrance of their unforgiving
severity: and now seeing before them the receptacle that contained the
glory of their family, who so lately was driven thence by their
indiscreet violence; never, never more to be restored to the! no wonder
that their grief was more than common grief.

They would have withheld the mother, it seems, from coming in.  But when
they could not, though undetermined before, they all bore her company,
led on by an impulse they could not resist.  The poor lady but just cast
her eye upon the coffin, and then snatched it away, retiring with
passionate grief towards the window; yet, addressing herself, with
clasped hands, as if to her beloved daughter: O my Child, my Child! cried
she; thou pride of my hope!  Why was I not permitted to speak pardon and
peace to thee!--O forgive thy cruel mother!

Her son (his heart then softened, as his eyes showed,) besought her to
withdraw: and her woman looking in at that moment, he called her to
assist him in conducting her lady into the middle parlour: and then
returning, met his father going out of the door, who also had but just
cast his eye on the coffin, and yielded to my entreaties to withdraw.
His grief was too deep for utterance, till he saw his son coming in; and
then, fetching a heavy groan, Never, said he, was sorrow like my sorrow!
--O Son! Son!--in a reproaching accent, his face turned from him.

I attended him through the middle parlour, endeavouring to console him.
His lady was there in agonies.  She took his eye.  He made a motion
towards her: O my dear, said he--But turning short, his eyes as full as
his heart, he hastened through to the great parlour: and when there, he
desired me to leave him to himself.

The uncles and sister looked and turned away, very often, upon the
emblems, in silent sorrow.  Mrs. Hervey would have read to them the
inscription--These words she did read, Here the wicked cease from
troubling--But could read no farther.  Her tears fell in large drops upon
the plate she was contemplating; and yet she was desirous of gratifying a
curiosity that mingled impatience with her grief because she could not
gratify it, although she often wiped her eyes as they flowed.

Judge you, Mr. Belford, (for you have great humanity,) how I must be
affected.  Yet was I forced to try to comfort them all.

But here I will close this letter, in order to send it to you in the
morning early.  Nevertheless, I will begin another, upon supposition that
my doleful prolixity will be disagreeable to you.  Indeed I am altogether
indisposed for rest, as I have mentioned before.  So can do nothing but
write.  I have also more melancholy scenes to paint.  My pen, if I may
say so, is untired.  These scenes are fresh upon my memory: and I myself,
perhaps, may owe to you the favour of a review of them, with such other
papers as you shall think proper to oblige me with, when heavy grief has
given way to milder melancholy.

My servant, in his way to you with this letter, shall call at St. Alban's
upon the good woman, that he may inform you how she does.  Miss Arabella
asked me after her, when I withdrew to my chamber; to which she
complaisantly accompanied me.  She was much concerned at the bad way we
left her in; and said her mother would be more so.

No wonder that the dear departed, who foresaw the remorse that would fall
to the lot of this unhappy family when they came to have the news of her
death confirmed to them, was so grieved for their apprehended grief, and
endeavoured to comfort them by her posthumous letters.  But it was still
a greater generosity in her to try to excuse them to me, as she did when
we were alone together, a few hours before she died; and to aggravate
more than (as far as I can find) she ought to have done, the only error
she was ever guilty of.  The more freely, however, perhaps, (exalted
creature!) that I might think the better of her friends, although at her
own expense.  I am, dear Sir,

Your faithful and obedient servant,
WM. MORDEN.



LETTER XXVII

COLONEL MORDEN
[IN CONTINUATION.]


When the unhappy mourners were all retired, I directed the lid of the
coffin to be unscrewed, and caused some fresh aromatics and flowers to
be put into it.

The corpse was very little altered, notwithstanding the journey.  The
sweet smile remained.

The maids who brought the flowers were ambitious of strewing them about
it: they poured forth fresh lamentations over her; each wishing she had
been so happy as to have been allowed to attend her in London.  One of
them particularly, who is, it seems, my cousin Arabella's personal
servant, was more clamorous in her grief than any of the rest; and the
moment she turned her back, all the others allowed she had reason for it.
I inquired afterwards about her, and found, that this creature was set
over my dear cousin, when she was confined to her chamber by indiscreet
severity.

Good Heaven! that they should treat, and suffer thus to be treated, a
young lady, who was qualified to give laws to all her family!

When my cousins were told that the lid was unscrewed, they pressed in
again, all but the mournful father and mother, as if by consent.  Mrs.
Hervey kissed her pale lips.  Flower of the world! was all she could say;
and gave place to Miss Arabella; who kissing the forehead of her whom she
had so cruelly treated, could only say, to my cousin James, (looking upon
the corpse, and upon him,) O Brother!--While he, taking the fair,
lifeless hand, kissed it, and retreated with precipitation.

Her two uncles were speechless.  They seemed to wait each other's
example, whether to look upon the corpse, or not.  I ordered the lid to
be replaced; and then they pressed forward, as the others again did, to
take a last farewell of the casket which so lately contained so rich a
jewel.

Then it was that the grief of each found fluent expression; and the fair
corpse was addressed to, with all the tenderness that the sincerest love
and warmest admiration could inspire; each according to their different
degrees of relationship, as if none of them had before looked upon her.
She was their very niece, both uncles said!  The injured saint, her uncle
Harlowe!  The same smiling sister, Arabella!--The dear creature, all of
them!--The same benignity of countenance!  The same sweet composure!  The
same natural dignity!--She was questionless happy!  That sweet smile
betokened her being so! themselves most unhappy!--And then, once more,
the brother took the lifeless hand, and vowed revenge upon it, on the
cursed author of all this distress.

The unhappy parents proposed to take one last view and farewell of their
once darling daughter.  The father was got to the parlour-door, after the
inconsolable mother: but neither of them were able to enter it.  The
mother said she must once more see the child of her heart, or she should
never enjoy herself.  But they both agreed to refer their melancholy
curiosity till the next day; and had in hand retired inconsolable,
speechless both, their faces overspread with woe, and turned from each
other, as unable each to behold the distress of the other.

When all were withdrawn, I retired, and sent for my cousin James, and
acquainted him with his sister's request in relation to the discourse to
be pronounced at her interment; telling him how necessary it was that the
minister, whoever he were, should have the earliest notice given him that
the case would admit.  He lamented the death of the reverend Dr. Lewen,
who, as he said, was a great admirer of his sister, as she was of him,
and would have been the fittest of all men for that office.  He spoke
with great asperity of Mr. Brand, upon whose light inquiry after his
sister's character in town he was willing to lay some of the blame due to
himself.  Mr. Melvill, Dr. Lewen's assistant, must, he said, be the man;
and he praised him for his abilities; his elocution, and unexceptionable
manners; and promised to engage him early in the morning.

He called out his sister, and he was of his opinion.  So I let this upon
them.

They both, with no little warmth, hinted their disapprobation of you,
Sir, for their sister's executor, on the score of your intimate
friendship with the author of her ruin.

You must not resent any thing I shall communicate to you of what they say
on this occasion: depending that you will not, I shall write with the
greater freedom.

I told them how much my dear cousin was obliged to your friendship and
humanity: the injunctions she had laid you under, and your own
inclination to observe them.  I said, That you were a man of honour: that
you were desirous of consulting me, because you would not willingly give
offence to any of them: and that I was very fond of cultivating your
favour and correspondence.

They said there was no need of an executor out of their family; and they
hoped that you would relinquish so unnecessary a trust, as they called
it.  My cousin James declared that he would write to you, as soon as the
funeral was over, to desire that you would do so, upon proper assurances
that all the will prescribed should be performed.

I said you were a man of resolution: that I thought he would hardly
succeed; for that you made a point of honour of it.

I then showed them their sister's posthumous letter to you; in which she
confesses her obligations to you, and regard for you, and for your future
welfare.*  You may believe, Sir, they were extremely affected with the
perusal of it.


* See Letter XII. of this volume.


They were surprised that I had given up to you the produce of her
grandfather's estate since his death.  I told them plainly that they must
thank themselves if any thing disagreeable to them occurred from their
sister's devise; deserted, and thrown into the hands of strangers, as she
had been.

They said they would report all I had said to their father and mother;
adding, that great as their trouble was, they found they had still more
to come.  But if Mr. Belford were to be the executor of her will,
contrary to their hopes, they besought me to take the trouble of
transacting every thing with you; that a friend of the man to whom they
owed all their calamity might not appear to them.

They were extremely moved at the text their sister had chosen for the
subject of their funeral discourse.*  I had extracted from the will that
article, supposing it probable that I might not so soon have an
opportunity to show them the will itself, as would otherwise have been
necessary, on account of the interment, which cannot be delayed.


* See the Will, in pg. 112 of this volume.



MONDAY MORNING, BETWEEN EIGHT AND NINE.

The unhappy family are preparing for a mournful meeting at breakfast.
Mr. James Harlowe, who has had as little rest as I, has written to Mr.
Melvill, who has promised to draw up a brief eulogium on the deceased.
Miss Howe is expected here by-and-by, to see, for the last time, her
beloved friend.

Miss Howe, by her messenger, desires she may not be taken any notice of.
She shall not tarry six minutes, was the word.  Her desire will be easily
granted her.

Her servant, who brought the request, if it were denied, was to return,
and meet her; for she was ready to set out in her chariot, when he got on
horseback.

If he met her not with the refusal, he was to say here till she came.  I
am, Sir,

Your faithful, humble servant,
WILLIAM MORDEN.



LETTER XXVIII

COLONEL MORDEN
[IN CONTINUATION.]
MONDAY AFTERNOON, SEPT. 11.


SIR,

We are such bad company here to one another, that it is some relief to
retire and write.

I was summoned to breakfast about half an hour after nine.  Slowly did
the mournful congress meet.  Each, lifelessly and spiritless, took our
places, with swoln eyes, inquiring, without expecting any tolerable
account, how each had rested.

The sorrowing mother gave for answer, that she should never more know
what rest was.

By the time we were well seated, the bell ringing, the outward gate
opening, a chariot rattling over the pavement of the court-yard, put them
into emotion.

I left them; and was just time enough to give Miss Howe my hand as she
alighted: her maid in tears remaining in the chariot.

I think you told me, Sir, you never saw Miss Howe.  She is a fine,
graceful young lady.  A fixed melancholy on her whole aspect, overclouded
a vivacity and fire, which, nevertheless, darted now-and-then through the
awful gloom.  I shall ever respect her for her love to my dear cousin.

Never did I think, said she, as she gave me her hand, to enter more these
doors: but, living or dead, Clarissa brings me after her any where!

She entered with me the little parlour; and seeing the coffin, withdrew
her hand from mine, and with impatience pushed aside the lid.  As
impatiently she removed the face-cloth.  In a wild air, she clasped her
uplifted hands together; and now looked upon the corpse, now up to
Heaven, as if appealing to that.  Her bosom heaved and fluttered
discernible through her handkerchief, and at last she broke silence:--O
Sir!--See you not here!--the glory of her sex?--Thus by the most
villanous of yours--thus--laid low!

O my blessed Friend!--said she--My sweet Companion!--My lovely Monitress!
--kissing her lips at every tender appellation.  And is this all!--Is it
all of my CLARISSA'S story!

Then, after a short pause, and a profound sigh, she turned to me, and
then to her breathless friend.  But is she, can she be, really dead!--O
no!--She only sleeps.--Awake, my beloved Friend!  My sweet clay-cold
Friend, awake: let thy Anna Howe revive thee; by her warm breath revive
thee, my dear creature!  And, kissing her again, Let my warm lips animate
thy cold ones!

Then, sighing again, as from the bottom of her heart, and with an air, as
if disappointed that she answered not, And can such perfection end thus!
--And art thou really and indeed flown from thine Anna Howe!--O my unkind
CLARISSA!

She was silent a few moments, and then, seeming to recover herself, she
turned to me--Forgive, forgive, Mr. Morden, this wild phrensy!--I am
myself!--I never shall be!--You knew not the excellence, no, not half the
excellence, that is thus laid low!--Repeating, This cannot, surely, be
all of my CLARISSA'S story!

Again pausing, One tear, my beloved friend, didst thou allow me!--But
this dumb sorrow!--O for a tear to ease my full-swoln heart that is just
bursting!--

But why, Sir, why, Mr. Morden, was she sent hither?  Why not to me?--She
has no father, no mother, no relation; no, not one!--They had all
renounced her.  I was her sympathizing friend--And had not I the best
right to my dear creature's remains?--And must names, without nature, be
preferred to such a love as mine?

Again she kissed her lips, each cheek, her forehead;--and sighed as if
her heart would break--

But why, why, said she, was I withheld from seeing my dearest, dear
friend, and too easily persuaded to delay, the friendly visit that my
heart panted after; what pain will this reflection give me!--O my blessed
Friend!  Who knows, who knows, had I come in time, what my cordial
comfortings might have done for thee!--But--looking round her, as if she
apprehended seeing some of the family--One more kiss, my Angel, my
Friend, my ever-to-be-regretted, lost Companion!  And let me fly this
hated house, which I never loved but for thy sake!--Adieu then, my
dearest CLARISSA!--Thou art happy, I doubt not, as thou assuredst me in
thy last letter!--O may we meet, and rejoice together, where no villanous
Lovelaces, no hard-hearted relations, will ever shock our innocence, or
ruffle our felicity!

Again she was silent, unable to go, though seeming to intend it:
struggling, as it were, with her grief, and heaving with anguish.  At
last, happily, a flood of tears gushed from her eyes--Now!--Now!--said
she, shall I--shall I--be easier.  But for this kindly relief, my heart
would have burst asunder--more, many more tears than these are due to my
CLARISSA, whose counsel has done for me what mine could not do for her!--
But why, looking earnestly upon her, her hands clasped and lifted up--But
why do I thus lament the HAPPY?  And that thou art so, is my comfort.  It
is, it is, my dear creature! kissing her again.

Excuse me, Sir, [turning to me, who was as much moved as herself,] I
loved the dear creature, as never woman loved another.  Excuse my frantic
grief.  How has the glory of her sex fallen a victim to villany and to
hard-heartedness!

Madam, said I, they all have it!--Now indeed they have it--

And let them have it;--I should belie my love for the friend of my heart,
were I to pity them!--But how unhappy am I [looking upon her] that I saw
her not before these eyes were shut, before these lips were for ever
closed!--O Sir, you know not the wisdom that continually flowed from
these lips when she spoke!--Nor what a friend I have lost!

Then surveying the lid, she seemed to take in at once the meaning of the
emblems; and this gave her so much fresh grief, that though she several
times wipes her eyes, she was unable to read the inscription and texts;
turning, therefore, to me, Favour me, Sir, I pray you, by a line, with
the description of these emblems, and with these texts; and if I might be
allowed a lock of the dear creature's hair----

I told her that her executor would order both; and would also send her a
copy of her last will; in which she would find the most grateful
remembrances of her love for her, whom she calls The sister of her heart.

Justly, said she, does she call me so; for we had but one heart, but one
soul, between us; and now my better half is torn from me--What shall I
do?

But looking round her, on a servant's stepping by the door, as if again
she had apprehended it was some of the family--Once more, said she, a
solemn, an everlasting adieu!--Alas for me! a solemn, an everlasting
adieu!

Then again embracing her face with both her hands, and kissing it, and
afterwards the hands of the dear deceased, first one, then the other, she
gave me her hand, and quitting the room with precipitation, rushed into
her chariot; and, when there, with profound sight, and a fresh burst of
tears, unable to speak, she bowed her head to me, and was driven away.

The inconsolable company saw how much I had been moved on my return to
them.  Mr. James Harlowe had been telling them what had passed between
him and me.  And, finding myself unfit for company, and observing, that
they broke off talk at my coming in, I thought it proper to leave them to
their consultations.

And here I will put an end to this letter, for indeed, Sir, the very
recollection of this affecting scene has left me nearly as unable to
proceed, as I was, just after it, to converse with my cousins.  I am,
Sir, with great truth,

Your most obedient humble servant,
WILLIAM MORDEN.



LETTER XXIX

COLONEL MORDEN
[IN CONTINUATION.]
TUESDAY MORNING, SEPT. 12.


The good Mrs. Norton is arrived, a little amended in her spirits; owing
to the very posthumous letters, as I may call them, which you, Mr.
Belford, as well as I, apprehended would have had fatal effects upon her.

I cannot but attribute this to the right turn of her mind.  It seems she
has been inured to afflictions; and has lived in a constant hope of a
better life; and, having no acts of unkindness to the dear deceased to
reproach herself with, is most considerately resolved to exert her utmost
fortitude in order to comfort the sorrowing mother.

O Mr. Belford, how does the character of my dear departed cousin rise
upon me from every mouth!--Had she been my own child, or my sister!--But
do you think that the man who occasioned this great, this extended ruin--
But I forbear.

The will is not to be looked into, till the funeral rites are performed.
Preparations are making for the solemnity; and the servants, as well as
principals of all the branches of the family, are put into close
mourning.

I have seen Mr. Melvill.  He is a serious and sensible man.  I have given
him particulars to go upon in the discourse he is to pronounce at the
funeral; but had the less need to do this, as I find he is extremely well
acquainted with the whole unhappy story; and was a personal admirer of my
dear cousin, and a sincere lamenter of her misfortunes and death.  The
reverend Dr. Lewen, who is but very lately dead, was his particular
friend, and had once intended to recommend him to her favour and notice.


***


I am just returned from attending the afflicted parents, in an effort
they made to see the corpse of their beloved child.  They had requested
my company, and that of the good Mrs. Norton.  A last leave, the mother
said, she must take.

An effort, however, it was, and no more.  The moment they came in sight
of the coffin, before the lid could be put aside, O my dear, said the
father, retreating, I cannot, I find I cannot bear it!--Had I--had I--had
I never been hard-hearted!--Then, turning round to his lady, he had but
just time to catch her in his arms, and prevent her sinking on the floor.
--O, my dearest Life, said he, this is too much!--too much, indeed!--Let
us--let us retire.  Mrs. Norton, who (attracted by the awful receptacle)
had but just left the good lady, hastened to her--Dear, dear woman, cried
the unhappy parent, flinging her arms about her neck, bear me, bear me
hence!--O my child! my child! my own Clarissa Harlowe! thou pride of my
life so lately!--never, never more must I behold thee!

I supported the unhappy father, Mrs. Norton the sinking mother, into the
next parlour.  She threw herself on a settee there; he into an
elbow-chair by her--the good woman at her feet, her arms clasped round
her waist.  The two mothers, I as may call them, of my beloved cousin,
thus tenderly engaged!  What a variety of distress in these woeful
scenes!

The unhappy father, in endeavouring to comfort his lady, loaded himself.
Would to God, my dear, said he, would to God I had no more to charge
myself with than you have!--You relented!--you would have prevailed upon
me to relent!

The greater my fault, said she, when I knew that displeasure was carried
too high, to acquiesce as I did!--What a barbarous parent was I, to let
two angry children make me forget that I was mother to a third--to such a
third!

Mrs. Norton used arguments and prayers to comfort her--O, my dear Norton,
answered the unhappy lady, you was the dear creature's more natural
mother!--Would to Heaven I had no more to answer for than you have!

Thus the unhappy pair unavailingly recriminated, till my cousin Hervey
entered, and, with Mrs. Norton, conducted up to her own chamber the
inconsolable mother.  The two uncles, and Mr. Hervey, came in at the same
time, and prevailed upon the afflicted father to retire with them to his
--both giving up all thoughts of ever seeing more the child whose death
was so deservedly regretted by them.

Time only, Mr. Belford, can combat with advantage such a heavy
deprivation as this.  Advice will not do, while the loss is recent.
Nature will have way given to it, (and so it ought,) till sorrow has in a
manner exhausted itself; and then reason and religion will come in
seasonably with their powerful aids, to raise the drooping heart.

I see here no face that is the same I saw at my first arrival.  Proud and
haughty every countenance then, unyielding to entreaty; now, how greatly
are they humbled!--The utmost distress is apparent in every protracted
feature, and in every bursting muscle, of each disconsolate mourner.
Their eyes, which so lately flashed anger and resentment, now are turned
to every one that approaches them, as if imploring pity!--Could ever
wilful hard-heartedness be more severely punished?

The following lines of Juvenal are, upon the whole applicable to this
house and family; and I have revolved them many times since Sunday
evening:

      Humani generis mores tibi nosse volenti
      Sufficit una domus: paucos consumere dies, &
      Dicere te miserum, postquam illinc veneris, aude.

Let me add, that Mrs. Norton has communicated to the family the
posthumous letter sent her.  This letter affords a foundation for future
consolation to them; but at present it has new pointed their grief, by
making them reflect on their cruelty to so excellent a daughter, niece,
and sister.*  I am, dear Sir,

Your faithful, humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.


* This letter contains in substance--her thanks to the good woman for her
care of her in her infancy; for her good instructions, and the excellent
example she had set her; with self-accusations of a vanity and
presumption, which lay lurking in her heart unknown to herself, till her
calamities (obliging her to look into herself) brought them to light.

She expatiates upon the benefit of afflictions to a mind modest, fearful,
and diffident.

She comforts her on her early death; having finished, as she says, her
probatory course, at so early a time of life, when many are not ripened
by the sunshine of Divine Grace for a better, till they are fifty, sixty,
or seventy years of age.

I hope, she says, that my father will grant the request I have made to
him in my last will, to let you pass the remainder of your days at my
Dairy-house, as it used to be called, where once I promised myself to be
happy in you.  Your discretion, prudence, and economy, my dear, good
woman, proceeds she, will male your presiding over the concerns of that
house as beneficial to them as it can be convenient to you.  For your
sake, my dear Mrs. Norton, I hope they will make you this offer.  And if
they do, I hope you will accept it for theirs.

She remembers herself to her foster-brother in a very kind manner; and
charges her, for his sake, that she will not take too much to heart what
has befallen her.

She concludes as follows:

Remember me, in the last place, to all my kind well-wishers of your
acquaintance; and to those I used to call My Poor.  They will be God's
poor, if they trust in Him.  I have taken such care, that I hope they
will not be losers by my death.  Bid them, therefore, rejoice; and do you
also, my reverend comforter and sustainer, (as well in my darker as in my
fairer days,) likewise rejoice, that I am so soon delivered from the
evils that were before me; and that I am NOW, when this comes to your
hands, as I humbly trust, exulting in the mercies of a gracious God, who
has conducted an end to all my temptations and distresses; and who, I
most humbly trust, will, in his own good time, give us a joyful meeting
in the regions of eternal blessedness.



LETTER XXX

COLONEL MORDEN
[IN CONTINUATION.]
THURSDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 14.


We are just returned from the solemnization of the last mournful rite.
My cousin James and his sister, Mr. and Mrs. Hervey, and their daughter,
a young lady whose affection for my departed cousin shall ever bind me to
her, my cousins John and Antony Harlowe, myself, and some other more
distant relations of the names of Fuller and Allinson, (who, to testify
their respect to the memory of the dear deceased, had put themselves in
mourning,) self-invited, attended it.

The father and mother would have joined in these last honours, had they
been able; but they were both very much indisposed; and continue to be
so.

The inconsolable mother told Mrs. Norton, that the two mothers of the
sweetest child in the world ought not, on this occasion, to be separated.
She therefore desired her to stay with her.

The whole solemnity was performed with great decency and order.  The
distance from Harlowe-place to the church is about half a mile.  All the
way the corpse was attended by great numbers of people of all conditions.

It was nine when it entered the church; every corner of which was
crowded.  Such a profound, such a silent respect did I never see paid at
the funeral of princes.  An attentive sadness overspread the face of all.

The eulogy pronounced by Mr. Melvill was a very pathetic one.  He wiped
his own eyes often, and made every body present still oftener wipe
theirs.

The auditors were most particularly affected, when he told them, that the
solemn text was her own choice.

He enumerated her fine qualities, naming with honour their late worthy
pastor for his authority.

Every enumerated excellence was witnessed to in different parts of the
church in respectful whispers by different persons, as of their own
knowledge, as I have been since informed.

When he pointed to the pew where (doing credit to religion by her
example) she used to sit or kneel, the whole auditory, as one person,
turned to the pew with the most respectful solemnity, as if she had been
herself there.

When the gentleman attributed condescension and mingled dignity to her,
a buzzing approbation was given to the attribute throughout the church;
and a poor, neat woman under my pew added, 'That she was indeed all
graciousness, and would speak to any body.'

Many eyes ran over when he mentioned her charities, her well-judged
charities.  And her reward was decreed from every mouth with sighs and
sobs from some, and these words from others, 'The poor will dearly miss
her.'

The cheerful giver whom God is said to love, was allowed to be her: and
a young lady, I am told, said, It was Miss Clarissa Harlowe's care to
find out the unhappy, upon a sudden distress, before the sighing heart
was overwhelmed by it.

She had a set of poor people, chosen for their remarkable honesty and
ineffectual industry.  These voluntarily paid their last attendance on
their benefactress; and mingling in the church as they could crowd near
the aisle where the corpse was on stands, it was the less wonder that her
praises from the preacher met with such general and such grateful
whispers of approbation.

Some, it seems there were, who, knowing her unhappy story, remarked upon
the dejected looks of the brother, and the drowned eyes of the sister!
'O what would they now give, they'd warrant, had they not been so
hard-hearted!'--Others pursued, as I may say, the severe father and
unhappy mother into their chambers at home--'They answered for their
relenting, now that it was too late!--What must be their grief!--No
wonder they could not be present!'

Several expressed their astonishment, as people do every hour, 'that a
man could live whom such perfections could not engage to be just to her;'
--to be humane I may say.  And who, her rank and fortune considered,
could be so disregardful of his own interest, had he had no other motive
to be just!--

The good divine, led by his text, just touched upon the unhappy step that
was the cause of her untimely fate.  He attributed it to the state of
things below, in which there could not be absolute perfection.  He very
politely touched upon the noble disdain she showed (though earnestly
solicited by a whole splendid family) to join interests with a man whom
she found unworthy of her esteem and confidence: and who courted her with
the utmost earnestness to accept of him.

What he most insisted upon was, the happy end she made; and thence drew
consolation to her relations, and instruction to the auditory.

In a word, his performance was such as heightened the reputation which he
had before in a very eminent degree obtained.

When the corpse was to be carried down into the vault, (a very spacious
one, within the church,) there was great crowding to see the coffin-lid,
and the devices upon it.  Particularly two gentlemen, muffled up in
clokes, pressed forward.  These, it seems, were Mr. Mullins and Mr.
Wyerley; both of them professed admirers of my dear cousin.

When they came near the coffin, and cast their eyes upon the lid, 'In
that little space,' said Mr. Mullins, 'is included all human excellence!'
--And then Mr. Wyerley, unable to contain himself, was forced to quit the
church, and we hear is very ill.

It is said that Mr. Solmes was in a remote part of the church, wrapped
round in a horseman's coat; and that he shed tears several times.  But I
saw him not.

Another gentleman was there incognito, in a pew near the entrance of the
vault, who had not been taken notice of, but for his great emotion when
he looked over his pew, at the time the coffin was carried down to its
last place.  This was Miss Howe's worthy Mr. Hickman.

My cousins John and Antony and their nephew James chose not to descend
into the vault among their departed ancestors.

Miss Harlowe was extremely affected.  Her conscience, as well as her
love, was concerned on the occasion.  She would go down with the corpse
of her dear, her only sister, she said; but her brother would not permit
it.  And her overwhelmed eye pursued the coffin till she could see no
more of it; and then she threw herself on the seat, and was near fainting
away.

I accompanied it down, that I might not only satisfy myself, but you,
Sir, her executor, that it was deposited, as she had directed, at the
feet of her grandfather.

Mr. Melvill came down, contemplated the lid, and shed a few tears over
it.  I was so well satisfied with his discourse and behaviour, that I
presented him on the solemn spot with a ring of some value; and thanked
him for his performance.

And here I left the remains of my beloved cousin; having bespoken my own
place by the side of her coffin.

On my return to Harlowe-place, I contented myself with sending my
compliments to the sorrowing parents, and retired to my chamber.  Nor am
I ashamed to own, that I could not help giving way to a repeated fit of
humanity, as soon as I entered it.  I am, Sir,

Your most faithful and obedient servant,
WM. MORDEN.


P.S. You will have a letter from my cousin James, who hopes to prevail
      upon you to relinquish the executorship.  It has not my
      encouragement.



LETTER XXXI

MR. BELFORD, TO WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 16.


DEAR SIR,

I once had thoughts to go down privately, in order, disguised, to see the
last solemnity performed.  But there was no need to give myself this
melancholy trouble, since your last letter so naturally describes all
that passed, that I have every scene before my eyes.

You crowd me, Sir, methinks, into the silent slow procession--now with
the sacred bier, do I enter the awful porch; now measure I, with solemn
paces, the venerable aisle; now, ambitious of a relationship to her,
placed in a pew near to the eye-attracting coffin, do I listen to the
moving eulogy; now, through the buz of gaping, eye-swoln crowds, do I
descend into the clammy vault, as a true executor, to see that part of
her will performed with my own eyes.  There, with a soul filled with
musing, do I number the surrounding monuments of mortality, and
contemplate the present stillness of so many once busy vanities, crowded
all into one poor vaulted nook, as if the living grudged room for the
corpse of those for which, when animated, the earth, the air, and the
waters, could hardly find room.  Then seeing her placed at the feet of
him whose earthly delight she was; and who, as I find, ascribes to the
pleasure she gave him the prolongation of his own life;* sighing, and
with averted face, I quit the solemn mansion, the symbolic coffin, and,
for ever, the glory of her sex; and ascend with those, who, in a few
years, after a very short blaze of life, will fill up other spaces of the
same vault, which now (while they mourn only for her, whom they jointly
persecuted) they press with their feet.


* See Vol. I. Letter V.


Nor do your affecting descriptions permit me here to stop; but, ascended,
I mingle my tears and my praises with those of the numerous spectators.
I accompany the afflicted mourners back to their uncomfortable mansion;
and make one in the general concert of unavailing woe; till retiring as I
imagine, as they retire, like them, in reality, I give up to new scenes
of solitary and sleepless grief; reflecting upon the perfections I have
seen the end of; and having no relief but from an indignation, which
makes me approve of the resentments of others against the unhappy man,
and those equally unhappy relations of her's, to whom the irreparable
loss is owing.

Forgive me, Sir, these reflections, and permit me, with this, to send you
what you declined receiving till the funeral was over.


[He gives him then an account of the money and effects, which he sends
      him down by this opportunity, for the legatees at Harlowe-place,
      and in its neighbourhood; which he desires him to dispose of
      according to the will.

He also sends him an account of other steps he has taken in pursuance of
      the will; and desires to know if Mr. Harlowe expects the discharge
      of the funeral-expenses from the effects in his hands; and the
      re-imbursement of the sums advanced to the testatrix since her
      grandfather's death.]


These expeditious proceedings, says he, will convince Mr. James Harlowe
that I am resolved to see the will completely executed; and yet, by my
manner of doing it, that I desire not to give unnecessary mortification
to the family, since every thing that relates to them shall pass through
your hands.



LETTER XXXII

MR. JAMES HARLOWE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
HARLOWE-PLACE, FRIDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 15.


SIR,

I hope, from the character my worthy cousin Morden gives you, that you
will excuse the application I make to you, to oblige a whole family in
an affair that much concerns their peace, and cannot equally concern any
body else.  You will immediately judge, Sir, that this is the
executorship of which my sister has given you the trouble by her last
will.

We shall all think ourselves extremely obliged to you, if you please to
relinquish this trust to our own family; the reasons which follow
pleading for our own expectation of this favour from you:

First, because she never would have had the thought of troubling you,
Sir, if she had believed any of her near relations would have taken it
upon themselves.

Secondly, I understand that she recommends to you in the will to trust
to the honour of any of our family, for the performance of such of the
articles as are of a domestic nature.  We are, any of us, and all of us,
if you request it, willing to stake our honours upon this occasion; and
all you can desire, as a man of honour, is, that the trust be executed.

We are the more concerned, Sir, to wish you to decline this office,
because of your short and accidental knowledge of the dear testatrix, and
long and intimate acquaintance with the man to whom she owed her ruin,
and we the greatest loss and disappointment (her manifold excellencies
considered) that ever befell a family.

You will allow due weight, I dare say, to this plea, if you make our case
your own; and so much the readier, when I assure you, that your
interfering in this matter, so much against our inclinations, (excuse,
Sir, my plain dealing,) will very probably occasion an opposition in some
points, where otherwise there might be none.

What, therefore, I propose is, not that my father should assume this
trust; he is too much afflicted to undertake it--nor yet myself--I might
be thought too much concerned in interest; but that it might be allowed
to devolve upon my two uncles; whose known honour, and whose affection to
the dear deceased, nobody every doubted; and they will treat with you,
Sir, through my cousin Morden, as to the points they will undertake to
perform.

The trouble you have already had will well entitle you to the legacy she
bequeaths you, together with the re-imbursement of all the charges you
have been at, and allowance of the legacies you have discharged, although
you should not have qualified yourself to act as an executor, as I
presume you have not yet done, nor will now do.

Your compliance, Sir, will oblige a family, (who have already distress
enough upon them,) in the circumstance that occasions this application to
you, and more particularly, Sir,

Your most humble servant,
JAMES HARLOWE, JUN.


I send this by one of my servants, who will attend your dispatch.



LETTER XXXIII

MR. BELFORD, TO MR. JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 16.


SIR,

You will excuse my plain-dealing in turn: for I must observe, that if I
had not the just opinion I have of the sacred nature of this office I
have undertaken, some passages in the letter you have favoured me with
would convince me that I ought not to excuse myself from acting in it.

I need only name one of them.  You are pleased to say, that your uncles,
if the trust be relinquished to them, will treat with me, through Colonel
Morden, as to the points they will undertake to perform.

Permit me, Sir, to say, that it is the duty of an executor to see every
point performed, that can be performed.--Nor will I leave the performance
of mine to any other persons, especially where a qualifying is so
directly intimated, and where all the branches of your family have shown
themselves, with respect to the incomparable lady, to have but one mind.

You are pleased to urge, that she recommends to me the leaving to the
honour of any of your family such of the articles as are of a domestic
nature.  But, admitting this to be so, does it not imply that the other
articles are still to obtain my care?--But even these, you will find by
the will, she gives not up; and to that I refer you.

I am sorry for the hints you give of an opposition, where, as you say,
there might be none, if I did not interfere.  I see not, Sir, why your
animosity against a man who cannot be defended, should be carried to such
a height against one who never gave you offence; and this only, because
he is acquainted with that man.  I will not say all I might say on this
occasion.

As to the legacy to myself, I assure you, Sir, that neither my
circumstances nor my temper will put me upon being a gainer by the
executorship.  I shall take pleasure to tread in the steps of the
admirable testatrix in all I may; and rather will increase than diminish
her poor's fund.

With regard to the trouble that may attend the execution of the trust, I
shall not, in honour to her memory, value ten times more than this can
give me.  I have, indeed two other executorships on my hands; but they
sit light upon me.  And survivors cannot better or more charitably bestow
their time.

I conceive that every article, but that relating to the poor's fund,
(such is the excellence of the disposition of the most excellent of
women,) may be performed in two months' time, at farthest.

Occasions of litigation or offence shall not proceed from me.  You need
only apply to Colonel Morden who shall command me in every thing that the
will allows me to oblige your family in.  I do assure you, that I am as
unwilling to obtrude myself upon it, as any of it can wish.

I own that I have not yet proved the will; nor shall I do it till next
week at soonest, that you may have time for amicable objections, if such
you think fit to make through the Colonel's mediation.  But let me
observe to you, Sir, 'That an executor's power, in such instances as I
have exercised it, is the same before the probate as after it.  He can
even, without taking that out, commence an action, although he cannot
declare upon it: and these acts of administration make him liable to
actions himself.'  I am therefore very proper in the steps I shall have
taken in part of the execution of this sacred trust; and want not
allowance on the occasion.

Permit me to add, that when you have perused the will, and coolly
considered every thing, it is my hope, that you will yourself be of
opinion that there can be no room for dispute or opposition; and that if
your family will join to expedite the execution, it will be the most
natural and easy way of shutting up the whole affair, and to have done
with a man so causelessly, as to his own particular, the object of your
dislike, as is, Sir,

Your very humble servant, (notwithstanding,)
JOHN BELFORD.



THE WILL

To which the following preamble, written on a separate paper, was
Stitched in black silk.


TO MY EXECUTOR

'I hope I may be excused for expatiating, in divers parts of this solemn
last act, upon subjects of importance.  For I have heard of so many
instances of confusion and disagreement in families, and so much doubt
and difficulty, for want of absolute clearness in the testaments of
departed persons, that I have often concluded, (were there to be no other
reasons but those which respect the peace of surviving friends,) that
this last act, as to its designation and operation, ought not to be the
last in its composition or making; but should be the result of cool
deliberation, and (as is more frequently than justly said) of a sound
mind and memory; which too seldom are to be met with but in sound health.
All pretences of insanity of mind are likewise prevented, when a testator
gives reasons for what he wills; all cavils about words are obviated; the
obliged are assured; and they enjoy the benefit for whom the benefit was
intended.  Hence have I, for some time past, employed myself in penning
down heads of such a disposition; which, as reasons offered, I have
altered and added to, so that I was never absolutely destitute of a will,
had I been taken off ever so suddenly.  These minutes and imperfect
sketches enabled me, as God has graciously given me time and sedateness,
to digest them into the form in which they appear.'


I, CLARISSA HARLOWE, now, by strange melancholy accidents, lodging in the
parish of St. Paul, Covent-garden, being of sound and perfect mind and
memory, as I hope these presents, drawn up by myself, and written with my
own hand, will testify, do, [this second day of September,*] in the year
of our Lord ----,** make and publish this my last will and testament, in
manner and form following:


* A blank, at the writing, was left for this date, and filled up on this
day.  See Vol. VIII. Letter LI.
** The date of the year is left blank for particular reasons.


In the first place, I desire that my body may lie unburied three days
after my decease, or till the pleasure of my father be known concerning
it.  But the occasion of my death not admitting of doubt, I will not, on
any account that it be opened; and it is my desire, that it shall not be
touched but by those of my own sex.

I have always earnestly requested, that my body might be deposited in the
family vault with those of my ancestors.  If it might be granted, I could
now wish, that it might be placed at the feet of my dear and honoured
grandfather.  But as I have, by one very unhappy step, been thought to
disgrace my whole lineage, and therefore this last honour may be refused
to my corpse; in this case my desire is, that it may be interred in the
churchyard belonging to the parish in which I shall die; and that in the
most private manner, between the hours of eleven and twelve at night;
attended only by Mrs. Lovick, and Mr. and Mrs. Smith, and their maid
servant.

But it is my desire, that the same fees and dues may be paid which are
usually paid for those who are laid in the best ground, as it is called,
or even in the chancel.--And I bequeath five pounds to be given, at the
discretion of the church-wardens, to twenty poor people, the Sunday after
my interment; and this whether I shall be buried here or elsewhere.

I have already given verbal directions, that, after I am dead, (and laid
out in the manner I have ordered,) I may be put into my coffin as soon as
possible: it is my desire, that I may not be unnecessarily exposed to the
view of any body; except any of my relations should vouchsafe, for the
last time, to look upon me.

And I could wish, if it might be avoided without making ill will between
Mr. Lovelace and my executor, that the former might not be permitted to
see my corpse.  But if, as he is a man very uncontroulable, and as I am
nobody's, he insist upon viewing her dead, whom he ONCE before saw in a
manner dead, let his gay curiosity be gratified.  Let him behold, and
triumph over the wretched remains of one who has been made a victim to
his barbarous perfidy: but let some good person, as by my desire, give
him a paper, whist he is viewing the ghastly spectacle, containing these
few words only,--'Gay, cruel heart! behold here the remains of the once
ruined, yet now happy, Clarissa Harlowe!--See what thou thyself must
quickly be;--and REPENT!--'

Yet, to show that I die in perfect charity with all the world, I do most
sincerely forgive Mr. Lovelace the wrongs he has done me.

If my father can pardon the errors of his unworthy child, so far as to
suffer her corpse to be deposited at the feet of her grandfather, as
above requested, I could wish (my misfortunes being so notorious) that a
short discourse be pronounced over my remains, before they be interred.
The subject of the discourse I shall determine before I conclude this
writing.


So much written about what deserves not the least consideration, and
      about what will be nothing when this writing comes to be opened
      and read, will be excused, when my present unhappy circumstances
      and absence from all my natural friends are considered.


And now, with regard to the worldly matters which I shall die possessed
of, as well as to those which of right appertain to me, either by the
will of my said grandfather, or otherwise; thus do I dispose of them.

In the first place, I give and bequeath all the real estates in or to
which I have any claim or title by the said will, to my ever-honoured
father, James Harlowe, Esq. and that rather than to my brother and
sister, to whom I had once thoughts of devising them, because, if they
survive my father, those estates will assuredly vest in them, or one of
them, by virtue of his favour and indulgence, as the circumstances of
things with regard to marriage-settlements, or otherwise, may require;
or, as they may respectively merit by the continuance of their duty.

The house, late my grandfather's, called The Grove, and by him, in honour
of me, and of some of my voluntary employments, my Dairy-house, and the
furniture thereof as it now stands (the pictures and large iron chest of
old plate excepted,) I also bequeath to my said father; only begging it
as a favour that he will be pleased to permit my dear Mrs. Norton to pass
the remainder of her days in that house; and to have and enjoy the
apartments in it known by the name of The Housekeeper's Apartments, with
the furniture in them; and which, (plain and neat) was bought for me by
my grandfather, who delighted to call me his house-keeper; and which,
therefore, in his life-time, I used as such: the office to go with the
apartments.  And as I am the more earnest in this recommendation, as I
had once thought to have been very happy there with the good woman; and
because I think her prudent management will be as beneficial to my
father, as his favour can be convenient to her.

But with regard to what has accrued from that estate, since my
grandfather's death, and to the sum of nine hundred and seventy pounds,
which proved to be the moiety of the money that my said grandfather had
by him at his death, and which moiety he bequeathed to me for my sole
and separate use, [as he did the other moiety in like manner to my
sister;*] and which sum (that I might convince my brother and sister that
I wished not for an independence upon my father's pleasure) I gave into
my father's hands, together with the management and produce of the whole
estate devised to me--these sums, however considerable when put together,
I hope I may be allowed to dispose of absolutely, as my love and
gratitude (not confined only to my own family, which is very wealthy in
all its branches) may warrant: and which therefore I shall dispose of in
the manner hereafter mentioned.  But it is my will and express direction,
that my father's account of the above-mentioned produce may be taken and
established absolutely (and without contravention or question,) as he
shall be pleased to give it to my cousin Morden, or to whom else he shall
choose to give it; so as that the said account be not subject to
litigation, or to the controul of my executor, or of any other person.


* See Vol. I. Letter XIII.


My father, of his love and bounty, was pleased to allow me the same
quarterly sums that he allowed my sister for apparel and other
requisites; and (pleased with me then) used to say, that those sums
should not be deducted from the estate and effects bequeathed to me by my
grandfather: but having mortally offended him (as I fear it may be said)
by one unhappy step, it may be expected that he will reimburse himself
those sums--it is therefore my will and direction, that he shall be
allowed to pay and satisfy himself for all such quarterly or other sums,
which he was so good as to advance me from the time of my grandfather's
death; and that his account of such sums shall likewise be taken without
questioning the money, however, which I left behind me in my escritoire,
being to be taken in part of those disbursements.

My grandfather, who, in his goodness and favour to me, knew no bounds,
was pleased to bequeath to me all the family pictures at his late house,
some of which are very masterly performances; with command, that if I
died unmarried, or if married and had no descendants, they should then go
to that son of his (if more than one should be then living) whom I should
think would set most value by them.  Now, as I know that my honoured
uncle, Mr. John Harlowe, Esq. was pleased to express some concern that
they were not left to him, as eldest son; and as he has a gallery where
they may be placed to advantage; and as I have reason to believe that he
will bequeath them to my father, if he survive him, who, no doubt, will
leave them to my brother, I therefore bequeath all the said family
pictures to my said uncle, John Harlowe.  In these pictures, however, I
include not one of my own, drawn when I was about fourteen years of age;
which I shall hereafter in another article bequeath.

My said honoured grandfather having a great fondness for the old family
plate, which he would never permit to be changed, having lived, as he
used to day, to see a great deal of it come into request again in the
revolution of fashions; and having left the same to me, with a command
to keep it entire; and with power at my death to bequeath it to
whomsoever I pleased that I thought would forward his desire; which was,
as he expresses it, that it should be kept to the end of time; this
family plate, which is deposited in a large iron chest, in the strong
room at his late dwelling-house, I bequeath entire to my honoured uncle
Antony Harlowe, Esq. with the same injunctions which were laid on me; not
doubting but he will confirm and strengthen them by his own last will.

I bequeath to my ever-valued friend, Mrs. Judith Norton, to whose piety
and care, seconding the piety and care of my ever-honoured and excellent
mother, I owe, morally speaking, the qualifications which, for eighteen
years of my life, made me beloved and respected, the full sum of six
hundred pounds, to be paid her within three months after my death.

I bequeath also to the same good woman thirty guineas, for mourning for
her and for her son, my foster-brother.

To Mrs. Dorothy Hervey, the only sister of my honoured mother, I bequeath
the sum of fifty guineas for a ring; and I beg of her to accept of my
thankful acknowledgements for all her goodness to me from my infancy; and
particularly for her patience with me, in the several altercations that
happened between my brother and sister and me, before my unhappy
departure from Harlowe-place.

To my kind and much valued cousin, Miss Dolly Hervey, daughter of my aunt
Hervey, I bequeath my watch and equipage, and my best Mechlin and
Brussels head-dresses and ruffles; also my gown and petticoat of flowered
silver of my own work; which having been made up but a few days before I
was confined to my chamber, I never wore.

To the same young lady I bequeath likewise my harpsichord, my
chamber-organ, and all my music-books.

As my sister has a very pretty library; and as my beloved Miss Howe has
also her late father's as well as her own; I bequeath all my books in
general, with the cases they are in, to my said cousin Dolly Hervey.  As
they are not ill-chosen for a woman's library, I know that she will take
the greater pleasure in them, (when her friendly grief is mellowed by
time into a remembrance more sweet than painful,) because they were mine;
and because there are observations in many of them of my own writing; and
some very judicious ones, written by the truly reverend Dr. Lewen.

I also bequeath to the same young lady twenty-five guineas for a ring, to
be worn in remembrance of her true friend.

If I live not to see my worthy cousin, William Morden, Esq. I desire my
humble and grateful thanks may be given to him for his favours and
goodness to me; and particularly for his endeavours to reconcile my other
friends to me, at a time when I was doubtful whether he would forgive me
himself.  As he is in great circumstances, I will only beg of him to
accept of two or three trifles, in remembrance of a kinswoman who always
honoured him as much as he loved her.  Particularly, of that piece of
flowers which my uncle Robert, his father, was very earnest to obtain, in
order to carry it abroad with him.

I desire him likewise to accept of the little miniature picture set in
gold, which his worthy father made me sit for to the famous Italian
master whom he brought over with him; and which he presented to me, that
I might bestow it, as he was pleased to say, upon the man whom I should
be one day most inclined to favour.

To the same gentleman I also bequeath my rose diamond ring, which was a
present from his good father to me; and will be the more valuable to him
on that account.

I humbly request Mrs. Annabella Howe, the mother of my dear Miss Howe, to
accept of my respectful thanks for all her favours and goodness to me,
when I was so frequently a visiter to her beloved daughter; and of a ring
of twenty-five guineas price.

My picture at full length, which is in my late grandfather's closet,
(excepted in an article above from the family pictures,) drawn when I was
near fourteen years of age; about which time my dear Miss Howe and I
began to know, to distinguish, and to love one another so dearly--I
cannot express how dearly--I bequeath to that sister of my heart: of
whose friendship, as well in adversity as prosperity, when I was deprived
of all other comfort and comforters, I have had such instances, as that
our love can only be exceeded in that state of perfection, in which I
hope to rejoice with her hereafter, to all eternity.

I bequeath also to the same dear friend my best diamond ring, which, with
other jewels, is in the private drawer of my escritoire: as also all my
finished and framed pieces of needle-work; the flower-piece excepted,
which I have already bequeathed to my cousin Morden.

These pieces have all been taken down, as I have heard;* and my relations
will have no heart to put them up again: but if my good mother chooses to
keep back any one piece, (the above capital piece, as it is called,
excepted,) not knowing but some time hence she may bear the sight of it;
I except that also from this general bequest; and direct it to be
presented to her.


* See Vol. III. Letter LV.


My whole-length picture in the Vandyke taste,* that used to hang in my
own parlour, as I was permitted to call it, I bequeath to my aunt Hervey,
except my mother should think fit to keep it herself.


* Ibid.


I bequeath to the worthy Charles Hickman, Esq. the locket, with the
miniature picture of the lady he best loves, which I have constantly
worn, and shall continue to wear next my heart till the approach of my
last hour.*  It must be the most acceptable present that can be made him,
next to the hand of the dear original.  'And, O my dear Miss Howe, let it
not be long before you permit his claim to the latter--for indeed you
know not the value of a virtuous mind in that sex; and how preferable
such a mind is to one distinguished by the more dazzling flights of
unruly wit; although the latter were to be joined by that specious
outward appearance which too--too often attracts the hasty eye, and
susceptible heart.'


* See Letter II. of this volume.


Permit me, my dear friends, this solemn apostrophe, in this last solemn
      act, to a young lady so deservedly dear to me!

I make it my earnest request to my dear Miss Howe, that she will not put
herself into mourning for me.  But I desire her acceptance of a ring with
my hair; and that Mr. Hickman will also accept of the like; each of the
value of twenty-five guineas.

I bequeath to Lady Betty Lawrance, and to her sister, Lady Sarah Sadleir,
and to the right honourable Lord M. and to their worthy nieces, Miss
Charlotte and Miss Martha Montague, each an enamelled ring, with a cipher
Cl. H. with my hair in crystal, and round the inside of each, the day,
month, and year of my death: each ring, with brilliants, to cost twenty
guineas.  And this as a small token of the grateful sense I have of the
honour of their good opinions and kind wishes in my favour; and of their
truly noble offer t me of a very considerable annual provision, when they
apprehended me to be entirely destitute of any.

To the reverend and learned Dr. Arthur Lewen, by whose instructions I
have been equally delighted and benefited, I bequeath twenty guineas for
a ring.  If it should please God to call him to Himself before he can
receive this small bequest, it is my will that his worthy daughter may
have the benefit of it.

In token of the grateful sense I have of the civilities paid me by Mrs.
and Miss Howe's domestics, from time to time, in my visits there, I
bequeath thirty guineas, to be divided among them, as their dear young
mistress shall think proper.

To each of my worthy companions and friends, Miss Biddy Lloyd, Miss Fanny
Alston, Miss Rachel Biddulph, and Miss Cartright Campbell, I bequeath
five guineas for a ring.

To my late maid servant, Hannah Burton, an honest, faithful creature, who
loved me, reverenced my mother, and respected my sister, and never sought
to do any thing unbecoming of her character, I bequeath the sum of fifty
pounds, to be paid within one month after my decease, she labouring under
ill health: and if that ill-health continue, I commend her for farther
assistance to my good Mrs. Norton, to be put upon my poor's fund,
hereafter to be mentioned.

To the coachman, groom, and two footmen, and five maids, at
Harlowe-place, I bequeath ten pounds each; to the helper five pounds.

To my sister's maid, Betty Barnes, I bequeath ten pounds, to show that I
resent no former disobligations; which I believe were owing more to the
insolence of office, and to natural pertness, than to personal ill will.

All my wearing-apparel, of whatever sort, that I have not been obliged to
part with, or which is not already bequeathed, (my linen excepted,) I
desire Mrs. Norton to accept of.

The trunks and boxes in which my clothes are sealed up, I desire may not
be opened, but in presence of Mrs. Norton (or of someone deputed by her)
and of Mrs. Lovick.

To the worthy Mrs. Lovick, above-mentioned, from whom I have received
great civilities, and even maternal kindnesses; and to Mrs. Smith (with
whom I lodge) from whom also I have received great kindnesses; I bequeath
all my linen, and all my unsold laces; to be divided equally between
them, as they shall agree; or, in case of disagreement, the same to be
sold, and the money arising to be equally shared by them.

And I bequeath to the same good gentlewomen, as a further token of my
thankful acknowledgements of their kind love and compassionate concern
for me, the sum of twenty guineas each.

To Mr. Smith, the husband of Mrs. Smith above-named, I bequeath the sum
of ten guineas, in acknowledgement of his civilities to me.

To Katharine, the honest maid servant of Mrs. Smith, to whom (having no
servant of my own) I have been troublesome, I bequeath five guineas; and
ten guineas more, in lieu of a suit of my wearing-apparel, which once,
with some linen, I thought of leaving to her.  With this she may purchase
what may be more suitable to her liking and degree.

To the honest and careful widow, Anne Shelburne, my nurse, over and above
her wages, and the customary perquisites that may belong to her, I
bequeath the sum of ten guineas.  Here is a careful, and (to persons of
such humanity and tenderness) a melancholy employment, attended in the
latter part of life with great watching and fatigue, which is hardly ever
enough considered.

The few books I have at my present lodgings, I desire Mrs. Lovick to
accept of; and that she be permitted, if she please, to take a copy of my
book of meditations, as I used to call it; being extracts from the best
of books; which she seemed to approve of, although suited particularly to
my own case.  As for the book itself, perhaps my good Mrs. Norton will be
glad to have it, as it is written with my own hand.

In the middle drawer of my escritoire, at Harlowe-place, are many
letters, and copies of letters, put up according to their dates, which I
have written or received in a course of years (ever since I learned to
write) from and to my grandfather, my father and mother, my uncles, my
brother and sister, on occasional little absences; my late uncle Morden,
my cousin Morden; Mrs. Norton, and Miss Howe, and other of my companions
and friends, before my confinement at my father's: as also from the three
reverent gentlemen, Dr. Blome, Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Tomkins, now with God,
and the very reverend Dr. Lewen, on serious subjects.  As these letters
exhibit a correspondence that no person of my sex need to be ashamed of,
allowing for the time of life when mine were written; and as many
excellent things are contained in those written to me; and as Miss Howe,
to whom most of them have been communicated, wished formerly to have
them, if she survived me: for these reasons, I bequeath them to my said
dear friend, Miss Anna Howe; and the rather, as she had for some years
past a very considerable share in the correspondence.

I do hereby make, constitute, and ordain John Belford, of Edgware, in
the county of Middlesex, Esq. the sole executor of this my last will and
testament; having previously obtained his leave so to do.  I have given
the reasons which induced me to ask this gentleman to take upon him this
trouble to Miss Howe.  I therefore refer to her on this subject.

But I do most earnestly beg of him the said Mr. Belford, that, in the
execution of his trust, he will (as he has repeatedly promised)
studiously endeavour to promote peace with, and suppress resentments in,
every one; so that all farther mischiefs may be prevented, as well from,
as to, his friend.  And, in order to this, I beseech him to cultivate the
friendship of my worthy cousin Morden; who, as I presume to hope, (when
he understands it to be my dying request,) will give him his advice and
assistance in every article where it may be necessary: and who will
perhaps be so good as to interpose with my relations, if any difficulty
should arise about carrying out some of the articles of this my last will
into execution, and to soften them into the wished-for condescension:--
for it is my earnest request to Mr. Belford, that he will not seek by
law, or by any sort of violence, either by word or deed, to extort the
performance from them.  If there be any articles of a merely domestic
nature, that my relations shall think unfit to be carried into execution;
such articles I leave entirely to my said cousin Morden and Mr. Belford
to vary, or totally dispense with, as they shall agree upon the matter;
or, if they two differ in opinion, they will be pleased to be determined
by a third person, to be chosen by them both.

Having been pressed by Miss Howe and her mother to collect the
particulars of my sad story, and given expectation that I would, in order
to do my character justice with all my friends and companions; but not
having time before me for the painful task; it has been a pleasure for me
to find, by extracts kindly communicated to me by my said executor, that
I may safely trust my fame to the justice done me by Mr. Lovelace, in his
letters to him my said executor.  And as Mr. Belford has engaged to
contribute what is in his power towards a compliment to be made of all
that relates to my story, and knows my whole mind in this respect; it is
my desire, that he will cause two copies to be made of this collection;
one to remain with Miss Howe, the other with himself; and that he will
show or lend his copy, if required, to my aunt Hervey, for the
satisfaction of any of my family; but under such restrictions as the said
Mr. Belford shall think fit to impose; that neither any other person's
safety may be endangered, nor his own honour suffer, by the
communication.

I bequeath to my said executor the sum of one hundred guineas, as a
grateful, though insufficient acknowledgment of the trouble he will be at
in the execution of the trust he has so kindly undertaken.  I desire him
likewise to accept of twenty guineas for a ring: and that he will
reimburse himself for all the charges and expenses which he shall be at
in the execution of this trust.

In the worthy Dr. H. I have found a physician, a father, and a friend.  I
beg of him, as a testimony of my gratitude, to accept of twenty guineas
for a ring.

I have the same obligations to the kind and skilful Mr. Goddard, who
attended me as my apothecary.  His very moderate bill I have discharged
down to yesterday.  I have always thought it incumbent upon testators to
shorten all they can the trouble of their executors.  I know I under-rate
the value of Mr. Goddard's attendances, when over and above what may
accrue from yesterday, to the hour that will finish all, I desire fifteen
guineas for a ring may be presented to him.

To the Reverend Mr. ----, who frequently attended me, and prayed by me in
my last stages, I also bequeath fifteen guineas for a ring.

There are a set of honest, indigent people, whom I used to call My Poor,
and to whom Mrs. Norton conveys relief each month, (or at shorter
periods,) in proportion to their necessities, from a sum I deposited in
her hands, and from time to time recruited, as means accrued to me; but
now nearly, if not wholly, expended: now, that my fault may be as little
aggravated as possible, by the sufferings of the worthy people whom
Heaven gave me a heart to relieve; and as the produce of my grandfather's
estate, (including the moiety of the sums he had by him, and was pleased
to give me, at his death, as above mentioned,) together with what I shall
further appropriate to the same use in the subsequent articles, will, as
I hope, more than answer all my legacies and bequests; it is my will and
desire, that the remainder, be it little or much, shall become a fund to
be appropriated, and I hereby direct that it be appropriated, to the like
purposes with the sums which I put into Mrs. Norton's hands, as aforesaid
--and this under the direction and management of the said Mrs. Norton,
who knows my whole mind in this particular.  And in case of her death, or
of her desire to be acquitted of the management thereof, it is my earnest
request to my dear Miss Howe, that she will take it upon herself, and
that at her own death she will transfer what shall remain undisposed of
at the time, to such persons, and with such limitations, restrictions,
and provisoes, as she shall think will best answer my intention.  For, as
to the management and distribution of all or any part of it, while in
Mrs. Norton's hands, or her own, I will that it be entirely discretional,
and without account, either to my executor or any other person.

Although Mrs. Norton, as I have hinted, knows my whole mind in this
respect; yet it may be proper to mention, in this solemn last act, that
my intention is, that this fund be entirely set apart and appropriated to
relieve temporarily, from the interest thereof, (as I dare say it will be
put out to the best advantage,) or even from the principal, if need be,
the honest, industrious, labouring poor only; when sickness, lameness,
unforeseen losses, or other accidents, disable them from following their
lawful callings; or to assist such honest people of large families as
shall have a child of good inclinations to put out to service, trade, or
husbandry.

It has always been a rule with me, in my little donations, to endeavour
to aid and set forward the sober and industrious poor.  Small helps, if
seasonably afforded, will do for such; and so the fund may be of more
extensive benefit; an ocean of wealth will not be sufficient for the idle
and dissolute: whom, therefore, since they will always be in want, it
will be no charity to relieve, if worthier creatures would, by relieving
the others, be deprived of such assistance as may set the wheels of their
industry going, and put them in a sphere of useful action.

But it is my express will and direction, that let this fund come out to
be ever so considerable, it shall be applied only in support of the
temporary exigencies of the persons I have described; and that no one
family or person receive from it, at one time, or in one year, more than
the sum of twenty pounds.

It is my will and desire, that the set of jewels which was my
grandmother's, and presented to me, soon after her death, be valued; and
the worth of them paid to my executor, if any of my family choose to have
them; or otherwise, that they should be sold, and go to the augmentation
of my poor's fund.--But if they may be deemed an equivalent for the sums
my father was pleased to advance to me since the death of my grandfather,
I desire that they may be given to him.

I presume, that the diamond necklace, solitaire, and buckles, which were
properly my own, presented by my mother's uncle, Sir Josias, Brookland,
will not be purchased by any one of my family, for a too obvious reason:
in this case I desire that they may be sent to the best advantage, and
apply the money to the uses of my will.

In the beginning of this tedious writing, I referred to the latter part
of it, the naming of the subject of the discourse which I wished might be
delivered at my funeral, if permitted to be interred with my ancestors.
I think the following will be suitable to my case.  I hope the alteration
of the words her and she, for him and he, may be allowable.

      'Let not her that is deceived trust in vanity; for vanity
      shall be her recompense.  She shall be accomplished before
      her time; and her branch shall not be green.  She shall
      shake off her unripe grape as the vine, and shall cut off her
      flower as the olive.'*


* Job xv. 31, 32, 33.


But if I am to be interred in town, let only the usual burial-service be
read over my corpse.

If my body be permitted to be carried down, I bequeath ten pounds to be
given to the poor of the parish, at the discretion of the church-wardens,
within a fortnight after my interment.

If any necessary matter be omitted in this my will, or if any thing
appear doubtful or contradictory, as possibly may be the case; since
besides my inexperience in these matters, I am now, at this time, very
weak and ill, having put off the finishing hand a little too long, in
hopes of obtaining the last forgiveness of my honoured friend; in which
case I should have acknowledged the favour with a suitable warmth of
duty, and filled up some blanks which I left to the very last,* in a more
agreeable manner to myself than now I have been enabled to do--in case of
such omissions and imperfections, I desire that my cousin Morden will be
so good as to join with Mr. Belford in considering them, and in comparing
them with what I have more explicitly written; and if, after that, any
doubt remain, that they will be pleased to apply to Miss Howe, who knows
my whole heart: and I desire that the construction of these three may be
established: and I hereby establish it, provided it be unanimous, and
direct it to be put in force, as if I had so written and determined
myself.


And now, O my blessed REDEEMER, do I, with a lively faith, humbly lay
      hold of thy meritorious death and sufferings; hoping to be washed
      clean in thy precious blood from all my sins: in the bare hope of
      the happy consequences of which, how light do those sufferings seem
      (grievous as they were at the time) which, I confidently trust,
      will be a mean, by the grace, to work out for me a more exceeding
      and eternal weight of glory!

CLARISSA HARLOWE.

Signed, sealed, published, and declared, the day and year above-written,
      by the said Clarissa Harlowe, as her last will and testament;
      contained in seven sheets of paper, all written with her own hand,
      and every sheet signed and sealed by herself, in the presence of
      us,

John Williams,
Arthur Bedall,
Elizabeth Swanton.



LETTER XXXIV

COLONEL MORDEN, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. SEPT. 16.


I have been employed in a most melancholy task: in reading the will of
the dear deceased.

The unhappy mother and Mrs. Norton chose to be absent on the affecting
occasion.  But Mrs. Harlowe made it her earnest request that every
article of it should be fulfilled.

They were all extremely touched with the preamble.

The first words of the will--'I, Clarissa Harlowe, now by strange
melancholy accidents, lodging,' &c. drew tears from some, sighs from
all.

The directions for her funeral, in case she were or were not permitted
to be carried down; the mention of her orders having been given for the
manner of her being laid out, and the presence of mind so visible
throughout the whole, obtained their admiration, expressed by hands and
eyes lifted up, and by falling tears.

When I read the direction, 'That her body was not to be viewed, except
any of her relations should vouchsafe, for the last time, to look upon
her;' they turned away, and turned to me, three or four times
alternately.  Mrs. Hervey and Miss Arabella sobbed; the uncles wiped
their eyes; the brother looked down; the father wrung his hands.

I was obliged to stop at the words, 'That she was nobody's.'

But when I came to the address to be made to the accursed man, 'if he
were not to be diverted from seeing her dead, whom ONCE before he had
seen in a manner dead'----execration, and either vows or wishes of
revenge, filled every mouth.

These were still more fervently renewed, when they came to hear read her
forgiveness of even this man.

You remember, Sir, on our first reading of the will in town, the
observations I made on the foul play which it is evident the excellent
creature met with from this abandoned man, and what I said upon the
occasion.  I am not used to repeat things of that nature.

The dear creature's noble contempt of the nothing, as she nobly calls it,
about which she had been giving such particular directions, to wit, her
body; and her apologizing for the particularity of those directions from
the circumstances she was in--had the same, and as strong an effect upon
me, as when I first read the animated paragraph; and, pointed by my eye,
(by turns cast upon them all,) affected them all.

When the article was read which bequeathed to the father the
grandfather's estate, and the reason assigned for it, (so generous and so
dutiful,) the father could sit no longer; but withdrew, wiping his eyes,
and lifting up his spread hands at Mr. James Harlowe; who rose to attend
him to the door, as Arabella likewise did----All he could say--O Son!
Son!--O Girl! Girl!--as if he reproached them for the parts they had
acted, and put him upon acting.

But yet, on some occasions, this brother and sister showed themselves to
be true will disputants.

Let tongue and eyes express what they will, Mr. Belford, the first
reading of a will, where a person dies worth anything considerable,
generally affords a true test of the relations' love to the deceased.

The clothes, the thirty guineas for mourning to Mrs. Norton, with the
recommendation of the good woman for housekeeper at The Grove, were
thought sufficient, had the article of 600L. which was called monstrous,
been omitted.  Some other passages in the will were called flights, and
such whimsies as distinguish people of imagination from those of
judgment.

My cousin Dolly Hervey was grudged the library.  Miss Harlowe said, That
as she and her sister never bought the same books, she would take that
to herself, and would make it up to her cousin Dolly one way or other.

I intend, Mr. Belford, to save you the trouble of interposing--the
library shall be my cousin Dolly's.

Mrs. Hervey could hardly keep her seat.  On this occasion, however, she
only said, That her late dear and ever dear niece, was too glad to her
and hers.  But, at another time, she declared, with tears, that she could
not forgive herself for a letter she wrote,* looking at Miss Arabella,
whom, it seems, unknown to any body, she had consulted before she wrote
it and which, she said, must have wounded a spirit, that now she saw had
been too deeply wounded before.


* See Vol. III. Letter LII.


O my Aunt, said Arabella, no more of that!--Who would have thought that
the dear creature had been such a penitent?

Mr. John and Mr. Antony Harlowe were so much affected with the articles
in their favour, (bequeathed to them without a word or hint of reproach
or recrimination,) that they broke out into self-accusations; and
lamented that their sweet niece, as they called her, was not got above
all grateful acknowledgement and returns.  Indeed, the mutual upbraidings
and grief of all present, upon those articles in which every one was
remembered for good, so often interrupted me, that the reading took up
above six hours.  But curses upon the accursed man were a refuge to which
they often resorted to exonerate themselves.

How wounding a thing, Mr. Belford, is a generous and well-distinguished
forgiveness!  What revenge can be more effectual, and more noble, were
revenge intended, and were it wished to strike remorse into a guilty or
ungrateful heart!  But my dear cousin's motives were all duty and love.
She seems indeed to have been, as much as a mortal could be, LOVE itself.
Love sublimed by a purity, by a true delicacy, that hardly any woman
before her could boast of.  O Mr. Belford, what an example would she have
given in every station of life, (as wife, mother, mistress, friend,) had
her lot fallen upon a man blessed with a mind like her own!

The 600L. bequeathed to Mrs. Norton, the library to Miss Hervey, and the
remembrances to Miss Howe, were not the only articles grudged.  Yet to
what purpose did they regret the pecuniary bequests, when the poor's
fund, and not themselves, would have had the benefit, had not those
legacies been bequeathed?

But enough passed to convince me that my cousin was absolutely right in
her choice of an executor out of the family.  Had she chosen one in it,
I dare say that her will would have been no more regarded than if it had
been the will of a dead king; than that of Lousi XIV. in particular; so
flagrantly broken through by his nephew the Duke of Orleans before he was
cold.  The only will of that monarch, perhaps, which was ever disputed.

But little does Mr. James Harlowe think that, while he is grasping at
hundreds, he will, most probably, lose thousands, if he be my survivor.
A man of a spirit so selfish and narrow shall not be my heir.

You will better conceive, Mr. Belford, than I can express, how much they
were touched at the hint that the dear creature had been obliged to part
with some of her clothes.

Silent reproach seized every one of them when I came to the passage where
she mentions that she deferred filling up some blanks, in hopes of
receiving their last blessing and forgiveness.

I will only add, that they could not bear to hear read the concluding
part, so solemnly addressed to her Redeemer.  They all arose from their
seats, and crowded out of the apartment we were in; and then, as I
afterwards found, separated, in order to seek that consolation in
solitary retirement, which, though they could not hope for from their own
reflections, yet, at the time, they had less reason to expect in each
other's company.  I am, Sir,

Your faithful and obedient servant,
WILLIAM MORDEN.



LETTER XXXV

MR. BELFORD, TO THE RIGHT HON. LORD M.
LONDON, SEPT. 14.


MY LORD,

I am very apprehensive that the affair between Mr. Lovelace and the late
excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe will be attended with farther bad
consequences, notwithstanding her dying injunctions to the contrary.  I
would, therefore, humbly propose that your Lordship, and his other
relations, will forward the purpose your kinsman lately had to go abroad;
where I hope he will stay till all is blown over.  But as he will not
stir, if he knew the true motives of your wishes, the avowed inducement,
as I hinted once to Mr. Mowbray, may be such as respects his own health
both of person and mind.  To Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville all countries
are alike; and they perhaps will accompany him.

I am glad to hear that he is in a way of recovery; but this the rather
induces me to press the matter.  I think no time should be lost.

Your Lordship had head that I have the honour to be the executor of this
admirable lady's last will.  I transcribe from it the following
paragraph.


[He then transcribes the article which so gratefully mentions this
      nobleman, and the ladies of his family, in relation to the rings
      she bequeaths them, about which he desires their commands.]



LETTER XXXVI

MISS MONTAGUE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, FRIDAY, SEPT. 15.


SIR,

My Lord having the gout in his right hand, his Lordship, and Lady Sarah,
and Lady Betty, have commanded me to inform you, that, before your letter
came, Mr. Lovelace was preparing for a foreign tour.  We shall endeavour
to hasten him away on the motives you suggest.

We are all extremely affected with the dear lady's death.  Lady Betty and
Lady Sarah have been indisposed ever since they heard of it.  They had
pleased themselves, as had my sister and self, with the hopes of
cultivating her acquaintance and friendship after he was gone abroad,
upon her own terms.  Her kind remembrance of each of us has renewed,
though it could not heighten, our regrets for so irreparable a loss.  We
shall order Mr. Finch, our goldsmith, to wait on you.  He has our
directions about the rings.  They will be long, long worn in memory of
the dear testatrix.

Every body is assured that you will do all in your power to prevent
farther ill consequences from this melancholy affair.  My Lord desires
his compliments to you.  I am, Sir,

Your humble servant,
CH. MONTAGUE.


*************************


This collection having run into a much greater length than was wished, it
is proper to omit several letters that passed between Colonel Morden,
Miss Howe, Mr. Belford, and Mr. Hickman, in relation to the execution of
the lady's will, &c.

It is, however, necessary to observe, on this subject, that the unhappy
mother, being supported by the two uncles, influenced the afflicted
father to over-rule all his son's objections, and to direct a literal
observation of the will; and at the same time to give up all the sums
which he was empowered by it to reimburse himself; as also to take upon
himself to defray the funeral expenses.

Mr. Belford so much obliges Miss Howe by his steadiness, equity, and
dispatch, and by his readiness to contribute to the directed collection,
that she voluntarily entered into a correspondence with him, as the
representative of her beloved friend.  In the course of which, he
communicated to her (in confidence) the letters which passed between him
and Mr. Lovelace, and, by Colonel Morden's consent, those which passed
between that gentleman and himself.

He sent, with the first parcel of letters which he had transcribed out of
short-hand for Miss Howe, a letter to Mr. Hickman, dated the 16th of
September, in which he expresses himself as follows:

'But I ought, Sir, in this parcel to have kept out one letter.  It is
that which relates to the interview between yourself and Mr. Lovelace, at
Mr. Dormer's,* in which Mr. Lovelace treats you with an air of levity,
which neither your person, your character, nor your commission, deserved;
but which was his usual way of treating every one whose business he was
not pleased with.  I hope, Sir, you have too much greatness of mind to be
disturbed at the contents of this letter, should Miss Howe communicate
them to you; and the rather, as it is impossible that you should suffer
with her on that account.'


* See Vol. VII. Letter XXVIII.


Mr. Belford then excuses Mr. Lovelace as a good-natured man with all his
faults; and gives instances of his still greater freedoms with himself.

To this Mr. Hickman answers, in his letter of the 18th:

'As to Mr. Lovelace's treatment of me in the letter you are pleased to
mention, I shall not be concerned at it, whatever it be.  I went to him
prepared to expect odd behaviour from him; and was not disappointed.  I
argue to myself, in all such cases as this, as Miss Howe, from her
ever-dear friend, argues, That if the reflections thrown upon me are
just, I ought not only to forgive them, but endeavour to profit by them;
if unjust, that I ought to despise them, and the reflector too, since it
would be inexcusable to strengthen by anger an enemy whose malice might
be disarmed by contempt.  And, moreover, I should be almost sorry to find
myself spoken well of by a man who could treat, as he treated, a lady who
was an ornament to her sex and to human nature.

'I thank you, however, Sir, for your consideration for me in this
particular, and for your whole letter, which gives me so desirable an
instance of the friendship which you assured me of when I was last in
town; and which I as cordially embrace as wish to cultivate.'

Miss Howe, in her's of the 20th, acknowledging the receipt of the
letters, and papers, and legacies, sent with Mr. Belford's letter to Mr.
Hickman, assures him, 'That no use shall be made of his communications,
but what he shall approve of.'

He had mentioned, with compassion, the distresses of the Harlowe family--
'Persons of a pitiful nature, says she, may pity them.  I am not one of
those.  You, I think, pity the infernal man likewise; while I, from my
heart, grudge him his phrensy, because it deprives him of that remorse,
which, I hope, in his recovery, will never leave him.  At times, Sir, let
me tell you, that I hate your whole sex for his sake; even men of
unblamable characters, whom, at those times, I cannot but look upon as
persons I have not yet found out.

'If my dear creature's personal jewels be sent up to you for sale, I
desire that I may be the purchaser of them, at the highest price--of the
necklace and solitaire particularly.

'Oh! what tears did the perusal of my beloved's will cost me!--But I must
not touch upon the heart-piercing subject.  I can neither take it up, nor
quit it, but with execration of the man whom all the world must
execrate.'

Mr. Belford, in his answer, promises that she shall be the purchaser of
the jewels, if they come into his hands.

He acquaints her that the family had given Colonel Morden the keys of all
that belonged to the dear departed; that the unhappy mother had (as the
will allows) ordered a piece of needlework to be set aside for her, and
had desired Mrs. Norton to get the little book of meditations
transcribed, and to let her have the original, as it was all of her dear
daughter's hand-writing; and as it might, when she could bear to look
into it, administer consolation to herself.  And that she had likewise
reserved for herself her picture in the Vandyke taste.

Mr. Belford sends with this letter to Miss Howe the lady's memorandum
book, and promises to send her copies of the several posthumous letters.
He tells her that Mr. Lovelace being upon the recovery, he had enclosed
the posthumous letter directed for him to Lord M. that his Lordship might
give it to him, or not, as he should find he could bear it.  The
following is a copy of that letter:


TO MR. LOVELACE
THURSDAY, AUG. 24.

I told you, in the letter I wrote to you on Tuesday last,* that you
should have another sent you when I had got into my father's house.


* See her letter, enclosed in Mr. Lovelace's, No. LIV. of Vol. VII.

The reader may observe, by the date of this letter, that it was written
within two days of the allegorical one, to which it refers, and while the
lady was labouring under the increased illness occasioned by the hurries
and terrors into which Mr. Lovelace had thrown her, in order to avoid the
visit he was so earnest to make her at Mr. Smith's; so early written,
perhaps, that she might not be surprised by death into a seeming breach
of her word.

High as her christian spirit soars in this letter, the reader has seen,
in Vol. VIII. Letter LXIV. and in other places, that that exalted spirit
carried her to still more divine elevations, as she drew nearer to her
end.


I presume to say, that I am now, at your receiving of this, arrived
there; and I invite you to follow me, as soon as you are prepared for so
great a journey.

Not to allegorize farther--my fate is now, at your perusal of this,
accomplished.  My doom is unalterably fixed; and I am either a miserable
or happy being to all eternity.  If happy, I owe it solely to the Divine
mercy; if miserable, to your undeserved cruelty.--And consider not, for
your own sake, gay, cruel, fluttering, unhappy man! consider, whether the
barbarous and perfidious treatment I have met with from you was worthy
the hazard of your immortal soul; since your wicked views were not to be
effected but by the wilful breach of the most solemn vows that ever were
made by man; and those aided by a violence and baseness unworthy of a
human creature.

In time then, once more, I wish you to consider your ways.  Your golden
dream cannot long last.  Your present course can yield you pleasure no
longer than you can keep off thought or reflection.  A hardened
insensibility is the only foundation on which your inward tranquillity
is built.  When once a dangerous sickness seizes you; when once effectual
remorse breaks in upon you; how dreadful will be your condition!  How
poor a triumph will you then find it, to have been able, by a series of
black perjuries, and studied baseness, under the name of gallantry or
intrigue, to betray poor unexperienced young creatures, who perhaps knew
nothing but their duty till they knew you!--Not one good action in the
hour of languishing to recollect, not one worthy intention to revolve, it
will be all reproach and horror; and you will wish to have it in your
power to compound for annihilation.

Reflect, Sir, that I can have no other motive, in what I write, than your
good, and the safety of other innocent creatures, who may be drawn in by
your wicked arts and perjuries.  You have not, in my wishes for future
welfare, the wishes of a suppliant wife, endeavouring for her own sake,
as well as for your's, to induce you to reform those ways.  They are
wholly as disinterested as undeserved.  But I should mistrust my own
penitence, were I capable of wishing to recompense evil for evil--if,
black as your offences have been against me, I could not forgive, as I
wish to be forgiven.

I repeat, therefore, that I do forgive you.  And may the Almighty forgive
you too!  Nor have I, at the writing of this, any other essential regrets
than what are occasioned by the grief I have given to parents, who, till
I knew you, were the most indulgent of parents; by the scandal given to
the other branches of my family; by the disreputation brought upon my
sex; and by the offence given to virtue in my fall.

As to myself, you have only robbed me of what once were my favourite
expectations in the transient life I shall have quitted when you receive
this.  You have only been the cause that I have been cut off in the bloom
of youth, and of curtailing a life that might have been agreeable to
myself, or otherwise, as had reason to be thankful for being taken away
from the evil of supporting my part of a yoke with a man so unhappy; I
will only say, that, in all probability, every hour I had lived with him
might have brought with it some new trouble.  And I am (indeed through
sharp afflictions and distresses) indebted to you, secondarily, as I
humbly presume to hope, for so many years of glory, as might have proved
years of danger, temptation, and anguish, had they been added to my
mortal life.

So, Sir, though no thanks to your intention, you have done me real
service; and, in return, I wish you happy.  But such has been your life
hitherto, that you can have no time to lose in setting about your
repentance.  Repentance to such as have lived only carelessly, and in the
omission of their regular duties, and who never aimed to draw any poor
creatures into evil, is not so easy a task, nor so much in our own power,
as some imagine.  How difficult a grace then to be obtained, where the
guilt is premeditated, wilful, and complicated!

To say I once respected you with a preference, is what I ought to blush
to own, since, at the very time, I was far from thinking you even a
mortal man; though I little thought that you, or indeed any man
breathing, could be--what you have proved yourself to be.  But, indeed,
Sir, I have long been greatly above you; for from my heart I have
despised you, and all your ways, ever since I saw what manner of man you
were.

Nor is it to be wondered that I should be able so to do, when that
preference was not grounded on ignoble motives.  For I was weak enough,
and presumptuous enough, to hope to be a mean, in the hand of Providence,
to reclaim a man whom I thought worthy of the attempt.

Nor have I yet, as you will see by the pains I take, on this solemn
occasion, to awaken you out of your sensual dream, given over all hopes
of this nature.

Hear me, therefore, O Lovelace! as one speaking from the dead.--Lose no
time--set about your repentance instantly--be no longer the instrument of
Satan, to draw poor souls into those subtile snares, which at last shall
entangle your own feet.  Seek not to multiply your offences till they
become beyond the power, as I may say, of the Divine mercy to forgive;
since justice, no less than mercy, is an attribute of the Almighty.

Tremble and reform, when you read what is the portion of the wicked man
from God.  Thus it is written:

'The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but
for a moment.  He is cast into a net by his own feet--he walketh upon a
snare.  Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him
to his feet.  His strength shall be hunger-bitten, and destruction shall
be ready at his side.  The first born of death shall devour his strength.
His remembrance shall perish from the earth; and he shall have no name in
the streets.  He shall be chaced [sic] out of the world.  He shall have
neither son nor nephew among his people.  They that have seen him shall
say, Where is he?  He shall fly away as a dream: He shall be chased away
as a vision of the night.  His meat is the gall of asps within him.  He
shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him
through.  A fire not blown shall consume him.  The heaven shall reveal
his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him.  The worm shall
feed sweetly on him.  He shall be no more remembered.--This is the fate
of him that knoweth not God.'

Whenever you shall be inclined to consult the sacred oracles from whence
the above threatenings are extracted, you will find doctrines and texts
which a truly penitent and contrite heart may lay hold of for its
consolation.

May your's, Mr. Lovelace, become such! and may you be enabled to escape
the fate denounced against the abandoned man, and be entitled to the
mercies of a long suffering and gracious God, is the sincere prayer of

CLARISSA HARLOWE

*************************



LETTER XXXVII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, THURSDAY, SEPT. 14.


Ever since the fatal seventh of this month, I have been lost to myself,
and to all the joys of life.  I might have gone farther back than that
fatal seventh; which, for the future, I will never see anniversarily
revolve but in sables; only till that cursed day I had some gleams of
hope now-and-then darting in upon me.

They tell me of an odd letter I wrote to you.*  I remember I did write.
But very little of the contents of what I wrote do I remember.


* See his delirious Letter, No. XXIII.


I have been in a cursed way.  Methinks something has been working
strangely retributive.  I never was such a fool as to disbelieve a
Providence; yet am I not for resolving into judgments every thing that
seems to wear an avenging face.  Yet if we must be punished either here
or hereafter for our misdeeds, better here, say I, than hereafter.  Have
I not then an interest to think my punishment already not only begun but
completed since what I have suffered, and do suffer, passes all
description?

To give but one instance of the retributive--here I, who was the
barbarous cause of the loss of senses for a week together to the most
inimitable of women, have been punished with the loss of my own--
preparative to--who knows what?--When, Oh! when, shall I know a joyful
hour?

I am kept excessively low; and excessively low I am.  This sweet
creature's posthumous letter sticks close to me.  All her excellencies
rise up hourly to my remembrance.

Yet dare I not indulge in these melancholy reflections.  I find my head
strangely working again--Pen, begone!


FRIDAY, SEPT. 15.

I resume, in a sprightly vein, I hope--Mowbray and Tourville have just
now--

But what of Mowbray and Tourville?--What's the world?--What's any body
in it?--

Yet they are highly exasperated against thee, for the last letter thou
wrotest to them*--such an unfriendly, such a merciless--


* This Letter appears not.


But it won't do!--I must again lay down my pen.--O Belford! Belford!
I am still, I am still most miserably absent from myself!--Shall never,
never more be what I was!


***


Saturday--Sunday--Nothing done.  Incapable of any thing.


MONDAY, SEPT. 18.

Heavy, d--n--y heavy and sick at soul, by Jupiter!  I must come into
their expedient.  I must see what change of climate will do.

You tell these fellows, and you tell me, of repenting and reforming; but
I can do neither.  He who can, must not have the extinction of a Clarissa
Harlowe to answer for.--Harlowe!--Curse upon the name!--and curse upon
myself for not changing it, as I might have done!--Yet I have no need of
urging a curse upon myself--I have it effectually.

'To say I once respected you with a preference!'*--In what stiff language
does maidenly modesty on these nice occasion express itself!--To say I
once loved you, is the English; and there is truth and ease in the
expression.--'To say I once loved you,' then let it be, 'is what I ought
to blush to own.'


* See Letter XXXVI. of this volume.


And dost thou own it, excellent creature?--and dost thou then own it?--
What music in these words from such an angel!--What would I give that my
Clarissa were in being, and could and would own that she loved me?

'But, indeed, Sir, I have been long greatly above you.'  Long, my blessed
charmer!--Long, indeed, for you have been ever greatly above me, and
above your sex, and above all the world.

'That preference was not grounded on ignoble motives.'

What a wretch was I, to be so distinguished by her, and yet to be so
unworthy of her hope to reclaim me!

Then, how generous her motives!  Not for her own sake merely, not
altogether for mine, did she hope to reclaim me; but equally for the sake
of innocents who might otherwise be ruined by me.

And now, why did she write this letter, and why direct it to be given me
when an event the most deplorable had taken place, but for my good, and
with a view to the safety of innocents she knew not?--And when was this
letter written?  Was it not at the time, at the very time, that I had
been pursuing her, as I may say, from place to place; when her soul was
bowed down by calamity and persecution; and herself was denied all
forgiveness from relations the most implacable?

Exalted creature!--And couldst thou, at such a time, and so early, and in
such circumstances, have so far subdued thy own just resentments, as to
wish happiness to the principal author of all thy distresses?--Wish
happiness to him who had robbed thee 'of all thy favourite expectations
in this life?'  To him who had been the cause that thou wert cut off in
the bloom of youth?'

Heavenly aspirer!--What a frame must thou be in, to be able to use the
word ONLY, in mentioning these important deprivations!--And as this was
before thou puttest off immortalily, may I not presume that thou now,

            ---- with pitying eye,
      Not derogating from thy perfect bliss,
      Survey'st all Heav'n around, and wishest for me?

'Consider my ways.'--Dear life of my life!  Of what avail is
consideration now, when I have lost the dear creature, for whose sake
alone it was worth while to have consideration?--Lost her beyond
retrieving--swallowed up by the greedy grave--for ever lost her--that,
that's the thing--matchless woman, how does this reflection wound me!

'Your golden dream cannot long last.'--Divine prophetess! my golden dream
is already over.  'Thought and reflection are no longer to be kept off.'
--No longer continues that 'hardened insensibility' thou chargest upon
me.  'Remorse has broken in upon me.  Dreadful is my condition;--it is
all reproach and horror with me!'--A thousand vultures in turn are
preying upon my heart!

But no more of these fruitless reflections--since I am incapable of
writing any thing else; since my pen will slide into this gloomy subject,
whether I will or not; I will once more quit it; nor will I again resume
it, till I can be more its master, and my own.

All I took pen to write for is however unwritten.  It was, in few words,
to wish you to proceed with your communications, as usual.  And why
should you not;--since, in her ever-to-be-lamented death, I know every
thing shocking and grievous--acquaint me, then, with all thou knowest,
which I do not know; how her relations, her cruel relations, take it; and
whether now the barbed dart of after-reflection sticks not in their
hearts, as in mine, up to the very feathers.


***


I will soon quit this kingdom.  For now my Clarissa is no more, what is
there in it (in the world indeed) worth living for?--But shall I not
first, by some masterly mischief, avenge her and myself upon her cursed
family?

The accursed woman, they tell me, has broken her leg.  Why was it not her
neck?--All, all, but what is owing to her relations, is the fault of that
woman, and of her hell-born nymphs.  The greater the virtue, the nobler
the triumph, was a sentence for ever in their mouths.--I have had it
several times in my head to set fire to the execrable house; and to watch
at the doors and windows, that not a devil in it escape the consuming
flames.  Had the house stood by itself, I had certainly done it.

But, it seems, the old wretch is in the way to be rewarded, without my
help.  A shocking letter is received of somebody's in relation to her--
your's, I suppose--too shocking for me, they say, to see at present.*


* See Letter XXV. of this volume.


They govern me as a child in strings; yet did I suffer so much in my
fever, that I am willing to bear with them, till I can get tolerably
well.

At present I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep.  Yet are my disorders
nothing to what they were; for, Jack, my brain was on fire day and night;
and had it not been of the asbestos kind, it had all been consumed.

I had no distinct ideas, but of dark and confused misery; it was all
remorse and horror indeed!--Thoughts of hanging, drowning, shooting--then
rage, violence, mischief, and despair, took their turns with me.  My
lucid intervals still worse, giving me to reflect upon what I was the
hour before, and what I was likely to be the next, and perhaps for life--
the sport of enemies!--the laughter of fools!--and the hanging-sleeved,
go-carted property of hired slaves; who were, perhaps, to find their
account in manacling, and (abhorred thought!) in personally abusing me by
blows and stripes!

Who can bear such reflections as these?  TO be made to fear only, to such
a one as me, and to fear such wretches too?--What a thing was this, but
remotely to apprehend!  And yet for a man to be in such a state as to
render it necessary for his dearest friends to suffer this to be done for
his own sake, and in order to prevent further mischief!--There is no
thinking of these things!

I will not think of them, therefore; but will either get a train of
cheerful ideas, or hang myself by to-morrow morning.

      ---- To be a dog, and dead,
      Were paradise, to such a life as mine.



LETTER XXXVIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 20.


I write to demand back again my last letter.  I own it was my mind at
the different times I wrote it; and, whatever ailed me, I could not help
writing it.  Such a gloomy impulse came upon me, and increased as I
wrote, that, for my soul, I could not forbear running into the miserable.

'Tis strange, very strange, that a man's conscience should be able to
force his fingers to write whether he will or not; and to run him into a
subject he more than once, at the very time, resolved not to think of.

Nor is it less strange, that (no new reason occurring) he should, in a
day or two more, so totally change his mind; have his mind, I should
rather say, so wholly illuminated by gay hopes and rising prospects, as
to be ashamed of what he had written.

For, on reperusal of a copy of my letter, which fell into my hands by
accident, in the hand-writing of my cousin Charlotte, who, unknown to me,
had transcribed it, I find it to be such a letter as an enemy would
rejoice to see.

This I know, that were I to have continued but one week more in the way
I was in when I wrote the latter part of it, I should have been confined,
and in straw, the next; for I now recollect, that all my distemper was
returning upon me with irresistible violence--and that in spite of
water-gruel and soup-meagre.

I own I am still excessively grieved at the disappointment this admirable
woman made it so much her whimsical choice to give me.

But, since it has thus fallen out; since she was determined to leave the
world; and since she actually ceases to be; ought I, who have such a
share of life and health in hand, to indulge gloomy reflections upon an
event that is passed; and being passed, cannot be recalled?--Have I not
had a specimen of what will be my case, if I do.

For, Belford, ('tis a folly to deny it,) I have been, to use an old word,
quite bestraught.

Why, why did my mother bring me up to bear no controul?  Why was I so
enabled, as that to my very tutors it was a request that I should not
know what contradiction or disappointment was?--Ought she not to have
known what cruelty there was in her kindness?

What a punishment, to have my first very great disappointment touch my
intellect!--And intellects, once touched--but that I cannot bear to think
of--only thus far; the very repentance and amendment, wished me so
heartily by my kind and cross dear, have been invalidated and postponed,
and who knows for how long?--the amendment at least; can a madman be
capable of either?

Once touched, therefore, I must endeavour to banish those gloomy
reflections, which might otherwise have brought on the right turn of
mind: and this, to express myself in Lord M.'s style, that my wits may
not be sent a wool-gathering.

For, let me moreover own to thee, that Dr. Hale, who was my good Astolfo,
[you read Ariosto, Jack,] and has brought me back my wit-jar, had much
ado, by starving, diet, by profuse phlebotomy, by flaying-blisters,
eyelet-hole-cupping, a dark room, a midnight solitude in a midday sun, to
effect my recovery.  And now, for my comfort, he tells me, that I may
still have returns upon full moons--horrible! most horrible!--and must be
as careful of myself at both equinoctials, as Caesar was warned to be of
the Ides of March.

How my heart sickens at looking back upon what I was!  Denied the sun,
and all comfort: all my visiters low-born, tip-toe attendants: even those
tip-toe slaves never approaching me but periodically, armed with
gallipots, boluses, and cephalic draughts; delivering their orders to me
in hated whispers; and answering other curtain-holding impertinents,
inquiring how I was, and how I took their execrable potions, whisperingly
too!  What a cursed still life was this!--Nothing active in me, or about
me, but the worm that never dies.

Again I hasten from the recollection of scenes, which will, at times,
obtrude themselves upon me.

Adieu, Belford!

But return me my last letter--and build nothing upon its contents.  I
must, I will, I have already, overcome these fruitless gloominess.  Every
hour my constitution rises stronger and stronger to befriend me; and,
except a tributary sigh now-and-then to the memory of my heart's beloved,
it gives me hope that I shall quickly be what I was--life, spirit,
gaiety, and once more the plague of a sex that has been my plague, and
will be every man's plague at one time or other of his life.  I repeat my
desire, however, that you will write to me as usual.  I hope you have
good store of particulars by you to communicate, when I can better bear
to hear of the dispositions that were made for all that was mortal of my
beloved Clarissa.

But it will be the joy of my heart to be told that her implacable friends
are plagued with remorse.  Such things as those you may now send me: for
company in misery is some relief; especially when a man can think those
he hates as miserable as himself.

One more adieu, Jack!



LETTER XXXIX

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


I am preparing to leave this kingdom.  Mowbray and Tourville promise to
give me their company in a month or two.

I'll give thee my route.

I shall first to Paris; and, for some amusement and diversion sake, try
to renew some of my old friendships: thence to some of the German courts:
thence, perhaps, to Vienna: thence descend through Bavaria and the Tyrol
to Venice, where I shall keep the carnival: thence to Florence and Turin:
thence again over Mount Cenis to France: and, when I return again to
Paris, shall expect to see my friend Belford, who, by that time, I doubt
not, will be all crusted and bearded over with penitence, self-denial,
and mortification; a very anchoret, only an itinerant one, journeying
over in hope to cover a multitude of his own sins, by proselyting his old
companions.

But let me tell thee, Jack, if stock rises on, as it has done since I
wrote my last letter, I am afraid thou wilt find a difficult task in
succeeding, should such be thy purpose.

Nor, I verily think, can thy own penitence and reformation hold.  Strong
habits are not so easily rooted out.  Old Satan has had too much benefit
from thy faithful services, for a series of years, to let thee so easily
get out of his clutches.  He knows what will do with thee.  A fine
strapping Bona Roba, in the Charters-taste, but well-limbed,
clear-complexioned, and Turkish-eyed; thou the first man with her, or
made to believe so, which is the same thing; how will thy frosty face be
illuminated by it!  A composition will be made between thee and the grand
tempter: thou wilt promise to do him suit and service till old age and
inability come.  And then will he, in all probability, be sure of thee
for ever.  For, wert thou to outlive thy present reigning appetites, he
will trump up some other darling sin, or make a now secondary one
darling, in order to keep thee firmly attached to his infernal interests.
Thou wilt continue resolving to amend, but never amending, till, grown
old before thou art aware, (a dozen years after thou art old with every
body else,) thy for-time-built tenement having lasted its allotted
period, he claps down upon thy grizzled head the universal trap-door: and
then all will be over with thee in his own way.

Thou wilt think these hints uncharacteristic from me.  But yet I cannot
help warning thee of the danger thou art actually in; which is the
greater, as thou seemst not to know it.  A few words more, therefore,
on this subject.

Thou hast made good resolutions.  If thou keepest them not, thou wilt
never be able to keep any.  But, nevertheless, the devil and thy time of
life are against thee: and six to one thou failest.  Were it only that
thou hast resolved, six to one thou failest.  And if thou dost, thou wilt
become the scoff of men, and the triumph of devils.--Then how will I
laugh at thee!  For this warning is not from principle.  Perhaps I wish
it were: but I never lied to man, and hardly ever said truth to woman.
The firs is what all free-livers cannot say: the second what every one
can.

I am mad again, by Jupiter!--But, thank my stars, not gloomily so!--
Farewell, farewell, farewell, for the third or fourth time, concludes

Thy
LOVELACE.


I believe Charlotte and you are in private league together.  Letters, I
      find, have passed between her and you, and Lord M.  I have been
      kept strangely in the dark of late; but will soon break upon you
      all, as the sun upon a midnight thief.

Remember that you never sent me the copy of my beloved's will.



LETTER XL

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, SEPT. 22.


Just as I was sitting down to answer your's of the 14th to the 18th, in
order to give you all the consolation in my power, came your revoking
letter of Wednesday.

I am really concerned and disappointed that your first was so soon
followed by one so contrary to it.

The shocking letter you mention, which your friends withhold from you, is
indeed from me.  They may now, I see, show you any thing.  Ask them,
then, for that letter, if you think it worth while to read aught about
the true mother of your mind.


***


I will suppose that thou hast just read the letter thou callest shocking,
and which I intended to be so.  And let me ask what thou thinkest of it?
Dost thou not tremble at the horrors the vilest of women labours with, on
the apprehensions of death, and future judgment?--How sit the reflections
that must have been raised by the perusal of this letter upon thy yet
unclosed eyelet-holes?  Will not some serious thoughts mingle with thy
melilot, and tear off the callus of thy mind, as that may flay the
leather from thy back, and as thy epispastics may strip the parchment
from thy plotting head?  If not, then indeed is thy conscience seared,
and no hopes will lie for thee.


[Mr. Belford then gives an account of the wretched Sinclair's terrible
      exit, which he had just then received.]

If this move thee not, I have news to acquaint thee with, of another
dismal catastrophe that is but within this hour come to my ear, of
another of thy blessed agents.  Thy TOMLINSON!--Dying, and, in all
probability, before this can reach thee, dead, in Maidstone gaol.  As
thou sayest in thy first letter, something strangely retributive seems
to be working.

This is his case.  He was at the head of a gang of smugglers,
endeavouring to carry off run goods, landed last Tuesday, when a party of
dragoons came up with them in the evening.  Some of his comrades fled.
M'Donald, being surrounded, attempted to fight his way through, and
wounded his man; but having received a shot in his neck, and being cut
deeply in the head by a broad-sword, he fell from his horse, was taken,
and carried to Maidstone gaol: and there my informant left him, just
dying, and assured of hanging if he recover.

Absolutely destitute, he got a kinsman of his to apply to me, and, if in
town, to the rest of the confraternity, for something, not to support him
was the word, (for he expected not to live till the fellow returned,) but
to bury him.

I never employed him but once, and then he ruined my project.  I now
thank Heaven that he did.  But I sent him five guineas, and promised him
more, as from you, and Mowbray, and Tourville, if he live a few days, or
to take his trial.  And I put it upon you to make further inquiry of him,
and to give him what you think fit.

His messenger tells me that he is very penitent; that he weeps
continually.  He cries out, that he has been the vilest of men: yet
palliates, that his necessities made him worse than he should otherwise
have been; [an excuse which none of us can plead:] but that which touches
him most of all, is a vile imposture he was put upon, to serve a certain
gentleman of fortune to the ruin of the most excellent woman that ever
lived; and who, he had heard, was dead of grief.

Let me consider, Lovelace--Whose turn can be next?

I wish it may not be thine.  But since thou givest me one piece of
advice, (which I should indeed have thought out of character, hadst thou
not taken pains to convince me that it proceeds not from principle,) I
will give thee another: and that is, prosecute, as fast as thou canst,
thy intended tour.  Change of scene, and of climate, may establish thy
health: while this gross air and the approach of winter, may thicken thy
blood; and with the help of a conscience that is upon the struggle with
thee, and like a cunning wrestler watches its opportunity to give thee
another fall, may make thee miserable for thy life.

I return your revoked letter.  Don't destroy it, however.  The same
dialect may one day come in fashion with you again.

As to the family at Harlowe-place, I have most affecting letters from
Colonel Morden relating to their grief and compunction.  But are you, to
whom the occasion is owing, entitled to rejoice in their distress?

I should be sorry, if I could not say, that what you have warned me of in
sport, makes me tremble in earnest.  I hope, for this is a serious
subject with me, (though nothing can be so with you,) that I never shall
deserve, by my apostasy, to be the scoff of men, and the triumph of
devils.

All that you say, of the difficulty of conquering rooted habits, is but
too true.  Those, and time of life, are indeed too much against me: but,
when I reflect upon the ends (some untimely) of those of our companions
whom we have formerly lost; upon Belton's miserable exit; upon the howls
and screams of Sinclair, which are still in my ears; and now upon your
miserable Tomlinson, and compare their ends with the happy and desirable
end of the inimitable Miss Harlowe, I hope I have reason to think my
footing morally secure.  Your caution, nevertheless, will be of use,
however you might design it: and since I know my weak side, I will
endeavour to fortify myself in that quarter by marriage, as soon as I can
make myself worthy of the confidence and esteem of some virtuous woman;
and, by this means, become the subject of your envy, rather than of your
scoffs.

I have already begun my retributory purposes, as I may call them.  I have
settled an annual sum for life upon poor John Loftus, whom I disabled
while he was endeavouring to protect his young mistress from my lawless
attempts.  I rejoice that I succeeded not in that; as I do in
recollecting many others of the like sort, in which I miscarried.

Poor Farley, who had become a bankrupt, I have set up again; but have
declared, that the annual allowance I make her shall cease, if I hear she
returns to her former courses: and I have made her accountable for her
conduct to the good widow Lovick; whom I have taken, at a handsome
salary, for my housekeeper at Edgware, (for I have let the house at
Watford;) and she is to dispense the quarterly allotment to her, as she
merits.

This good woman shall have other matters of the like nature under her
care, as we grow better acquainted; and I make no doubt that she will
answer my expectations, and that I shall be both confirmed and improved
by her conversation: for she shall generally sit at my own table.

The undeserved sufferings of Miss Clarissa Harlowe, her exalted merit,
her exemplary preparation, and her happy end, will be standing subjects
with us.

She shall read to me, when I have no company; write for me, out of books,
passages she shall recommend.  Her years (turned of fifty,) and her good
character, will secure me from scandal; and I have great pleasure in
reflecting that I shall be better myself for making her happy.

Then, whenever I am in danger, I will read some of the admirable lady's
papers: whenever I would abhor my former ways, I will read some of thine,
and copies of my own.

The consequence of all this will be, that I shall be the delight of my
own relations of both sexes, who were wont to look upon me as a lost man.
I shall have good order in my own family, because I shall give a good
example myself.  I shall be visited and respected, not perhaps by
Lovelace, by Mowbray, and by Tourville, because they cannot see me upon
the old terms, and will not, perhaps, see me upon the new, but by the
best and worthiest gentlemen, clergy as well as laity, all around me.  I
shall look upon my past follies with contempt: upon my old companions
with pity.  Oaths and curses shall be for ever banished my mouth: in
their place shall succeed conversation becoming a rational being, and a
gentleman.  And instead of acts of offence, subjecting me perpetually to
acts of defence, will I endeavour to atone for my past evils, by doing
all the good in my power, and by becoming an universal benefactor to the
extent of that power.

Now tell me, Lovelace, upon this faint sketch of what I hope to do, and
to be, if this be not a scheme infinitely preferable to the wild, the
pernicious, the dangerous ones, both to body and soul, which we have
pursued?

I wish I could make my sketch as amiable to you as it appears to me.  I
wish it with all my soul: for I always loved you.  It has been my
misfortune that I did: for this led me into infinite riots and follies,
of which, otherwise, I verily think I should not have been guilty.

You have a great deal more to answer for than I have, were it only in the
temporal ruin of this admirable woman.  Let me now, while you yet have
youth, and health, and intellect, prevail upon you: for I am afraid, very
much afraid, that such is the enormity of this single wickedness, in
depriving the world of such a shining light, that if you do not quickly
reform, it will be out of your power to reform at all; and that
Providence, which has already given you the fates of your agents Sinclair
and Tomlinson to take warning by, will not let the principal offender
escape, if he slight the warning.

You will, perhaps, laugh at me for these serious reflections.  Do, if you
will.  I had rather you should laugh at me, for continuing in this way of
thinking and acting, than triumph over me, as you threaten, on my
swerving from purposes I have determined upon with such good reason, and
induced and warned by such examples.

And so much for this subject at present.

I should be glad to know when you intend to set out.  I have too much
concern for your welfare, not to wish you in a thinner air and more
certain climate.

What have Tourville and Mowbray to do, that they cannot set out with you?
They will not covet my company, I dare say; and I shall not be able to
endure theirs, when you are gone: take them, therefore, with you.

I will not, however, forswear making you a visit at Paris, at your return
from Germany and Italy: but hardly with the hope of reclaiming you, if
due reflection upon what I have set before you, and upon what you have
written in your two last, will not by that time have done it.

I suppose I shall see you before you go.  Once more I wish you were gone.
This heavy island-air cannot do for you what that of the Continent will.

I do not think I ought to communicate with you, as I used to do, on this
side the Channel: let me, then, hear from you on the opposite shore, and
you shall command the pen, as you please; and, honestly, the power of

J. BELFORD.



LETTER XLI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, SEPT. 26.


Fate, I believe, in my conscience, spins threads for tragedies, on
purpose for thee to weave with.--Thy Watford uncle, poor Belton, the
fair inimitable, [exalted creature! and is she to be found in such a
list!] the accursed woman, and Tomlinson, seemed to have been all doomed
to give thee a theme for the dismal and the horrible;--and, by my soul,
that thou dost work it going, as Lord M. would phrase it.

That's the horrid thing, a man cannot begin to think, but causes for
thought crowd in upon him; the gloomy takes place, and mirth and gaiety
abandon his heard for ever!

Poor M'Donald!--I am really sorry for the fellow.--He was an useful,
faithful, solemn varlet, who could act incomparably any part given him,
and knew not what a blush was.--He really took honest pains for me in the
last affair; which has cost him and me so dearly in reflection.  Often
gravelled, as we both were, yet was he never daunted.--Poor M'Donald!  I
must once more say:--for carrying on a solemn piece of roguery, he had no
equal.

I was so solicitous to know if he were really as bad as thou hast a knack
of painting every body whom thou singlest out to exercise thy murdering
pen upon, that I dispatched a man and horse to Maidstone, as soon as I
had thine; and had word brought me, that he died in two hours after he
had received thy five guineas.  And all thou wrotest of his concern, in
relation to the ever-dear Miss Harlowe, it seems was true.

I can't help it, Belford!--I have only to add, that it is happy that the
poor fellow lived not to be hanged; as it seems he would have been; for
who knows, as he had got into such a penitential strain, what might have
been in his dying speech?

When a man has not great good to comfort himself with, it is right to
make the best of the little that may offer.  There never was any
discomfort happened to mortal man, but some little ray of consolation
would dart in, if the wretch was not so much a wretch, as to draw,
instead of undraw, the curtain, to keep it out.

And so much, at this time, and for ever, for poor Capt. Tomlinson, as I
called him.

Your solicitude to get me out of this heavy changeable climate exactly
tallies with every body's here.  They all believe that travelling will
establish me.  Yet I think I am quite well.  Only these plaguy news and
fulls, and the equinoctals, fright me a little when I think of them; and
that is always: for the whole family are continually ringing these
changes in my ears, and are more sedulously intent, than I can well
account for, to get me out of the kingdom.

But wilt thou write often, when I am gone?  Wilt thou then piece the
thread where thou brokest it off?  Wilt thou give me the particulars of
their distress, who were my auxiliaries in bringing on the event that
affects me?--Nay, principals rather: Since, say what thou wilt, what did
I do worth a woman's breaking her heart for?

Faith and troth, Jack, I have had very hard usage, as I have often said:
--to have such a plaguy ill name given me, screamed out upon, run away
from, as a mad dog would be; all my own friends ready to renounce me!--
Yet I think I deserve it all; for have I not been as ready to give up
myself, as others are to condemn me?

What madness, what folly, this!--Who will take the part of a man that
condemns himself?--Who can?--He that pleads guilty to an indictment,
leaves no room for aught but the sentence.  Out upon me, for an
impolitical wretch!  I have not the art of the least artful of any of our
Christian princes; who every day are guilty of ten times worse breaches
of faith; and yet, issuing out a manifesto, they wipe their mouths, and
go on from infraction to infraction, from robbery to robbery; commit
devastation upon devastation; and destroy--for their glory!  And are
rewarded with the names of conquerors, and are dubbed Le Grand; praised,
and even deified, by orators and poets, for their butcheries and
depredations.

While I, a poor, single, harmless prowler; at least comparatively
harmless; in order to satisfy my hunger, steal but one poor lamb; and
every mouth is opened, every hand is lifted up, against me.

Nay, as I have just now heard, I am to be manifestoed against, though
no prince: for Miss Howe threatens to have the case published to the whole
world.

I have a good mind not to oppose it; and to write an answer to it, as
soon as it comes forth, and exculpate myself, by throwing all the fault
upon the old ones.  And this I have to plead, supposing all that my worst
enemies can allege against me were true,--That I am not answerable for
all the extravagant consequences that this affair has been attended with;
and which could not possibly be foreseen.

And this I will prove demonstrably by a case, which, but a few hours ago,
I put to Lord M. and the two Misses Montague.  This it is:

Suppose A, a miser, had hid a parcel of gold in a secret place, in order
      to keep it there, till he could lend it out at extravagant
      interest.

Suppose B, in such a great want of this treasure, as to be unable to live
      without it.

And suppose A, the miser, has such an opinion of B, the wanter, that he
      would rather lend it to him, than to any mortal living; but yet,
      though he has no other use in the world for it, insists upon very
      unconscionable terms.

B would gladly pay common interest for it; but would be undone, (in his
      own opinion at least, and that is every thing to him,) if he
      complied with the miser's terms; since he would be sure to be soon
      thrown into gaol for the debt, and made a prisoner for life.
      Wherefore guessing (being an arch, penetrating fellow) where the
      sweet hoard lies, he searches for it, when the miser is in a
      profound sleep, finds it, and runs away with it.

[B, in this case, can only be a thief, that's plain, Jack.]


Here Miss Montague put in very smartly.--A thief, Sir, said she, that
steals what is and ought to be dearer to me than my life, deserves less
to be forgiven than he who murders me.

But what is this, cousin Charlotte, said I, that is dearer to you than
your life?  Your honour, you'll say--I will not talk to a lady (I never
did) in a way she cannot answer me--But in the instance for which I put
my case, (allowing all you attribute to the phantom) what honour is lost,
where the will is not violated, and the person cannot help it?  But, with
respect to the case put, how knew we, till the theft was committed, that
the miser did actually set so romantic a value upon the treasure?

Both my cousins were silent; and my Lord, because he could not answer me,
cursed me; and I proceeded.

Well then, the result is, that B can only be a thief; that's plain.--To
pursue, therefore, my case--

Suppose this same miserly A, on awaking and searching for, and finding
      his treasure gone, takes it so much to heart that he starves
      himself;

Who but himself is to blame for that?--Would either equity, law, or
      conscience, hang B for a murder?

And now to apply, said I----

None of your applications, cried my cousins, both in a breath.

None of your applications, and be d----d to you, the passionate Peer.

Well then, returned I, I am to conclude it to be a case so plain that it
needs none; looking at the two girls, who tried for a blush a-piece.  And
I hold myself, of consequence, acquitted of the death.

Not so, cried my Lord, [Peers are judges, thou knowest, Jack, in the last
resort:] for if, by committing an unlawful act, a capital crime is the
consequence, you are answerable for both.

Say you so, my good Lord?--But will you take upon you to say, supposing
(as in the present case) a rape (saving your presence, cousin Charlotte,
saving your presence, cousin Patty)--Is death the natural consequence of
a rape?--Did you ever hear, my Lord, or did you, Ladies, that it was?--
And if not the natural consequence, and a lady will destroy herself,
whether by a lingering death, as of grief; or by the dagger, as Lucretia
did; is there more than one fault the man's?--Is not the other her's?--
Were it not so, let me tell you, my dears, chucking each of my blushing
cousins under the chin, we either would have had no men so wicked as
young Tarquin was, or no women so virtuous as Lucretia, in the space of--
How many thousand years, my Lord?--And so Lucretia is recorded as a
single wonder!

You may believe I was cried out upon.  People who cannot answer, will
rave: and this they all did.  But I insisted upon it to them, and so I do
to you, Jack, that I ought to be acquitted of every thing but a common
theft, a private larceny, as the lawyers call it, in this point.  And
were my life to be a forfeit of the law, it would not be for murder.

Besides, as I told them, there was a circumstance strongly in my favour
in this case: for I would have been glad, with all my soul, to have
purchased my forgiveness by a compliance with the terms I first boggled
at.  And this, you all know, I offered; and my Lord, and Lady Betty, and
Lady Sarah, and my two cousins, and all my cousins' cousins, to the
fourteenth generation, would have been bound for me--But it would not do:
the sweet miser would break her heart, and die: And how could I help it?

Upon the whole, Jack, had not the lady died, would there have been half
so much said of it, as there is?  Was I the cause of her death? or could
I help it?  And have there not been, in a million of cases like this,
nine hundred and ninty-nine thousand that have not ended as this has
ended?--How hard, then, is my fate!--Upon my soul, I won't bear it as I
have done; but, instead of taking guilt to myself, claim pity.  And this
(since yesterday cannot be recalled) is the only course I can pursue to
make myself easy.  Proceed anon.



LETTER XLII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


But what a pretty scheme of life hast thou drawn out for thyself and thy
old widow!  By my soul, Jack, I was mightily taken with it.  There is but
one thing wanting in it; and that will come of course: only to be in the
commission, and one of the quorum.  Thou art already provided with a
clerk, as good as thou'lt want, in the widow Lovick; for thou
understandest law, and she conscience: a good Lord Chancellor between ye!
--I should take prodigious pleasure to hear thee decide in a bastard
case, upon thy new notions and old remembrances.

But raillery apart.  [All gloom at heart, by Jupiter! although the pen
and the countenance assume airs of levity!]  If, after all, thou canst so
easily repent and reform, as thou thinkest thou canst: if thou canst thus
shake off thy old sins, and thy old habits: and if thy old master will so
readily dismiss so tried and so faithful a servant, and permit thee thus
calmly to enjoy thy new system; no room for scandal; all temptation
ceasing: and if at last (thy reformation warranted and approved by time)
thou marriest, and livest honest:--why, Belford, I cannot but say, that
if all these IF's come to pass, thou standest a good chance to be a happy
man!

All I think, as I told thee in my last, is, that the devil knows his own
interest too well, to let thee off so easily.  Thou thyself tallest me,
that we cannot repent when we will.  And indeed I found it so: for, in my
lucid intervals, I made good resolutions: but as health turned its blithe
side to me, and opened my prospects of recovery, all my old inclinations
and appetites returned; and this letter, perhaps, will be a thorough
conviction to thee, that I am as wild a fellow as ever, or in the way to
be so.

Thou askest me, very seriously, if, upon the faint sketch thou hast
drawn, thy new scheme be not infinitely preferable to any of those which
we have so long pursued?--Why, Jack--Let me reflect--Why, Belford--I
can't say--I can't say--but it is.  To speak out--It is really, as Biddy
in the play says, a good comfortable scheme.

But when thou tallest me, that it was thy misfortune to love me, because
thy value for me made thee a wickeder man than otherwise thou wouldst
have been; I desire thee to revolve this assertion: and I am persuaded
that thou wilt not find thyself in so right a train as thou imaginest.

No false colourings, no glosses, does a true penitent aim at.
Debasement, diffidence, mortification, contrition, are all near of a kin,
Jack, and inseparable from a repentant spirit.  If thou knowest not this,
thou art not got three steps (out of threescore) towards repentance and
amendment.  And let me remind thee, before the grand accuser come to do
it, that thou wert ever above being a passive follower in iniquity.
Though thou hadst not so good an invention as he to whom thou writest,
thou hadst as active an heart for mischief, as ever I met with in man.

Then for improving an hint, thou wert always a true Englishman.  I never
started a roguery, that did not come out of thy forge in a manner ready
anvilled and hammered for execution, when I have sometimes been at a loss
to make any thing of it myself.

What indeed made me appear to be more wicked than thou was, that I being
a handsome fellow, and thou an ugly one, when we had started a game, and
hunted it down, the poor frighted puss generally threw herself into my
paws, rather than into thine: and then, disappointed, hast thou wiped thy
blubber-lips, and marched off to start a new game, calling me a wicked
fellow all the while.

In short, Belford, thou wert an excellent starter and setter. The old
women were not afraid for their daughters, when they saw such a face as
thine.  But, when I came, whip was the key turned upon the girls.  And
yet all signified nothing; for love, upon occasion, will draw an elephant
through a key-hole.  But for thy HEART, Belford, who ever doubted the
wickedness of that?

Nor even in this affair, that sticks most upon me, which my conscience
makes such a handle of against me, art thou so innocent as thou fanciest
thyself.  Thou wilt stare at this: but it is true; and I will convince
thee of it in an instant.

Thou sayest, thou wouldst have saved the lady from the ruin she met with.
Thou art a pretty fellow for this: For how wouldst thou have saved her?
What methods didst thou take to save her?

Thou knewest my designs all along.  Hadst thou a mind to make thyself a
good title to the merit to which thou now pretendest to lay claim, thou
shouldest, like a true knight-errant, have sought to set the lady free
from the enchanted castle.  Thou shouldst have apprized her of her
danger; have stolen in, when the giant was out of the way; or, hadst thou
had the true spirit of chivalry upon thee, and nothing else would have
done, have killed the giant; and then something wouldst thou have had to
brag of.

'Oh! but the giant was my friend: he reposed a confidence in me: and I
should have betrayed my friend, and his confidence!'  This thou wouldst
have pleaded, no doubt.  But try this plea upon thy present principles,
and thou wilt see what a caitiff thou wert to let it have weight with
thee, upon an occasion where a breach of confidence is more excusable
than to keep the secret.  Did not the lady herself once putt his very
point home upon me?  And didst thou not, on that occasion, heavily blame
thyself?*


* See Vol. VII. Letter XXI.


Thou canst not pretend, and I know thou wilt not, that thou wert afraid
of thy life by taking such a measure: for a braver fellow lives not, nor
a more fearless, than Jack Belford.  I remember several instances, and
thou canst not forget them, where thou hast ventured thy bones, thy neck,
thy life, against numbers, in a cause of roguery; and hadst thou had a
spark of that virtue, which now thou art willing to flatter thyself thou
hast, thou wouldst surely have run a risk to save an innocence, and a
virtue, that it became every man to protect and espouse.  This is the
truth of the case, greatly as it makes against myself.  But I hate a
hypocrite from my soul.

I believe I should have killed thee at the time, if I could, hadst thou
betrayed me thus.  But I am sure now, that I would have thanked thee for
it, with all my heart; and thought thee more a father, and a friend, than
my real father, and my best friend--and it was natural for thee to think,
with so exalted a merit as this lady had, that this would have been the
case, when consideration took place of passion; or, rather, when the
d----d fondness for intrigue ceased, which never was my pride so much, as
it is now, upon reflection, my curse.

Set about defending myself, and I will probe thee still deeper, and
convince thee still more effectually, that thou hast more guilt than
merit even in this affair.  And as to all the others, in which we were
accustomed to hunt in couples, thou wert always the forwardest whelp, and
more ready, by far, to run away with me, than I with thee.  Yet canst
thou now compose thy horse-muscles, and cry out, How much more hadst
thou, Lovelace, to answer for than I have!--Saying nothing, neither, when
thou sayest this, were it true: for thou wilt not be tried, when the time
comes, by comparison.  In short, thou mayest, at this rate, so miserably
deceive thyself, that, notwithstanding all thy self-denial and
mortification, when thou closest thy eyes, thou mayst perhaps open them
in a place where thou thoughtest least to be.

However, consult thy old woman on this subject.  I shall be thought to be
out of character, if I go on in this strain.  But really, as to a title
to merit in this affair, I do assure thee, Jack, that thou less deservest
praise than a horsepond; and I wish I had the sousing of thee.


***


I am actually now employed in taking leave of my friends in the country.
I had once thought of taking Tomlinson, as I called him, with me: but his
destiny has frustrated that intention.

Next Monday I think to see you in town; and then you, and I, and Mowbray,
and Tourville, will laugh off that evening together.  They will both
accompany me (as I expect you will) to Dover, if not cross the water.  I
must leave you and them good friends.  They take extremely amiss the
treatment you have given them in your last letters.  They say, you strike
at their understandings.  I laugh at them; and tell them, that those
people who have least, are the most apt to be angry when it is called
into question.

Make up all the papers and narratives you can spare me against the time.
The will, particularly, I expect to take with me.  Who knows but that
those things, which will help to secure you in the way you are got into,
may convert me?

Thou talkest of a wife, Jack: What thinkest you of our Charlotte?  Her
family and fortune, I doubt, according to thy scheme, are a little too
high.  Will those be an objection?  Charlotte is a smart girl.  For piety
(thy present turn) I cannot say much: yet she is as serious as most of
her sex at her time of life--Would flaunt it a little, I believe, too,
like the rest of them, were her reputation under covert.

But it won't do neither, now I think of it:--Thou art so homely, and so
awkward a creature!  Hast such a boatswain-like air!--People would think
she had picked thee up in Wapping, or Rotherhithe; or in going to see
some new ship launched, or to view the docks at Chatham, or Portsmouth.
So gaudy and so clumsy!  Thy tawdriness won't do with Charlotte!--So sit
thee down contented, Belford: although I think, in a whimsical way, as
now, I mentioned Charlotte to thee once before.*  Yet would I fain secure
thy morals too, if matrimony will do it.--Let me see!--Now I have it.----
Has not the widow Lovick a daughter, or a niece?  It is not every girl of
fortune and family that will go to prayers with thee once or twice a day.
But since thou art for taking a wife to mortify with, what if thou
marriest the widow herself?--She will then have a double concern in thy
conversation.  You and she may, tete a tete, pass many a comfortable
winter's evening together, comparing experiences, as the good folks call
them.


* See the Postscript to Letter XL. of Vol. VIII.


I am serious, Jack, faith I am.  And I would have thee take it into thy
wise consideration.

R.L.


Mr. Belford returns a very serious answer to the preceding letter; which
      appears not.

In it, he most heartily wishes that he had withstood Mr. Lovelace,
      whatever had been the consequence, in designs so elaborately base
      and ungrateful, and so long and steadily pursued, against a lady
      whose merit and innocence entitled her to the protection of every
      man who had the least pretences to the title of a gentleman; and
      who deserved to be even the public care.

He most severely censures himself for his false notions of honour to his
      friend, on this head; and recollects what the divine lady, as he
      calls her, said to him on this very subject, as related by himself
      in his letter to Lovelace No. XXI. Vol. VII., to which Lovelace
      also (both instigator and accuser) refers, and to his own regret
      and shame on the occasion.  He distinguishes, however, between an
      irreparable injury intended to a CLARISSA, and one designed to such
      of the sex, as contribute by their weakness and indiscretion to
      their own fall, and thereby entitle themselves to a large share of
      the guilt which accompanies the crime.

He offers not, he says, to palliate or extenuate the crimes he himself
      has been guilty of: but laments, for Mr. Lovelace's own sake, that
      he gives him, with so ludicrous and unconcerned an air, such solemn
      and useful lessons and warnings.  Nevertheless, he resolves to make
      it his whole endeavour, he tells him, to render them efficacious to
      himself: and should think himself but too happy, if he shall be
      enabled to set him such an example as may be a mean to bring about
      the reformation of a man so dear to him as he has always been, from
      the first of their acquaintance; and who is capable of thinking so
      rightly and deeply; though at present to such little purpose, as
      make his very knowledge add to his condemnation.



LETTER XLIII

MR. BELFORD, TO COLONEL MORDEN
THURSDAY, SEPT. 21.


Give me leave, dear Sir, to address myself to you in a very serious and
solemn manner, on a subject that I must not, cannot, dispense with; as I
promised the divine lady that I would do every thing in my power to
prevent that further mischief of which she was so very apprehensive.

I will not content myself with distant hints.  It is with very great
concern that I have just now heard of a declaration which you are said to
have made to your relations at Harlowe-place, that you will not rest till
you have avenged your cousin's wrongs upon Mr. Lovelace.

Far be it from me to offer to defend the unhappy man, or even unduly to
extenuate his crime!  But yet I must say, that the family, by their
persecutions of the dear lady at first, and by their implacableness
afterwards, ought, at least, to share the blame with him.  There is even
great reason to believe, that a lady of such a religious turn, her virtue
neither to be surprised nor corrupted, her will inviolate, would have got
over a mere personal injury; especially as he would have done all that
was in his power to repair it; and as, from the application of all his
family in his favour, and other circumstances attending his sincere and
voluntary offer, the lady might have condescended, with greater glory to
herself, than if he had never offended.

When I have the pleasure of seeing you next, I will acquaint you, Sir,
with all the circumstances of this melancholy story; from which you will
see that Mr. Lovelace was extremely ill treated at first, by the whole
family, this admirable lady excepted.  This exception, I know, heightens
his crime: but as his principal intention was but to try her virtue; and
that he became so earnest a suppliant to her for marriage; and as he has
suffered so deplorably in the loss of his reason, for not having it in
his power to repair her wrongs; I presume to hope that much is to be
pleaded against such a resolution as you are said to have made.  I will
read to you, at the same time, some passages from letters of his; two of
which (one but this moment received) will convince you that the unhappy
man, who is but now recovering his intellects, needs no greater
punishment than what he has from his own reflections.

I have just now read over the copies of the dear lady's posthumous
letters.  I send them all to you, except that directed for Mr. Lovelace;
which I reserve till I have the pleasure of seeing you.  Let me entreat
you to read once more that written to yourself; and that to her brother;*
which latter I now send you; as they are in point to the present subject.


* See Letter XVI. of this volume.


I think, Sir, they are unanswerable.  Such, at least, is the effect they
have upon me, that I hope I shall never be provoked to draw my sword
again in a private quarrel.

To the weight these must needs have upon you, let me add, that the
unhappy man has given no new occasion of offence, since your visit to him
at Lord M.'s, when you were so well satisfied of his intention to atone
for his crimes, that you yourself urged to your dear cousin her
forgiveness of him.

Let me also (though I presume to hope there is no need, when you coolly
consider every thing) remind you of your own promise to your departing
cousin; relying upon which, her last moments were the easier.

Reflect, my dear Colonel Morden, that the highest injury was to her: her
family all have a share in the cause: she forgives it: Why should we not
endeavour to imitate what we admire?

You asked me, Sir, when in town, if a brave man could be a premeditatedly
base one?--Generally speaking, I believe bravery and baseness are
incompatible.  But Mr. Lovelace's character, in the instance before us,
affords a proof of the truth of the common observation, that there is no
general rule but has its exceptions: for England, I believe, as gallant a
nation as it is deemed to be, has not in it a braver spirit than his; nor
a man who has a greater skill at his weapons; nor more calmness with his
skill.

I mention not this with a thought that it can affect Col. Morden; who, if
he be not withheld by SUPERIOR MOTIVES, as well as influenced by those I
have reminded him of, will tell me, that this skill, and this bravery,
will make him the more worthy of being called upon by him.

To these SUPERIOR MOTIVES then I refer myself: and with the greater
confidence; as a pursuit ending in blood would not, at this time, have
the plea lie for it with any body, which sudden passion might have with
some: but would be construed by all to be a cool and deliberate act of
revenge for an evil absolutely irretrievable: an act of which a brave and
noble spirit (such as is the gentleman's to whom I now write) is not
capable.

Excuse me, Sir, for the sake of my executorial duty and promise, keeping
in eye the dear lady's personal injunctions, as well as written will,
enforced by letters posthumous.  Every article of which (solicitous as we
both are to see it duly performed) she would have dispensed with, rather
than farther mischief should happen on her account.  I am, dear Sir,

Your affectionate and faithful friend,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XLIV

[THIS IS THE POSTHUMOUS LETTER TO COL. MORDEN, REFERRED TO IN THE ABOVE.]

Superscribed,

TO MY BELOVED COUSIN WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
TO BE DELIVERED AFTER MY DEATH.


MY DEAREST COUSIN,

As it is uncertain, from my present weak state, whether, if living, I may
be in a condition to receive as I ought the favour you intend me of a
visit, when you come to London, I take this opportunity to return you,
while able, the humble acknowledgments of a grateful heart, for all your
goodness to me from childhood till now: and more particularly for your
present kind interposition in my favour--God Almighty for ever bless you,
dear Sir, for the kindness you endeavoured to procure for me!

One principal end of my writing to you, in this solemn manner, is, to beg
of you, which I do with the utmost earnestness, that when you come to
hear the particulars of my story, you will not suffer active resentment
to take place in your generous breast on my account.

Remember, my dear Cousin, that vengeance is God's province, and he has
undertaken to repay it; nor will you, I hope, invade that province:--
especially as there is no necessity for you to attempt to vindicate my
fame; since the offender himself (before he is called upon) has stood
forth, and offered to do me all the justice that you could have extorted
from him, had I lived: and when your own person may be endangered by
running an equal risque with a guilty man.

Duelling, Sir, I need not tell you, who have adorned a public character,
is not only an usurpation of the Divine prerogative; but it is an insult
upon magistracy and good government.  'Tis an impious act.  'Tis an
attempt to take away a life that ought not to depend upon a private
sword; an act, the consequence of which is to hurry a soul (all its sins
upon its had) into perdition; endangering that of the poor triumpher--
since neither intend to give to the other that chance, as I may call it,
for the Divine mercy, in an opportunity for repentance, which each
presumes to hope for himself.

Seek not then, I beseech you, Sir, to aggravate my fault, by a pursuit of
blood, which must necessarily be deemed a consequence of that fault.
Give not the unhappy man the merit (were you assuredly to be the victor)
of falling by your hand.  At present he is the perfidious, the ungrateful
deceiver; but will not the forfeiture of his life, and the probable loss
of his soul, be a dreadful expiation for having made me miserable for a
few months only, and through that misery, by the Divine favour, happy to
all eternity?

In such a case, my Cousin, where shall the evil stop?--And who shall
avenge on you?--And who on your avenger?

Let the poor man's conscience, then, dear Sir, avenge me.  He will one
day find punishment more than enough from that.  Leave him to the chance
of repentance.  If the Almighty will give him time for it, who should you
deny it him?--Let him still be the guilty aggressor; and let no one say,
Clarissa Harlowe is now amply revenged in his fall; or, in the case of
your's, (which Heaven avert!) that her fault, instead of being buried in
her grave, is perpetuated, and aggravated, by a loss far greater than
that of herself.

Often, Sir, has the more guilty been the vanquisher of the less.  An Earl
of Shrewsbury, in the reign of Charles II. as I have read, endeavouring
to revenge the greatest injury that man can do to man, met with his death
at Barn-Elms, from the hand of the ignoble Duke who had vilely
dishonoured him.  Nor can it be thought an unequal dispensation, were it
generally to happen that the usurper of the Divine prerogative should be
punished for his presumption by the man whom he sought to destroy, and
who, however previously criminal, is put, in this case, upon a necessary
act of self-defence.

May Heaven protect you, Sir, in all your ways; and, once more, I pray,
reward you for all your kindness to me!  A kindness so worthy of your
heart, and so exceedingly grateful to mine: that of seeking to make
peace, and to reconcile parents to a once-beloved child; uncles to a
niece late their favourite; and a brother and sister to a sister whom
once they thought not unworthy of that tender relation.  A kindness so
greatly preferable to the vengeance of a murdering sword.

Be a comforter, dear Sir, to my honoured parents, as you have been to me;
and may we, through the Divine goodness to us both, meet in that blessed
eternity, into which, as I humbly trust, I shall have entered when you
will read this.

So prays, and to her latest hour will pray, my dear Cousin Morden, my
friend, my guardian, but not my avenger--[dear Sir! remember that!--]

Your ever-affectionate and obliged
CLARISSA HARLOWE.



LETTER XLV

COLONEL MORDEN, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 23.


DEAR SIR,

I am very sorry that any thing you have heard I have said should give you
uneasiness.

I am obliged to you for the letters you have communicated to me; and
still further for your promise to favour me with others occasionally.

All that relates to my dear cousin I shall be glad to see, be it from
whom it will.

I leave to your own discretion, what may or may not be proper for Miss
Howe to see from a pen so free as mine.

I admire her spirit.  Were she a man, do you think, Sir, she, at this
time, would have your advice to take upon such a subject as that upon
which you write?

Fear not, however, that your communications shall put me upon any
measures that otherwise I should not have taken.  The wickedness, Sir, is
of such a nature, as admits not of aggravation.

Yet I do assure you, that I have not made any resolutions that will be a
tie upon me.

I have indeed expressed myself with vehemence upon the occasion.  Who
could forbear to do so?  But it is not my way to resolve in matters of
moment, till opportunity brings the execution of my purposes within my
reach.  We shall see by what manner of spirit this young man will be
actuated on his recovery.  If he continue to brave and defy a family,
which he has so irreparably injured--if--but resolutions depending upon
future contingencies are best left to future determination, as I just
now hinted.

Mean time, I will own that I think my cousin's arguments unanswerable.
No good man but must be influenced by them.--But, alas! Sir, who is good?

As to your arguments; I hope you will believe me, when I assure you, as I
now do, that your opinion and your reasonings have, and will always have,
great and deserved weight with me; and that I respect you still more than
I did, if possible, for your expostulations in support of my cousin's
pious injunctions to me.  They come from you, Sir, with the greatest
propriety, as her executor and representative; and likewise as you are a
man of humanity, and a well-wisher to both parties.

I am not exempt from violent passions, Sir, any more than your friend;
but then I hope they are only capable of being raised by other people's
insolence, and not by my own arrogance.  If ever I am stimulated by my
imperfections and my resentments to act against my judgment and my
cousin's injunctions, some such reflections as these that follow will
run away with my reason.  Indeed they are always present with me.


In the first place; my own disappointment: who came over with the hope of
      passing the remainder of my days in the conversation of a kinswoman
      so beloved; and to whom I have a double relation as her cousin and
      trustee.

Then I reflect, too, too often perhaps for my engagements to her in her
      last hours, that the dear creature could only forgive for herself.
      She, no doubt, is happy: but who shall forgive for a whole family,
      in all its branches made miserable for their lives?

That the more faulty her friends were as to her, the more enormous his
      ingratitude, and the more inexcusable--What! Sir, was it not enough
      that she suffered what she did for him, but the barbarian must make
      her suffer for her sufferings for his sake?--Passion makes me
      express this weakly; passion refuses the aid of expression
      sometimes, where the propriety of a resentment prima facie declares
      expression to be needless.  I leave it to you, Sir, to give this
      reflection its due force.

That the author of this diffusive mischief perpetuated it premeditatedly,
      wantonly, in the gaiety of his heart.  To try my cousin, say you,
      Sir!  To try the virtue of a Clarissa, Sir!--Has she then given him
      any cause to doubt her virtue?--It could not be.--If he avers that
      she did, I am indeed called upon--but I will have patience.

That he carried her, as now appears, to a vile brothel, purposely to put
      her out of all human resource; himself out of the reach of all
      human remorse: and that, finding her proof against all the common
      arts of delusion, base and unmanly arts were there used to effect
      his wicked purposes.  Once dead, the injured saint, in her will,
      says, he has seen her.

That I could not know this, when I saw him at M. Hall: that, the object
      of his attempts considered, I could not suppose there was such a
      monster breathing as he: that it was natural for me to impute her
      refusal of him rather to transitory resentment, to consciousness of
      human frailty, and mingled doubts of the sincerity of his offers,
      than to villanies, which had given the irreversible blow, and had
      at that instant brought her down to the gates of death, which in a
      very few days enclosed her.

That he is a man of defiance: a man who thinks to awe every one by his
      insolent darings, and by his pretensions to superior courage and
      skill.

That, disgrace as he is to his name, and to the character of a gentleman,
      the man would not want merit, who, in vindication of the
      dishonoured distincion, should expunge and blot him out of the
      worthy list.

That the injured family has a son, who, however unworthy of such a
      sister, is of a temper vehement, unbridled, fierce; unequal,
      therefore, (as he has once indeed been found,) to a contention
      with this man: the loss of which son, by a violent death on such
      an occasion, and by a hand so justly hated, would complete the
      misery of the whole family; and who, nevertheless, resolves to
      call him to account, if I do not; his very misbehaviour, perhaps,
      to such a sister, stimulating his perverse heart to do her memory
      the more signal justice; though the attempt might be fatal to
      himself.

Then, Sir, to be a witness, as I am every hour, to the calamity and
      distress of a family to which I am related; every one of whom,
      however averse to an alliance with him while it had not place,
      would no doubt have been soon reconciled to the admirable
      creature, had the man (to whom, for his family and fortunes, it
      was not a disgrace to be allied) done her but common justice!

To see them hang their pensive heads; mope about, shunning one another;
      though formerly never used to meet but to rejoice in each other;
      afflicting themselves with reflections, that the last time they
      respectively saw the dear creature, it was here or there, at such
      a place, in such an attitude; and could they have thought that it
      would have been the last?--Every one of them reviving instances of
      her excellencies that will for a long time make their very
      blessings a curse to them!

Her closet, her chamber, her cabinet, given up to me to disfurnish, in
      order to answer (now too late obliging!) the legacies bequeathed;
      unable themselves to enter them; and even making use of less
      convenient back stairs, that they may avoid passing by the doors
      of her apartment!

Her parlour locked up; the walks, the retirements, the summer-house in
      which she delighted, and in which she used to pursue her charming
      works; that in particular, from which she went to the fatal
      interview, shunned, or hurried by, or over!

Her perfections, nevertheless, called up to remembrance, and enumerated;
      incidents and graces, unheeded before, or passed over in the group
      of her numberless perfections, now brought back into notice, and
      dwelt upon!

The very servants allowed to expatiate upon these praiseful topics to
      their principals!  Even eloquent in their praises!  The distressed
      principals listening and weeping!  Then to see them break in upon
      the zealous applauders, by their impatience and remorse, and throw
      abroad their helpless hands, and exclaim; then again to see them
      listen to hear more of her praises, and weep again--they even
      encouraging the servants to repeat how they used to be stopt by
      strangers to ask after her, and by those who knew her, to be told
      of some new instances to her honour--how aggravating all this!

In dreams they see her, and desire to see her; always an angle, and
      accompanied by angels; always clad in robes of light; always
      endeavouring to comfort them, who declare, that they shall never
      more know comfort!

What an example she set!  How she indited!  How she drew!  How she
      wrought!  How she talked!  How she sung!  How she played!  Her
      voice music!  Her accent harmony!

Her conversation how instructive! how sought after!  The delight of
      persons of all ages, of both sexes, of all ranks!  Yet how humble,
      how condescending!  Never were dignity and humility so
      illustriously mingled!

At other times, how generous, how noble, how charitable, how judicious in
      her charities!  In every action laudable!  In every attitude
      attractive!  In every appearance, whether full-dressed, or in the
      housewife's more humble garb, equally elegant, and equally lovely!
      Like, or resembling, Miss Clarissa Harlowe, they now remember to
      be a praise denoting the highest degree of excellence, with every
      one, whatever person, action, or rank, spoken of.--The desirable
      daughter; the obliging kinswoman; the affectionate sister, (all
      envy now subsided!) the faithful, the warm friend; the affable,
      the kind, the benevolent mistress!--Not one fault remembered!  All
      their severities called cruelties: mutually accusing each other;
      each him and herself; and all to raise her character, and torment
      themselves.


Such, Sir, was the angel, of whom the vilest of men has deprived the
world!  You, Sir, who know more of the barbarous machinations and
practices of this strange man, can help me to still more inflaming
reasons, were they needed, why a man, not perfect, may stand excused to
the generality of the world, if he should pursue his vengeance; and the
rather, as through an absence of six years, (high as just report, and the
promises of her early youth from childhood, had raised her in his
esteem,) he could not till now know one half of her excellencies--till
now! that we have lost, for ever lost, the admirable creature!--

But I will force myself from the subject, after I have repeated that I
have not yet made any resolutions that can bind me.  Whenever I do, I
shall be glad they may be such as may merit the honour of your
approbation.

I send you back the copies of the posthumous letters.  I see the humanity
of your purpose, in the transmission of them to me; and I thank you most
heartily for it.  I presume, that it is owing to the same laudable
consideration, that you kept back the copy of that to the wicked man
himself.

I intend to wait upon Miss Howe in person with the diamond ring, and such
other of the effects bequeathed to her as are here.  I am, Sir,

Your most faithful and obliged servant,
WM. MORDEN.


[Mr. Belford, in his answer to this letter, farther enforces the lady's
      dying injunctions; and rejoices that the Colonel has made no
      vindictive resolutions; and hopes every thing from his prudence
      and consideration, and from his promise given to the dying lady.

He refers to the seeing him in town on account of the dreadful ends of
      two of the greatest criminals in his cousin's affair.  'This, says
      he, together with Mr. Lovelace's disorder of mind, looks as if
      Providence had already taken the punishment of these unhappy
      wretches into its own hands.'

He desires the Colonel will give him a day's notice of his coming to
      town, lest otherwise he may be absent at the time--this he does,
      though he tells him not the reason, with a view to prevent a
      meeting between him and Mr. Lovelace; who might be in town (as he
      apprehends,) about the same time, in his way to go abroad.]



LETTER XLVI

COLONEL MORDEN, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, SEPT. 26.


DEAR SIR,

I cannot help congratulating myself as well as you that we have already
got through with the family every article of the will where they have any
concern.

You left me a discretional power in many instances; and, in pursuance of
it, I have had my dear cousin's personal jewels, and will account to you
for them, at the highest price, when I come to town, as well as for other
matters that you were pleased to intrust to my management.

These jewels I have presented to my cousin Dolly Hervey, in
acknowledgement of her love to the dear departed.  I have told Miss Howe
of this; and she is as well pleased with what I have done as if she had
been the purchaser of them herself.  As that young lady has jewels of her
own, she could only have wished to purchase these because they were her
beloved friend's.--The grandmother's jewels are also valued; and the
money will be paid me for you, to be carried to the uses of the will.

Mrs. Norton is preparing, by general consent, to enter upon her office as
housekeeper at The Grove.  But it is my opinion that she will not be long
on this side Heaven.

I waited upon Miss Howe myself, as I told you I would, with what was
bequeathed to her and her mother.  You will not be displeased, perhaps,
if I make a few observations with regard to that young lady, so dear to
my beloved cousin, as you have not a personal acquaintance with her.

There never was a firmer or nobler friendship in women, than between my
dear cousin and Miss Howe, to which this wretched man had given a period.

Friendship, generally speaking, Mr. Belford, is too fervent a flame for
female minds to manage: a light that but in few of their hands burns
steady, and often hurries the sex into flight and absurdity. Like other
extremes, it is hardly ever durable.  Marriage, which is the highest
state of friendship, generally absorbs the most vehement friendships of
female to female; and that whether the wedlock be happy, or not.

What female mind is capable of two fervent female friendships at the same
time?--This I mention as a general observation; but the friendship that
subsisted between these two ladies affords a remarkable exception to it:
which I account for from those qualities and attainments in both, which,
were they more common, would furnish more exceptions still in favour of
the sex.

Both had an enlarged, and even a liberal education: both had minds
thirsting after virtuous knowledge; great readers both; great writers--
[and early familiar writing I take to be one of the greatest openers and
improvers of the mind that man or woman can be employed in.]  Both
generous.  High in fortune, therefore above that dependence each on the
other that frequently destroys that familiarity which is the cement of
friendship.  Both excelling in different ways, in which neither sought
to envy the other.  Both blessed with clear and distinguishing faculties;
with solid sense; and, from their first intimacy, [I have many of my
lights, Sir, from Mrs. Norton,] each seeing something in the other to
fear, as well as to love; yet making it an indispensable condition of
their friendship, each to tell the other of her failings; and to be
thankful for the freedom taken.  One by nature gentle; the other made so
by her love and admiration of her exalted friend--impossible that there
could be a friendship better calculated for duration.

I must, however, take the liberty to blame Miss Howe for her behaviour
to Mr. Hickman.  And I infer from it, that even women of sense are not
to be trusted with power.

By the way, I am sure I need not desire you not to communicate to this
fervent young lady the liberties I have taken with her character.

I dare say my cousin could not approve of Miss Howe's behaviour to this
gentleman; a behaviour which is talked of by as many as know Mr. Hickman
and her.  Can a wise young lady be easy under such censure?  She must
know it.

Mr. Hickman is really a very worthy man.  Every body speaks well of him.
But he is gentle-dispositioned, and he adores Miss Howe; and love admits
not of an air of even due dignity to the object of it.  Yet will Mr.
Hickman hardly ever get back the reins he has yielded up; unless she, by
carrying too far the power of which she seems at present too sensible,
should, when she has no favours to confer which he has not a right to
demand, provoke him to throw off the too-heavy yoke.  And should he do
so, and then treat her with negligence, Miss Howe, of all the women I
know, will be the least able to support herself under it.  She will then
be more unhappy than she ever made him; for a man who is uneasy at home,
can divert himself abroad; which a woman cannot so easily do, without
scandal.--Permit me to take farther notice, as to Miss Howe, that it is
very obvious to me, that she has, by her haughty behaviour to this worthy
man, involved herself in one difficulty, from which she knows not how to
extricate herself with that grace which accompanies all her actions.  She
intends to have Mr. Hickman.  I believe she does not dislike him.  And it
will cost her no small pains to descend from the elevation she has
climbed to.

Another inconvenience she will suffer from her having taught every body
(for she is above disguise) to think, by her treatment of Mr. Hickman,
much more meanly of him than he deserves to be thought of.  And must she
not suffer dishonour in his dishonour?

Mrs. Howe is much disturbed at her daughter's behaviour to the gentleman.
He is very deservedly a favourite of her's. But [another failing in Miss
Howe] her mother has not all the authority with her that a mother ought
to have.  Miss Howe is indeed a woman of fine sense; but it requires a
high degree of good understanding, as well as a sweet and gentle
disposition of mind, and great discretion, in a child, when grown up, to
let it be seen, that she mingles reverence with her love, to a parent,
who has talents visibly inferior to her own.

Miss Howe is open, generous, noble.  The mother has not any of her fine
qualities.  Parents, in order to preserve their children's veneration for
them, should take great care not to let them see any thing in their
conduct, or behaviour, or principles, which they themselves would not
approve of in others.

Mr. Hickman has, however, this consideration to comfort himself with,
that the same vivacity by which he suffers, makes Miss Howe's own mother,
at times, equally sensible.  And as he sees enough of this beforehand, he
will have more reason to blame himself than the lady, should she prove as
lively a wife as she was a mistress, for having continued his addresses,
and married her, against such threatening appearances.

There is also another circumstance which good-natured men, who engage
with even lively women, may look forward to with pleasure; a circumstance
which generally lowers the spirits of the ladies, and domesticates them,
as I may call it; and which, as it will bring those of Mr. Hickman and
Miss Howe nearer to a par, that worthy gentleman will have double reason,
when it happens, to congratulate himself upon it.

But after all, I see that there is something so charmingly brilliant and
frank in Miss Howe's disposition, although at present visibly overclouded
by grief, that it is impossible not to love her, even for her failings.
She may, and I hope she will, make Mr. Hickman an obliging wife.  And if
she does, she will have additional merit with me; since she cannot be
apprehensive of check or controul; and may therefore, by her generosity
and prudence, lay an obligation upon her husband, by the performance of
what is no more than her duty.

Her mother both loves and fears her.  Yet is Mrs. Howe also a woman of
vivacity, and ready enough, I dare say, to cry out when she is pained.
But, alas! she has, as I hinted above, weakened her authority by the
narrowness of her mind.

Yet once she praised her daughter to me with so much warmth for the
generosity of her spirit, that had I not known the old lady's character,
I should have thought her generous herself.  And yet I have always
observed, that people of narrow tempers are ready to praise generous
ones:--and thus have I accounted for it--that such persons generally find
it to their purpose, that all the world should be open-minded but
themselves.

The old lady applied herself to me, to urge to the young one the contents
of the will, in order to hasten her to fix a day for her marriage; but
desired that I would not let Miss Howe know that she did.

I took the liberty upon it to tell Miss Howe that I hoped that her part
of a will, so soon, and so punctually, in almost all its other articles,
fulfilled, would not be the only one that would be slighted.

Her answer was, she would consider of it: and made me a courtesy with
such an air, as showed me that she thought me more out of my sphere, than
I could allow her to think me, had I been permitted to argue the point
with her.

I found Miss Howe and her own servant-maid in deep mourning.  This, it
seems, had occasioned a great debate at first between her mother and her.
Her mother had the words of the will on her side; and Mr. Hickman's
interest in her view; her daughter having said that she would wear it for
six months at least.  But the young lady carried her point--'Strange,'
said she, 'if I, who shall mourn the heavy, the irreparable loss to the
last hour of my life, should not show my concern to the world for a few
months!'

Mr. Hickman, for his part, was so far from uttering an opposing word on
this occasion, that, on the very day that Miss Howe put on her's, he
waited on her in a new suit of mourning, as for a near relation.  His
servants and equipage made the same respectful appearance.

Whether the mother was consulted by him in it, I cannot say; but the
daughter knew nothing of it, till she saw him in it; she looked at him
with surprise, and asked him for whom he mourned?

The dear, and ever-dear Miss Harlowe, he said.

She was at a loss, it seems.  At last--All the world ought to mourn for
my Clarissa, said she; But whom, man, [that was her whimsical address to
him,] thinkest thou to oblige by this appearance?

It is more than appearance, Madam.  I love not my own sister, worthy as
she is, better than I loved Miss Clarissa Harlowe.  I oblige myself by
it.  And if I disoblige not you, that is all I wish.

She surveyed him, I am told, from head to foot.  She knew not, at first,
whether to be angry or pleased.--At length, 'I thought at first,' said
she, 'that you might have a bolder and freer motive--but (as my Mamma
says) you may be a well-meaning man, though generally a little
wrong-headed--however, as the world is censorious, and may think us
nearer of kin than I would have it supposed, I must take care that I am
not seen abroad in your company.'

But let me add, Mr. Belford, that if this compliment of Mr. Hickman (or
this more than compliment, as I may call it, since the worthy man speaks
not of my dear cousin without emotion) does not produce a short day, I
shall think Miss Howe has less generosity in her temper than I am willing
to allow her.

You will excuse me, Mr. Belford, for the particularities which you
invited and encouraged.  Having now seen every thing that relates to the
will of my dear cousin brought to a desirable issue, I will set about
making my own.  I shall follow the dear creature's example, and give my
reasons for every article, that there may be no room for
after-contention.

What but a fear of death, a fear unworthy of a creature who knows that he
must one day as surely die as he was born, can hinder any one from making
such a disposition?

I hope soon to pay my respects to you in town.  Mean time, I am, with
great respect, dear Sir,

Your faithful and affectionate humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.



LETTER XLVII

MR. BELFORD, TO MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, SEPT. 28.


MADAM,

I do myself the honour to send you by this, according to my promise,*
copies of the posthumous letters written by your exalted friend.


* See Letter XXXVI. of this volume.


These will be accompanied with other letters, particularly a copy of one
from Mr. Lovelace, begun to be written on the 14th, and continued down to
the 18th.*  You will see by it, Madam, the dreadful anguish that his
spirits labour with, and his deep remorse.


* See Letter XXXVII. ibid.


Mr. Lovelace sent for this letter back.  I complied; but I first took a
copy of it.  As I have not told him that I have done so, you will be
pleased to forbear communicating of it to any body but Mr. Hickman.  That
gentleman's perusal of it will be the same as if nobody but yourself saw
it.

One of the letters of Colonel Morden, which I enclose, you will observe,
Madam, is only a copy.*  The true reason for which, as I will ingenuously
acknowledge, is, some free, but respectful animadversions which the
Colonel has made upon your declining to carry into execution your part of
your dear friend's last requests.  I have therefore, in respect to that
worthy gentleman, (having a caution from him on that head,) omitted those
parts.


* The preceding Letter.


Will you allow me, Madam, however, to tell you, that I myself could not
have believed that my inimitable testatrix's own Miss Howe would have
been the most backward in performing such a part of her dear friend's
last will, as is entirely in her own power to perform--especially, when
that performance would make one of the most deserving men in England
happy; and whom, I presume, she proposes to honour with her hand.

Excuse me, Madam, I have a most sincere veneration for you; and would not
disoblige you for the world.

I will not presume to make remarks on the letters I send you; nor upon
the informations I have to give you of the dreadful end of two unhappy
wretches who were the greatest criminals in the affair of your adorable
friend.  These are the infamous Sinclair, and a person whom you have read
of, no doubt, in the letters of the charming innocent, by the name of
Captain Tomlinson.

The wretched woman died in the extremest tortures and despondency: the
man from wounds got in defending himself in carrying on a contraband
trade; both accusing themselves, in their last hours, for the parts they
had acted against the most excellent of women, as of the crime that gave
them the deepest remorse.

Give me leave to say, Madam, that if your compassion be not excited for
the poor man who suffers so greatly from his own anguish of mind, as you
will observe by his letter he does; and for the unhappy family, whose
remorse, you will see by Colonel Morden's, is so deep; your terror must.
And yet I should not wonder, if the just sense of the irreparable loss
you have sustained hardens a heart against pity, which, on a less
extraordinary occasion, would want its principal grace, if it were not
compassionate.

I am, Madam, with the greatest respect and gratitude,
Your most obliged and faithful humble servant,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER XLVIII

MISS HOWE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 30.


SIR,

I little thought I ever could have owed so much obligation to any man as
you have laid me under.  And yet what you have sent me has almost broken
my heart, and ruined my eyes.

I am surprised, though agreeably, that you have so soon, and so well, got
over that part of the trust you have engaged in, which relates to the
family.

It may be presumed, from the exits you mention of two of the infernal
man's accomplices, that the thunderbolt will not stop short of the
principal.  Indeed I have some pleasure to think it seems rolling along
towards the devoted head that has plotted all the mischief.  But let me,
however, say, that although I think Mr. Morden not altogether in the
wrong in his reasons for resentment, as he is the dear creature's kinsman
and trustee, yet I think you very much in the right in endeavouring to
dissuade him from it, as you are her executor, and act in pursuance of
her earnest request.

But what a letter is that of the infernal man's!  I cannot observe upon
it.  Neither can I, for very different reasons, upon my dear creature's
posthumous letters; particularly on that to him.  O Mr. Belford!  what
numberless perfections died, when my Clarissa drew her last breath!

If decency be observed in his letters, for I have not yet had patience
to read above two or three of them, (besides this horrid one, which I
return to you enclosed,) I may some time hence be curious to look, by
their means, into the hearts of wretches, which, though they must be the
abhorrence of virtuous minds, will, when they are laid open, (as I
presume they are in them,) afford a proper warning to those who read
them, and teach them to detest men of such profligate characters.

If your reformation be sincere, you will not be offended that I do not
except you on this occasion.--And thus have I helped you to a criterion
to try yourself by.

By this letter of the wicked man it is apparent that there are still
wickeder women.  But see what a guilty commerce with the devils of your
sex will bring those to whose morals ye have ruined!--For these women
were once innocent: it was man that made them otherwise.  The first bad
man, perhaps, threw them upon worse men; those upon still worse; till
they commenced devils incarnate--the height of wickedness or of shame
is not arrived at all at once, as I have somewhere heard observed.

But this man, this monster rather, for him to curse these women, and to
curse the dear creature's family (implacable as the latter were,) in
order to lighten a burden he voluntarily took up, and groans under, is
meanness added to wickedness: and in vain will he one day find his low
plea of sharing with her friends, and with those common wretches, a guilt
which will be adjudged him as all his own; though they too may meet their
punishment; as it is evidently begun; in the first, in their ineffectual
reproaches of one another; in the second--as you have told me.

This letter of the abandoned wretch I have not shown to any body; not
even to Mr. Hickman: for, Sir, I must tell you, I do not as yet think it
the same thing as only seeing it myself.

Mr. Hickman, like the rest of his sex, would grow upon indulgence.  One
distinction from me would make him pay two to himself.  Insolent
creepers, or encroachers all of you!  To show any of you a favour to-day,
you would expect it as a right to-morrow.

I am, as you see, very open and sincere with you; and design in another
letter to be still more so, in answer to your call, and Colonel Morden's
call, upon me, in a point that concerns me to explain myself upon to my
beloved creature's executor, and to the Colonel, as her only tender and
only worthy relation.

I cannot but highly applaud Colonel Morden for his generosity to Miss
Dolly Hervey.

O that he had arrived time enough to save my inimitable friend from the
machinations of the vilest of men, and from the envy and malice of the
most selfish and implacable of brothers and sisters!

ANNA HOWE.



LETTER XLIX

MISS HOWE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, OCT. 2.


When you question me, Sir, as you do, and on a subject so affecting to
me, in the character of the representative of my best beloved friend,
and have in every particular hitherto acted up to that character, you are
entitled to my regard: especially as you are joined in your questioning
of me by a gentleman whom I look upon as the dearest and nearest (because
worthiest) relation of my dear friend: and who, it seems, has been so
severe a censurer of my conduct, that your politeness will not permit you
to send me his letter, with others of his; but a copy only, in which the
passages reflecting upon me are omitted.

I presume, however, that what is meant by this alarming freedom of the
Colonel is no more than what you both have already hinted to me.  As if
you thought I were not inclined to pay so much regard to my beloved
creature's last will, in my own case, as I would have others pay to it.
A charge that I ought not to be quite silent under.

You have observed, no doubt, that I have seemed to value myself upon the
freedom I take in declaring my sentiments without reserve upon every
subject that I pretend to touch upon: and I can hardly question that I
have, or shall, in your opinion, by my unceremonious treatment of you
upon so short an acquaintance, run into the error of those, who, wanting
to be thought above hypocrisy and flattery, fall into rusticity, if not
ill-manners; a common fault with such, who, not caring to correct
constitutional failings, seek to gloss them over by some nominal virtue;
when all the time, perhaps, these failings are entirely owing to native
arrogance; or, at least, to a contracted rust, that they will not,
because it would give them pain, submit to have filed off.

You see, Sir, that I can, however, be as free with myself as with you:
and by what I am going to write, you will find me still more free; and
yet I am aware that such of my sex as will not assume some little
dignity, and exact respect from your's, will render themselves cheap;
and, perhaps, for their modesty and diffidence, be repaid with scorn and
insult.

But the scorn I will endeavour not to deserve; and the insult I will not
bear.

In some of the dear creature's papers which you have had in your
possession, and must again have, in order to get transcribed, you will
find several friendly, but severe reprehensions of me, on account of a
natural, or, at least, an habitual, warmth of temper, which she was
pleased to impute to me.

I was thinking to give you her charge against me in her own words, from
one of her letters delivered to me with her own hands, on taking leave
of me on the last visit she honoured me with.  But I will supply that
charge by confession of more than it imports; to wit, 'That I am haughty,
uncontroulable, and violent in my temper;' this, I say; 'Impatient of
contradiction,' was my beloved's charge; [from any body but her dear
self, she should have said;] 'and aim not at that affability, that
gentleness, next to meekness, which, in the letter I was going to
communicate, she tells me are the peculiar and indispensable
characteristics of a real fine lady; who, she is pleased to say, should
appear to be gall-less as a dove; and never should know what warmth or
high spirit is, but in the cause of religion or virtue; or in cases where
her own honour, the honour of a friend, or that of an innocent person, is
concerned.'

Now, Sir, as I needs must plead guilty to this indictment, do you think I
ought not to resolve upon a single life?--I, who have such an opinion of
your sex, that I think there is not one man in an hundred whom a woman of
sense and spirit can either honour or obey, though you make us promise
both, in that solemn form of words which unites or rather binds us to you
in marriage?

When I look round upon all the married people of my acquaintance, and see
how they live, and what they bear who live best, I am confirmed in my
dislike to the state.

Well do your sex contrive to bring us up fools and idiots, in order to
make us bear the yoke you lay upon our shoulders; and that we may not
despise you from our hearts, (as we certainly should, if we were brought
up as you are,) for your ignorance, as much as you often make us do (as
it is) for your insolence.

These, Sir, are some of my notions.  And, with these notions, let me
repeat my question, Do you think I ought to marry at all?

If I marry either a sordid or an imperious wretch, can I, do you think,
live with him?  And ought a man of a contrary character, for the sake of
either of our reputations, to be plagued with me?

Long did I stand out against all the offers made me, and against all the
persuasions of my mother; and, to tell you the truth, the longer, and
with the more obstinacy, as the person my choice would have first fallen
upon was neither approved by my mother, nor by my dear friend.  This
riveted me to my pride, and to my opposition; for although I was
convinced, after a while, that my choice would neither have been prudent
nor happy; and that the specious wretch was not what he had made me
believe he was; yet could I not easily think of any other man; and
indeed, from the detection of him, took a settled aversion to the whole
sex.

At last Mr. Hickman offered himself; a man worthy of a better choice.  He
had the good fortune [he thinks it so] to be agreeable (and to make his
proposals agreeable) to my mother.

As to myself; I own, that were I to have chosen a brother, Mr. Hickman
should have been the man; virtuous, sober, sincere, friendly, as he is.
But I wish not to marry; nor knew I the man in the world whom I could
think deserving of my beloved friend.  But neither of our parents would
let us live single.

The accursed Lovelace was proposed warmly to her at one time; and, while
she was yet but indifferent to him, they, by ungenerous usage of him,
(for then, Sir, he was not known to be Beelzebub himself,) and by
endeavouring to force her inclinations in favour first of one worthless
man, then of another, in antipathy to him, through her foolish brother's
caprice, turned that indifference (from the natural generosity of her
soul) into a regard which she never otherwise would have had for a man of
his character.

Mr. Hickman was proposed to me.  I refused him again and again.  He
persisted; my mother his advocate.  I told him my dislike of all men--of
him--of matrimony--still he persisted.  I used him with tyranny--led,
indeed, partly by my temper, partly by design; hoping thereby to get rid
of him; till the poor man (his character unexceptionably uniform) still
persisting, made himself a merit with me by his patience.  This brought
down my pride, [I never, Sir, was accounted very ungenerous, nor quite
ungrateful,] and gave me, at one time, an inferiority in my own opinion
to him; which lasted just long enough for my friends to prevail upon me
to promise him encouragement, and to receive his addresses.

Having done so, when the weather-glass of my pride got up again, I found
I had gone too far to recede.  My mother and my friends both held me to
it.  Yet I tried him, I vexed him, an hundred ways; and not so much
neither with design to vex him, as to make him hate me, and decline his
suit.

He bore this, however; and got nothing but my pity; yet still my mother,
and my friend, having obtained my promise, [made, however, not to him,
but to them,] and being well assured that I valued no man more than Mr.
Hickman, (who never once disobliged me in word, or deed, or look, except
by his foolish perseverance,) insisted upon the performance.

While my dear friend was in her unhappy uncertainty, I could not think of
marriage; and now, what encouragement have I?--She, my monitress, my
guide, my counsel, gone, for ever gone! by whose advice and instructions
I hoped to acquit myself tolerably in the state to which I could not
avoid entering.  For, Sir, my mother is so partially Mr. Hickman's
friend, that I am sure, should any difference arise, she would always
censure me, and acquit him; even were he ungenerous enough to remember me
in his day.

This, Sir, being my situation, consider how difficult it is for me to
think of marriage.  Whenever we approve, we can find an hundred good
reasons to justify our approbation.  Whenever we dislike, we can find a
thousand to justify our dislike.  Every thing in the latter case is an
impediment; every shadow a bugbear.--Thus can I enumerate and swell,
perhaps, only imaginary grievances; 'I must go whither he would have me
to go; visit whom he would have me to visit: well as I love to write,
(though now, alas! my grand inducement to write is over!) it must be to
whom he pleases:' and Mrs. Hickman (who, as Miss Howe, cannot do wrong)
would hardly ever be able to do right.  Thus, the tables turned upon me,
I am reminded of my vowed obedience; Madam'd up perhaps to matrimonial
perfection, and all the wedded warfare practised comfortably over between
us, (for I shall not be passive under insolent treatment,) till we become
curses to each other, a bye-word to our neighbours, and the jest of our
own servants.

But there must be bear and forbear, methinks some wise body will tell me:
But why must I be teased into a state where that must be necessarily the
case; when now I can do as I please, and wish only to be let alone to do
as best pleases me?  And what, in effect, does my mother say?  'Anna
Howe, you now do every thing that pleases you; you now have nobody to
controul you; you go and you come; you dress and you undress; you rise
and you go to rest, just as you think best; but you must be happier
still, child!'--

As how, Madam?

'Why, you must marry, my dear, and have none of these options; but, in
every thing, do as your husband commands you.'

This is very hard, you will own, Sir, for such a one as me to think of.
And yet, engaged to enter into that state, as I am, how can I help
myself?  My mother presses me; my friend, my beloved friend, writing as
from the dead, presses me; and you and Mr. Morden, as executors of her
will, remind me; the man is not afraid of me, [I am sure, were I the man,
I should not have half his courage;] and I think I ought to conclude to
punish him (the only effectual way I have to do it) for his perverse
adherence and persecution, with the grant of his own wishes; a punishment
which many others who enjoy their's very commonly experience.

Let me then assure you, Sir, that when I can find, in the words of my
charming friend in her will, writing of her cousin Hervey, that my grief
for her is mellowed by time into a remembrance more sweet than painful,
that I may not be utterly unworthy of the passion a man of some merit has
for me, I will answer the request of my dear friend, so often repeated,
and so earnestly pressed; and Mr. Hickman shall find, if he continue to
deserve my gratitude, that my endeavours shall not be wanting to make him
amends for the patience he has had, and must still a little while longer
have with me: and then will it be his own fault (I hope not mine) if our
marriage answer not those happy prognostics, which filled her generous
presaging mind, upon this view, as she once, for my encouragement, and to
induce me to encourage him, told me.

Thus, Sir, have I, in a very free manner, accounted to you, as to the
executor of my beloved friend, for all that relates to you, as such, to
know; and even for more than I needed to do, against myself; only that
you will find as much against me in some of her letters; and so, losing
nothing, I gain the character of ingenuousness with you.

And thus much for the double reprimand, on my delaying my part of the
performance of my dear friend's will.

And now, while you are admonishing me on this subject, let me remind you
of one great article relating to yourself: it is furnished me by my dear
creature's posthumous letter to you--I hope you will not forget, that the
most benevolent of her sex expresses herself as earnestly concerned for
your thorough reformation, as she does for my marrying.  You'll see to
it, then, that her wishes are as completely answered in that particular,
as you are desirous they should be in all others.

I have, I own, disobeyed her in one article; and that is, where she
desires I would not put myself into mourning.  I could not help it.

I send this and mine of Saturday last together; and will not add another
word, after I have told you that I think myself

Your obliged servant,
A. HOWE.



LETTER L

MR. BELFORD, TO MISS HOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, OCT. 5.


I return you, Madam, my most respectful thanks for your condescending
hint, in relation to the pious wishes of your exalted friend for my
thorough reformation.

I will only say, that it will be my earnest and unwearied endeavour to
make those generous wishes effectual: and I hope for the Divine blessing
upon such my endeavours, or else I know they will be in vain.

I cannot, Madam, express how much I think myself obliged to you for your
farther condescension, in writing to me so frankly the state of your past
and present mind, in relation to the single and matrimonial life.  If the
lady by whom, as the executor of her inimitable friend, I am thus
honoured, has failings, never were failings so lovely in woman!--How much
more lovely, indeed, than the virtues of many of her sex!

I might have ventured into the hands of such a lady the Colonel's
original letter entire.  The worthy gentleman exceedingly admires you;
and this caution was the effect of his politeness only, and of his regard
for you.

I send you, Madam, a letter from Lord M. to myself; and the copies of
three others written in consequence of that.  These will acquaint you
with Mr. Lovelace's departure from England, and with other particulars,
which you will be curious to know.

Be pleased to keep to yourself such of the contents as your own prudence
will suggest to you ought not to be seen by any body else.

I am, Madam, with the profoundest and most grateful respect,

Your faithful and obliged humble servant,
JOHN BELFORD.



LETTER LI

LORD M. TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, FRIDAY, SEPT. 29.


DEAR SIR,

My kinsman Lovelace is now setting out for London; proposing to see you,
and then to go to Dover, and so embark.  God send him well out of the
kingdom!

On Monday he will be with you, I believe.  Pray let me be favoured with
an account of all your conversations; for Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville
are to be there too; and whether you think he is grown quite his own man
again.

What I mostly write for is, to wish you to keep Colonel Morden and him
asunder; and so I give you notice of his going to town.  I should be very
loth there should be any mischief between them, as you gave me notice
that the Colonel threatened my nephew.  But my kinsman would not bear
that; so nobody let him know that he did.  But I hope there is no fear;
for the Colonel does not, as I hear, threaten now.  For his own sake, I
am glad of that; for there is not such a man in the world as my kinsman
is said to be, at all the weapons--as well he was not; he would not be so
daring.

We shall all here miss the wild fellow.  To be sure, there is no man
better company when he pleases.

Pray, do you never travel thirty or forty miles?  I should be glad to see
you here at M. Hall.  It will be charity when my kinsman is gone; for we
suppose you will be his chief correspondent; although he has promised to
write to my nieces often.  But he is very apt to forget his promises; to
us his relations particularly.  God preserve us all; Amen! prays

Your very humble servant,
M.



LETTER LII

MR. BELFORD, TO LORD M.
LONDON, TUESDAY NIGHT, OCT. 3.


MY LORD,

I obey your Lordship's commands with great pleasure.

Yesterday in the afternoon Mr. Lovelace made me a visit at my lodgings.
As I was in expectation of one from Colonel Morden about the same time,
I thought proper to carry him to a tavern which neither of us frequented,
(on pretence of a half-appointment;) ordering notice to be sent me
thither, if the Colonel came; and Mr. Lovelace sent to Mowbray, and
Tourville, and Mr. Doleman of Uxbridge, (who came to town to take leave
of him,) to let them know where to find us.

Mr. Lovelace is too well recovered, I was going to say.  I never saw him
more gay, lively, and handsome.  We had a good deal of bluster about some
parts of the trust I had engaged in; and upon freedoms I had treated him
with; in which, he would have it, that I had exceeded our agreed-upon
limits; but on the arrival of our three old companions, and a nephew of
Mr. Doleman's, (who had a good while been desirous to pass an hour with
Mr. Lovelace,) it blew off for the present.

Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville had also taken some exceptions at the
freedoms of my pen; and Mr. Lovelace, after his way, took upon him to
reconcile us; and did it at the expense of all three; and with such an
infinite run of humour and raillery, that we had nothing to do but to
laugh at what he said, and at one another.  I can deal tolerably with
him at my pen; but in conversation he has no equal.  In short, it was his
day.  He was glad, he said, to find himself alive; and his two friends,
clapping and rubbing their hands twenty times in an hour, declared, that
now, once more, he was all himself--the charming'st fellow in the world;
and they would follow him to the farthest part of the globe.

I threw a bur upon his coat now-and-then; but none would stick.

Your Lordship knows, that there are many things which occasion a roar of
applause in conversation, when the heart is open, and men are resolved to
be merry, which will neither bear repeating, nor thinking of afterwards.
Common things, in the mouth of a man we admire, and whose wit has passed
upon us for sterling, become, in a gay hour, uncommon.  We watch every
turn of such a one's countenance, and are resolved to laugh when he
smiles, even before he utters what we are expecting to flow from his
lips.

Mr. Doleman and his nephew took leave of us by twelve, Mowbray and
Tourville grew very noisy by one, and were carried off by two.  Wine
never moves Mr. Lovelace, notwithstanding a vivacity which generally
helps on over-gay spirits.  As to myself, the little part I had taken
in the gaiety kept me unconcerned.

The clock struck three before I could get him into any serious or
attentive way--so natural to him is gaiety of heart; and such strong
hold had the liveliness of the evening taken of him.  His conversation,
you know, my Lord, when his heart is free, runs off to the bottom without
any dregs.

But after that hour, and when we thought of parting, he became a little
more serious: and then he told me his designs, and gave me a plan of his
intended tour; wishing heartily that I could have accompanied him.

We parted about four; he not a little dissatisfied with me; for we had
some talk about subjects, which, he said, he loved not to think of; to
whit, Miss Harlowe's will; my executorship; papers I had in confidence
communicated to that admirable lady (with no unfriendly design, I assure
your Lordship;) and he insisting upon, and I refusing, the return of the
letters he had written to me, from the time that he had made his first
addresses to her.

He would see me once again, he said; and it would be upon very ill terms
if I complied not with his request.  Which I bid him not expect.  But,
that I might not deny him every thing, I told him, that I would give him
a copy of the will; though I was sure, I said, when he read it, he would
wish he had never seen it.

I had a message from him about eleven this morning, desiring me to name
a place at which to dine with him, and Mowbray, and Tourville, for the
last time: and soon after another from Colonel Morden, inviting me to
pass the evening with him at the Bedford-head in Covent-Garden.  And,
that I might keep them at distance from one another, I appointed Mr.
Lovelace at the Eagle in Suffolk-street.

There I met him, and the two others.  We began where we left off at our
last parting; and were very high with each other.  But, at last, all was
made up, and he offered to forget and forgive every thing, on condition
that I would correspond with him while abroad, and continue the series
which had been broken through by his illness; and particularly give him,
as I had offered, a copy of the lady's last will.

I promised him: and he then fell to rallying me on my gravity, and on my
reformation-schemes, as he called them.  As we walked about the room,
expecting dinner to be brought in, he laid his hand upon my shoulder;
then pushed me from him with a curse; walking round me, and surveying me
from head to foot; then calling for the observations of the others, he
turned round upon his heel, and with one of his peculiar wild airs, 'Ha,
ha, ha, ha,' burst he out, 'that these sour-faced proselytes should take
it into their heads that they cannot be pious, without forfeiting both
their good-nature and good-manners!--Why, Jack,' turning me about,
'pr'ythee look up, man!--Dost thou not know, that religion, if it has
taken proper hold of the heart, is the most cheerful countenance-maker
in the world?--I have heard my beloved Miss Harlowe say so: and she knew,
or nobody did.  And was not her aspect a benign proof of the observation?
But thy these wamblings in thy cursed gizzard, and thy awkward grimaces,
I see thou'rt but a novice in it yet!--Ah, Belford, Belford, thou hast
a confounded parcel of briers and thorns to trample over barefoot, before
religion will illuminate these gloomy features!'

I give your Lordship this account, in answer to your desire to know, if I
think him the man he was.

In our conversation at dinner, he was balancing whether he should set out
the next morning, or the morning after.  But finding he had nothing to
do, and Col. Morden being in town, (which, however, I told him not of,) I
turned the scale; and he agreed upon setting out to-morrow morning; they
to see him embark; and I promised to accompany them for a morning's ride
(as they proposed their horses); but said, that I must return in the
afternoon.

With much reluctance they let me go to my evening's appointment: they
little thought with whom: for Mr. Lovelace had put it as a case of honour
to all of us, whether, as he had been told that Mr. Morden and Mr. James
Harlowe had thrown out menaces against him, he ought to leave the kingdom
till he had thrown himself in their way.

Mowbray gave his opinion, that he ought to leave it like a man of honour
as he was; and if he did not take those gentlemen to task for their
opprobrious speeches, that at least he should be seen by them in public
before he went away; else they might give themselves airs, as if he had
left the kingdom in fear of them.

To this he himself so much inclined, that it was with difficulty I
persuaded him, that, as they had neither of them proceeded to a direct
and formal challenge; as they knew he had not made himself difficult of
access; and as he had already done the family injury enough; and it was
Miss Harlowe's earnest desire, that he would be content with that; he had
no reason, from any point of honour, to delay his journey; especially as
he had so just a motive for his going, as the establishing of his health;
and as he might return the sooner, if he saw occasion for it.

I found the Colonel in a very solemn way.  We had a good deal of
discourse upon the subject of certain letters which had passed between us
in relation to Miss Harlowe's will, and to her family.  He has some
accounts to settle with his banker; which, he says, will be adjusted
to-morrow; and on Thursday he proposes to go down again, to take leave of
his friends; and then intends to set out directly for Italy.

I wish Mr. Lovelace could have been prevailed upon to take any other
tour, than that of France and Italy.  I did propose Madrid to him; but he
laughed at me, and told me, that the proposal was in character from a
mule; and from one who was become as grave as a Spaniard of the old cut,
at ninety.

I expressed to the Colonel my apprehensions, that his cousin's dying
injunctions would not have the force upon him that were to be wished.

'They have great force upon me, Mr. Belford,' said he; 'or one world
would not have held Mr. Lovelace and me thus long.  But my intention is
to go to Florence; and not to lay my bones there, as upon my cousin's
death I told you I thought to do; but to settle all my affairs in those
parts, and then to come over, and reside upon a little paternal estate in
Kent, which is strangely gone to ruin in my absence.  Indeed, were I to
meet Mr. Lovelace, either here or abroad, I might not be answerable for
the consequence.'

He would have engaged me for to-morrow.  But having promised to attend
Mr. Lovelace on his journey, as I have mentioned, I said, I was obliged
to go out of town, and was uncertain as to the time of my return in the
evening.  And so I am to see him on Thursday morning at my own lodgings.

I will do myself the honour to write again to your Lordship to-morrow
night.  Mean time, I am, my Lord,

Your Lordship's, &c.



LETTER LIII

MR. BELFORD, TO LORD M.
WEDN. NIGHT, OCT. 4.


MY LORD,

I am just returned from attending Mr. Lovelace as far as Gad's-Hill, near
Rochester.  He was exceeding gay all the way.  Mowbray and Tourville are
gone on with him.  They will see him embark, and under sail; and promise
to follow him in a month or two; for they say, there is no living without
him, now he is once more himself.

He and I parted with great and even solemn tokens of affection; but yet
not without gay intermixtures, as I will acquaint your Lordship.

Taking me aside, and clasping his arms about me, 'Adieu, dear Belford!'
said he: 'may you proceed in the course you have entered upon!--Whatever
airs I give myself, this charming creature has fast hold of me here--
[clapping his hand upon his heart]: and I must either appear what you see
me, or be what I so lately was--O the divine creature!' lifting up his
eyes----

'But if I live to come to England, and you remain fixed in your present
way, and can give me encouragement, I hope rather to follow your example,
than to ridicule you for it.  This will [for I had given him a copy of
it] I will make the companion of my solitary hours.  You have told me a
part of its melancholy contents; and that, and her posthumous letter,
shall be my study; and they will prepare me for being your disciple, if
you hold on.

'You, Jack, may marry,' continued he; 'and I have a wife in my eye for
you.--Only thou'rt such an awkward mortal:' [he saw me affected, and
thought to make me smile:] 'but we don't make ourselves, except it be
worse by our dress.  Thou art in mourning now, as well as I: but if ever
thy ridiculous turn lead thee again to be beau-brocade, I will bedizen
thee, as the girls say, on my return, to my own fancy, and according to
thy own natural appearance----Thou shalt doctor my soul, and I will
doctor thy body: thou shalt see what a clever fellow I will make of thee.

'As for me, I never will, I never can, marry--that I will not take a few
liberties, and that I will not try to start some of my former game, I
won't promise--habits are not so easily shaken off--but they shall be by
way of wearing.  So return and reform shall go together.

'And now, thou sorrowful monkey, what aileth thee?'  I do love him, my
Lord.

'Adieu!--And once more adieu!'--embracing me.  'And when thou thinkest
thou hast made thyself an interest out yonder (looking up) then put in
a word for thy Lovelace.'

Joining company, he recommended to me to write often; and promised to let
me hear quickly from him; and that he would write to your Lordship, and
to all his family round; for he said, that you had all been more kind to
him than he had deserved.

And so we parted.

I hope, my Lord, for all your noble family's sake, that we shall see him
soon return, and reform, as he promises.

I return your Lordship my humble thanks for the honour of your invitation
to M. Hall.  The first letter I receive from Mr. Lovelace shall give me
the opportunity of embracing it.  I am, my Lord,

Your most faithful and obedient servant,
J. BELFORD.



LETTER LIV

MR. BELFORD, TO LORD M.
THURSDAY MORNING, OCT. 5.


It may be some satisfaction to your Lordship, to have a brief account of
what has just now passed between Colonel Morden and me.

We had a good deal of discourse about the Harlowe family, and those parts
of the lady's will which still remain unexecuted; after which the Colonel
addressed himself to me in a manner which gave me some surprise.

He flattered himself, he said, from my present happy turn, and from my
good constitution, that I should live a great many years.  It was
therefore his request, that I would consent to be his executor; since it
was impossible for him to make a better choice, or pursue a better
example, than his cousin had set.

His heart, he said was in it: there were some things in his cousin's will
and his analogous: and he had named one person to me, with whom he was
sure I would not refuse to be joined: and to whom he intended to apply
for his consent, when he had obtained mine.*  [Intimating, as far as I
could gather, that it was Mr. Hickman, son of Sir Charles Hickman; to
whom I know your Lordship is not a stranger: for he said, Every one who
was dear to his beloved cousin, must be so to him: and he knew that the
gentleman who he had thoughts of, would have, besides my advice and
assistance, the advice of one of the most sensible ladies in England.]


* What is between crotchets, thus [ ], Mr. Belford omitted in the
transcription of this Letter to Miss Howe.


He took my hand, seeing me under some surprise: you must not hesitate,
much less deny me, Mr. Belford.  Indeed you must not.  Two things I will
assure you of: that I have, as I hope, made every thing so clear that you
cannot have any litigation: and that I have done so justly, and I hope it
will be thought so generously, by all my relations, that a mind like
your's will rather have pleasure than pain in the execution of this
trust.  And this is what I think every honest man, who hopes to find an
honest man for his executor, should do.

I told him, that I was greatly obliged to him for his good opinion of me:
that it was so much every man's duty to be an honest man, that it could
not be interpreted as vanity to say, that I had no doubt to be found so.
But if I accepted of this trust, it must be on condition--

I could name no condition, he said, interrupting me, which he would
refuse to comply with.

This condition, I told him, was, that as there was as great a probability
of his being my survivor, as I his, he would permit me to name him for
mine; and, in that case, a week should not pass before I made my will.

With all his heart, he said; and the readier, as he had no apprehensions
of suddenly dying; for what he had done and requested was really the
effect of the satisfaction he had taken in the part I had already acted
as his cousin's executor; and in my ability, he was pleased to add: as
well as in pursuance of his cousin's advice in the preamble of her will;
to wit; 'That this was a work which should be set about in full health,
both of body and mind.'

I told him, that I was pleased to hear him say that he was not in any
apprehension of suddenly dying; as this gave me assurance that he had
laid aside all thoughts of acting contrary to the dying request of his
beloved cousin.

Does it argue, said he, smiling, that if I were to pursue a vengeance so
justifiable in my own opinion, I must be in apprehension of falling by
Mr. Lovelace's hand?--I will assure you, that I have no fears of that
sort--but I know this is an ungrateful subject to you.  Mr. Lovelace is
your friend; and I will allow, that a good man may have a friendship for
a bad one, so far as to wish him well, without countenancing him in his
evil.

I will assure you, added he, that I have not yet made any resolutions
either way.  I have told you what force my cousin's repeated requests
have with me.  Hitherto they have with-held me--But let us quit this
subject.

This, Sir [giving me a sealed-up parcel] is my will.  It is witnessed.
I made no doubt of prevailing upon you to do me the requested favour.  I
have a duplicate to leave with the other gentleman; and an attested copy,
which I shall deposit at my banker's.  At my return, which will be in six
or eight months at farthest, I will allow you to make an exchange of
your's, if you will have it so.  I have only now to take leave of my
relations in the country.  And so God protect you, Mr. Belford!  You will
soon hear of me again.

He then very solemnly embraced me, as I did him: and we parted.

I heartily congratulate your Lordship on the narrow escape each gentleman
has had from the other: for I apprehend that they could not have met
without fatal consequences.

Time, I hope, which subdues all things, will subdue their resentments.  I
am, my Lord,

Your Lordship's most faithful and obedient servant,
J. BELFORD.


Several other letters passed between Miss Howe and Mr. Belford, relating
      to the disposition of the papers and letters; to the poor's fund;
      and to other articles of the Lady's will: wherein the method of
      proceeding in each case was adjusted.  After which the papers were
      returned to Mr. Belford, that he might order the two directed
      copies of them to be taken.

In one of these letters Mr. Belford requests Miss Howe to give the
      character of the friend she so dearly loved: 'A task, he imagines,
      that will be as agreeable to herself, as worthy of her pen.'

'I am more especially curious to know,' says he, 'what was that
      particular disposition of her time, which I find mentioned in a
      letter which I have just dipt into, where her sister is enviously
      reproaching her on that score.*  This information may
      enable me,' says he, 'to account for what has often surprised me:
      how, at so tender an age, this admirable lady became mistress of
      such extraordinary and such various qualifications.'


* See Vol. I. Letter XLII.



LETTER LV

MISS HOWE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY, OCT. 12.


SIR,

I am incapable of doing justice to the character of my beloved friend;
and that not only from want of talents, but from grief; which, I think,
rather increases than diminishes by time; and which will not let me sit
down to a task that requires so much thought, and a greater degree of
accuracy than I ever believed myself mistress of.  And yet I so well
approve of your motion, that I will throw into your hands a few
materials, that may serve by way of supplement, as I may say, to those
you will be able to collect from the papers themselves; from Col.
Morden's letters to you, particularly that of Sept. 23;* and from the
letters of the detestable wretch himself, who, I find, has done her
justice, although to his own condemnation: all these together will enable
you, who seem to be so great an admirer of her virtues, to perform the
task; and, I think, better than any person I know.  But I make it my
request, that if you do any thing in this way, you will let me see it.
If I find it not to my mind, I will add or diminish, as justice shall
require.  She was a wonderful creature from her infancy: but I suppose
you intend to give a character of her at those years when she was
qualified to be an example to other young ladies, rather than a history
of her life.


*See Letter XLV. of this volume.


Perhaps, nevertheless, you will choose to give a description of her
person: and as you knew not the dear creature when her heart was easy,
I will tell you what yet, in part, you can confirm:

That her shape was so fine, her proportion so exact, her features so
regular, her complexion so lovely, and her whole person and manner so
distinguishedly charming, that she could not move without being admired
and followed by the eyes of every one, though strangers, who never saw
her before.  Col. Morden's letter, above referred to, will confirm this.

In her dress she was elegant beyond imitation; and generally led the
fashion to all the ladies round her, without seeming to intend it, and
without being proud of doing so.*


* See Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.


She was rather tall than of a middling stature; and had a dignity in her
aspect and air, that bespoke the mind that animated every feature.

This native dignity, as I may call it, induced some superficial persons,
who knew not how to account for the reverence which involuntarily filled
their hearts on her appearance, to impute pride to her.  But these were
such as knew that they should have been proud of any one of her
perfections: judging therefore by their own narrowness, they thought it
impossible that the lady who possessed so many, should not think herself
superior to them all.  Indeed, I have heard her noble aspect found fault
with, as indicating pride and superiority.  But people awed and
controuled, though but by their own consciousness of inferiority, will
find fault, right or wrong, with those, whose rectitude of mind and
manners their own culpable hearts give them to be afraid.  But, in the
bad sense of the word, Miss Clarissa Harlowe knew not what pride was.

You may, if you touch upon this subject, throw in these sentences of
her's, spoken at different times, and on different occasions:

'Persons of accidental or shadowy merit may be proud: but inborn worth
must be always as much above conceit as arrogance.'

'Who can be better, or more worthy, than they should be?  And, who shall
be proud of talents they give not to themselves?'

'The darkest and most contemptible ignorance is that of not knowing one's
self; and that all we have, and all we excel in, is the gift of God.'

'All human excellence is but comparative--there are persons who excel us,
as much as we fancy we excel the meanest.'

'In the general scale of beings, the lowest is as useful, and as much a
link of the great chain, as the highest.'

'The grace that makes every other grace amiable, is HUMILITY.'

'There is but one pride pardonable; that of being above doing a base or
dishonourable action.'

Such were the sentiments by which this admirable young lady endeavoured
to conduct herself, and to regulate her conduct to others.

And, in truth, never were affability and complacency (graciousness, some
have called it) more eminent in any person, man or woman, than in her, to
those who put it in her power to oblige them: insomuch that the
benefitted has sometimes not known which to prefer--the grace bestowed,
or the manner in which it was conferred.

It has been observed, that what was said of Henry IV. of France, might be
said of her manner of refusing a request: That she generally sent from
her presence the person refused nearly as well satisfied as if she had
granted it.

Then she had such a sacred regard to truth.--You cannot, Sir, expatiate
too much upon this topic.  I dare say, that in all her letters, in all
the letters of the wretch, her veracity will not once be found
impeachable, although her calamities were so heavy, the horrid man's
wiles so subtle, and her struggles to free herself from them so active.

Her charity was so great, that she always chose to defend or acquit where
the fault was not so flagrant that it became a piece of justice to
condemn it; and was always an advocate for an absent person, whose
discretion was called in question, without having given manifest proofs
of indiscretion.

Once I remember, in a large circle of ladies, every one of which [I among
the rest] having censured a generally-reported indiscretion in a young
lady--Come, my Miss Howe, said she, [for we had agreed to take each other
to task when either thought the other gave occasion for it; and when by
blaming each other we intended a general reprehension, which, as she used
to say, it would appear arrogant or assuming to level more properly,] let
me be Miss Fanny Darlington.  Then removing out of the circle, and
standing up, Here I stand, unworthy of a seat with the rest of the
company, till I have cleared myself.  And now, suppose me to be her, let
me hear you charge, and do you hear what the poor culprit can say to it
in her own defence.  And then answering the conjectural and unproved
circumstances, by circumstances as fairly to be supposed favourable, she
brought off triumphantly the censured lady; and so much to every one's
satisfaction, that she was led to her chair, and voted a double rank in
the circle, as the reinstated Miss Fanny Darlington, and as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe.

Very few persons, she used to say, would be condemned, or even accused,
in the circles of ladies, were they present; it is generous, therefore,
nay, it is but just, said she, to take the part of the absent, if not
flagrantly culpable.

But though wisdom was her birthright, as I may say, yet she had not lived
years enow to pretend to so much experience as to exempt her from the
necessity of sometimes altering her opinion both of persons and things;
but, when she found herself obliged to do this, she took care that the
particular instance of mistaken worthiness in the person should not
narrow or contract her almost universal charity into general doubt or
jealousy.  An instance of what I mean occurs to my memory.

Being upbraided, by a severe censure, with a person's proving base, whom
she had frequently defended, and by whose baseness my beloved friend was
a sufferer; 'You, Madam,' said she, 'had more penetration than such a
young creature as I can pretend to have.  But although human depravity
may, I doubt, oftener justify those who judge harshly, than human
rectitude can those who judge favourably, yet will I not part with my
charity.  Nevertheless, for the future, I will endeavour, in cases where
the judgment of my elders is against me, to make mine consistent with
caution and prudence.'

Indeed, when she was convinced of any error or mistake, (however
seemingly derogatory to her judgment and sagacity,) no one was ever so
acknowledging, so ingenuous, as she.  'It was a merit,' she used to say,
'next in degree to that of having avoided error, frankly to own an error.
And that the offering at an excuse in a blameable manner, was the
undoubted mark of a disingenuous, if not of a perverse mind.'

But I ought to add, on this head, [of her great charity where character
was concerned, and where there was room for charity,] that she was always
deservedly severe in her reprehensions of a wilful and studied vileness.
How could she then forgive the wretch by whose premeditated villany she
was entangled?

You must every where insist upon it, that had it not been for the stupid
persecutions of her relations, she never would have been in the power of
that horrid Lovelace.  And yet, on several occasions, she acknowledged
frankly, that were person, and address, and alliance, to be allowedly the
principal attractives in the choice of a lover, it would not have been
difficult for her eye to mislead her heart.

When she was last with me, (three happy weeks together!) in every visit
the wretch made her, he left her more dissatisfied with him than in the
former.  And yet his behaviour before her was too specious to have been
very exceptionable to a woman who had a less share of that charming
delicacy, and of that penetration, which so much distinguished her.

In obedience to the commands of her gloomy father, on his allowing her to
be my guest, for that last time, [as it most unhappily proved!] she never
would see him out of my company; and would often say, when he was gone,
'O my Nancy! this is not THE man!'--At other times, 'Gay, giddy creature!
he has always something to be forgiven for!'--At others, 'This man will
much sooner excite one's fears than attract one's love.'  And then would
she repeat, 'This is not THE man.  All that the world says of him cannot
be untrue.  But what title have I to call him to account, who intend not
to have him?'

In short had she been left to a judgment and discretion, which nobody
ever questioned who had either, she would soon have discovered enough of
him to cause her to discard him for ever.

She was an admirable mistress of all the graces of elocution.  The hand
she wrote, for the neat and free cut of her letters, (like her mind,
solid, and above all flourish,) for its fairness, evenness, and
swiftness, distinguished her as much as the correctness of her
orthography, and even punctuation, from the generality of her own sex;
and left her none, among the most accurate of the other, who excelled
her.

And here you may, if you please, take occasion to throw in one hint for
the benefit of such of our sex as are too careless in their orthography,
[a consciousness of a defect which generally keeps them from writing.]--
She was used to say, 'It was a proof that a woman understood the
derivation as well as sense of the words she used, and that she stopt not
at sound, when she spelt accurately.'

On this head you may take notice, that it was always matter of surprise
to her, that the sex are generally so averse as they are to writing;
since the pen, next to the needle, of all employments, is the most
proper, and best adapted to their geniuses; and this, as well for
improvement as amusement: 'Who sees not,' would she say, 'that those
women who take delight in writing excel the men in all the graces of the
familiar style?  The gentleness of their minds, the delicacy of their
sentiments, (improved by the manner of their education, and the
liveliness of their imaginations, qualify them to a high degree of
preference for this employment;) while men of learning, as they are
called, (that is to say, of mere learning,) aiming to get above that
natural ease and freedom which distinguish this, (and indeed every other
kind of writing,) when they think they have best succeeded, are got
above, or rather beneath, all natural beauty.'

Then, stiffened and starched [let me add] into dry and indelectable
affectation, one sort of these scholars assume a style as rough as
frequently are their manners; they spangle over their productions with
metaphors; they tumble into bombast: the sublime, with them, lying in
words, and not in sentiment, they fancy themselves most exalted when
least understood; and down they sit, fully satisfied with their own
performances, and call them MASCULINE. While a second sort, aiming at
wit, that wicked misleader, forfeit all title to judgment.  And a third,
sinking into the classical pits, there poke and scramble about, never
seeking to show genius of their own; all their lives spent in
common-place quotation; fit only to write notes and comments upon other
people's texts; all their pride, that they know those beauties of two
thousand years old in another tongue, which they can only admire, but not
imitate, in their own.

And these, truly, must be learned men, and despisers of our insipid sex!

But I need not mention the exceptions which my beloved friend always made
[and to which I subscribe] in favour of men of sound learning, true
taste, and extensive abilities; nor, in particular, her respect even to
reverence for gentlemen of the cloath; which, I dare say, will appear in
every paragraph of her letters wherever any of the clergy are mentioned.
Indeed the pious Dr. Lewen, the worthy Dr. Blome, the ingenious Mr.
Arnold, and Mr. Tompkins, gentlemen whom she names, in one article of her
will, as learned divines with whom she held an early correspondence, well
deserved her respect; since to their conversation and correspondence she
owed many of her valuable acquirements.

Nor were the little slights she would now-and-then (following, as I must
own, my lead) put upon such mere scholars [and her stupid and pedantic
brother was one of those who deserved those slights] as despised not only
our sex, but all such as had not had their opportunities of being
acquainted with the parts of speech, [I cannot speak low enough of such,]
and with the dead languages, owing to that contempt which some affect for
what they have not been able to master; for she had an admirable facility
for learning languages, and read with great ease both in Italian and
French.  She had begun to apply herself to Latin; and having such a
critical knowledge of her own tongue, and such a foundation from the two
others, would soon have made herself an adept in it.

But, notwithstanding all her acquirements, she was an excellent ECONOMIST
and HOUSEWIFE.  And those qualifications, you must take notice, she was
particularly fond of inculcating upon all her reading and writing
companions of the sex: for it was a maxim with her, 'That a woman who
neglects the useful and the elegant, which distinguish her own sex, for
the sake of obtaining the learning which is supposed more peculiar to the
other, incurs more contempt by what she foregoes, than she gains credit
by what she acquires.'

'All that a woman can learn,' she used to say, [expatiating on this
maxim,] 'above the useful knowledge proper to her sex, let her learn.
This will show that she is a good housewife of her time, and that she has
not a narrow or confined genius.  But then let her not give up for these
those more necessary, and, therefore, not meaner, employments, which will
qualify her to be a good mistress of a family, a good wife, and a good
mother; for what can be more disgraceful to a woman than either, through
negligence of dress, to be found a learned slattern; or, through
ignorance of household-management, to be known to be a stranger to
domestic economy?'

She would have it indeed, sometimes, from the frequent ill use learned
women make of that respectable acquirement, that it was no great matter
whether the sex aimed at any thing but excelling in the knowledge of the
beauties and graces of their mother-tongue; and once she said, that this
was field enough for a woman; and an ampler was but endangering her
family usefulness.  But I, who think our sex inferior in nothing to the
other, but in want of opportunities, of which the narrow-minded mortals
industriously seek to deprive us, lest we should surpass them as much in
what they chiefly value themselves upon, as we do in all the graces of a
fine imagination, could never agree with her in that.  And yet I was
entirely of her opinion, that those women, who were solicitous to obtain
that knowledge of learning which they supposed would add to their
significance in sensible company, and in their attainment of it imagined
themselves above all domestic usefulness, deservedly incurred the
contempt which they hardly ever failed to meet with.

Perhaps you will not think it amiss further to observe on this head, as
it will now show that precept and example always went hand and hand with
her, that her dairy at her grandfather's was the delight of every one who
saw it; and she of all who saw her in it.

Her grandfather, in honour of her dexterity and of her skill in all the
parts of the dairy management, as well as of the elegance of the offices
allotted for that use, would have his seat, before known by the name of
The Grove, to be called The Dairy-house.*  She had an easy, convenient,
and graceful habit made on purpose, which she put on when she employed
herself in these works; and it was noted of her, that in the same hour
that she appeared to be a most elegant dairy-maid, she was, when called
to a change of dress, the finest lady that ever graced a circle.


* See Vol. I. Letter II.


Her grandfather, father, mother, uncles, aunt, and even her brother and
sister, made her frequent visits there, and were delighted with her
silent ease and unaffected behaviour in her works; for she always, out of
modesty, chose rather the operative than the directive part, that she
might not discourage the servant whose proper business it was.

Each was fond of a regale from her hands in her Dairy-house.  Her mother
and aunt Hervey generally admired her in silence, that they might not
give uneasiness to her sister; a spiteful, perverse, unimitating thing,
who usually looked upon her all the time with speechless envy.
Now-and-then, however, the pouting creature would suffer extorted and
sparing praise to burst open her lips; though looking at the same time
like Saul meditating the pointed javelin at the heart of David, the glory
of his kingdom.  And now, methinks, I see my angel-friend, (too superior
to take notice of her gloom,) courting her acceptance of the milk-white
curd, from hands more pure than that.

Her skill and dexterity in every branch of family management seem to be
the only excellence of her innumerable ones which she owed to her family;
whose narrowness, immensely rich, and immensely carking, put them upon
indulging her in the turn she took to this part of knowledge; while her
elder sister affected dress without being graceful in it; and the fine
lady, which she could never be; and which her sister was without studying
for it, or seeming to know she was so.

It was usual with the one sister, when company was expected, to be half
the morning dressing; while the other would give directions for the whole
business and entertainment of the day; and then go up to her
dressing-room, and, before she could well be missed, [having all her
things in admirable order,] come down fit to receive company, and with
all that graceful ease and tranquillity as if she had nothing else to
think of.

Long after her, [hours, perhaps, of previous preparation having passed,]
down would come rustling and bustling the tawdry and awkward Bella,
disordering more her native disorderliness at the sight of her serene
sister, by her sullen envy, to see herself so much surpassed with such
little pains, and in a sixth part of the time.

Yet was this admirable creature mistress of all these domestic
qualifications, without the least intermixture of narrowness.  She knew
how to distinguish between frugality, a necessary virtue, and
niggardliness, an odious vice; and used to say, 'That to define
generosity, it must be called the happy medium betwixt parsimony and
profusion.'

She was the most graceful reader I ever knew.  She added, by her
melodious voice, graces to those she found in the parts of books she read
out to her friends; and gave grace and significance to others where they
were not.  She had no tone, no whine.  Her accent was always admirably
placed.  The emphasis she always forcibly laid as the subject required.
No buskin elevation, no tragedy pomp, could mislead her; and yet poetry
was poetry indeed, when she read it.

But if her voice was melodious when she read, it was all harmony when she
sung.  And the delight she gave by that, and by her skill and great
compass, was heightened by the ease and gracefulness of her air and
manner, and by the alacrity with which she obliged.

Nevertheless she generally chose rather to hear others sing or play, than
either to play or sing herself.

She delighted to give praise where deserved; yet she always bestowed it
in such a manner as gave not the least suspicion that she laid out for a
return of it to herself, though so universally allowed to be her due.

She had a talent of saying uncommon things in such an easy manner that
every body thought they could have said the same; and which yet required
both genius and observation to say them.

Even severe things appeared gentle, though they lost not their force,
from the sweetness of her air and utterance, and the apparent benevolence
of her purpose.

We form the truest judgment of persons by their behaviour on the most
familiar occasions.  I will give an instance or two of the correction she
favoured me with on such a one.

When very young, I was guilty of the fault of those who want to be
courted to sing.  She cured me of it, at the first of our happy intimacy,
by her own example; and by the following correctives, occasionally, yet
privately enforced:

'Well, my dear, shall we take you at your word?  Shall we suppose, that
you sing but indifferently?  Is not, however, the act of obliging, (the
company so worthy!) preferable to the talent of singing?  And shall not
young ladies endeavour to make up for their defects in one part of
education, by their excellence in another?'

Again, 'You must convince us, by attempting to sing, that you cannot
sing; and then we will rid you, not only of present, but of future
importunity.'--An indulgence, however, let me add, that but tolerable
singers do not always wish to meet with.

Again, 'I know you will favour us by and by; and what do you by your
excuses but raise our expectations, and enhance your own difficulties?'

At another time, 'Has not this accomplishment been a part of your
education, my Nancy?  How, then, for your own honour, can we allow of
your excuses?'

And I once pleading a cold, the usual pretence of those who love to be
entreated--'Sing, however, my dear, as well as you can.  The greater the
difficulty to you, the higher the compliment to the company.  Do you
think you are among those who know not how to make allowances? you should
sing, my love, lest there should be any body present who may think your
excuses owing to affectation.'

At another time, when I had truly observed that a young lady present sung
better than I; and that, therefore, I chose not to sing before that lady
--'Fie, said she, (drawing me on one side,) is not this pride, my Nancy?
Does it not look as if your principal motive to oblige was to obtain
applause?  A generous mind will not scruple to give advantage to a person
of merit, though not always to her own advantage.  And yet she will have
a high merit in doing that.  Supposing this excellent person absent, who,
my dear, if your example spread, shall sing after you?  You know every
one else must be but as a foil to you.  Indeed I must have you as much
superior to other ladies in these smaller points, as you are in greater.'
So she was pleased to say to shame me.  She was so much above reserve as
disguise.  So communicative that no young lady could be in her company
half an hour, and not carry away instruction with her, whatever was the
topic.  Yet all sweetly insinuated; nothing given with the air of
prescription; so that while she seemed to ask a question for
information-sake, she dropt in the needful instruction, and left the
instructed unable to decide whether the thought (which being started,
she, the instructed, could improve) came primarily from herself, or from
the sweet instructress.

She had a pretty hand at drawing, which she obtained with very little
instruction.  Her time was too much taken up to allow, though to so fine
an art, the attention which was necessary to make her greatly excel in
it: and she used to say, 'That she was afraid of aiming at too many
things, for fear she should not be tolerable at any thing.'

For her years, and her opportunities, she was an extraordinary judge of
painting.  In this, as in every thing else, nature was her art, her art
was nature.  She even prettily performed in it.  Her grandfather, for
this reason, bequeathed to her all the family pictures.  Charming was her
fancy: alike sweet and easy was every touch of her pencil and her pen.
Yet her judgment exceeded her performance.  She did not practise enough
to excel in the executive part.  She could not in every thing excel.
But, upon the whole, she knew what every subject required according to
the nature of it; in other words, was an absolute mistress of the
should-be.

To give a familiar instance for the sake of young ladies; she (untaught)
observed when but a child, that the sun, moon, and stars, never appeared
at once; and were therefore never to be in one piece; that bears, tigers,
lions, were not natives of an English climate, and should not therefore
have place in an English landscape; that these ravagers of the forest
consorted not with lambs, kids, or fawns; nor kites, hawks, and vultures,
with doves, partridges, or pheasants.

And, alas! she knew, before she was nineteen years of age, by fatal
experience she knew! that all these beasts and birds of prey were
outdone, in treacherous cruelty, by MAN!  Vile, barbarous, plotting,
destructive man! who, infinitely less excusable than those, destroys,
through wantonness and sport, what those only destroy through hunger and
necessity!

The mere pretenders to those branches of science which she aimed at
acquiring she knew how to detect; and from all nature.  Propriety,
another word for nature, was (as I have hinted) her law, as it is the
foundation of all true judgment.  But, nevertheless, she was always
uneasy, if what she said exposed those pretenders to knowledge, even in
their absence, to the ridicule of lively spirits.

Let the modern ladies, who have not any one of her excellent qualities;
whose whole time, in the short days they generally make, and in the
inverted night and day, where they make them longer, is wholly spent in
dress, visits, cards, plays, operas, and musical entertainments, wonder
at what I have written, and shall further write; and let them look upon
it as an incredible thing, that when, at a mature age, they cannot boast
one of her perfections, there should have been a lady so young, who had
so many.

These must be such as know not how she employed her time; and cannot form
the least idea of what may be done in those hours in which they lie
enveloped with the shades of death, as she used to call sleep.

But before I come to mention the distribution she usually made of her
time, let me say a few words upon another subject, in which she excelled
all the young ladies I ever knew.

This was her skill in almost all sorts of fine needleworks; of which,
however, I shall say the less, since possibly you will find it mentioned
in some of the letters.

That piece which she bequeaths to her cousin Morden is indeed a capital
piece; a performance so admirable, that that gentleman's father, who
resided chiefly abroad, (was, as is mentioned in her will,) very desirous
to obtain it, in order to carry it to Italy with him, to show the curious
of other countries, (as he used to say,) for the honour of his own, that
the cloistered confinement was not necessary to make English women excel
in any of those fine arts upon which nuns and recluses value themselves.

Her quickness at these sort of works was astonishing; and a great
encouragement to herself to prosecute them.

Mr. Morden's father would have been continually making her presents,
would she have permitted him to do so; and he used to call them, and so
did her grandfather, tributes due to a merit so sovereign, and not
presents.

As to her diversions, the accomplishments and acquirements she was
mistress of will show what they must have been.  She was far from being
fond of cards, the fashionable foible of modern ladies; nor, as will be
easily perceived from what I have said, and more from what I shall
further say, had she much time for play.  She never therefore promoted
their being called for; and often insensibly diverted the company from
them, by starting some entertaining subject, when she could do it without
incurring the imputation of particularity.

Indeed very few of her intimates would propose cards, if they could
engage her to read, to talk, to touch the keys, or to sing, when any new
book, or new piece of music, came down.  But when company was so
numerous, that conversation could not take that agreeable turn which it
oftenest does among four or five friends of like years and inclinations,
and it became in a manner necessary to detach off some of it, to make the
rest better company, she would not refuse to play, if, upon casting in,
it fell to her lot.  And then she showed that her disrelish to cards was
the effect of choice only; and that she was an easy mistress of every
genteel game played with them.  But then she always declared against
playing high.  'Except for trifles,' she used to say, 'she would not
submit to chance what she was already sure of.'

At other times, 'she should make her friends a very ill compliment,' she
said, 'if she supposed they would wish to be possessed of what of right
belonged to her; and she should be very unworthy, if she desired to make
herself a title to what was theirs.'

'High gaming, in short,' she used to say, 'was a sordid vice; an
immorality; the child of avarice; and a direct breach of that
commandment, which forbids us to covet what is our neighbour's.'

She was exceedingly charitable; the only one of her family that knew the
meaning of the word; and this with regard both to the souls and the
bodies of those who were the well-chosen objects of her benevolence.  She
kept a list of these, whom she used to call her Poor, entering one upon
it as another was provided for, by death, or any other way; but always
made a reserve, nevertheless, for unforeseen cases, and for accidental
distresses.  And it must be owned, that in the prudent distribution of
them, she had neither example nor equal.

The aged, the blind, the lame, the widow, the orphan, the unsuccessful
industrious, were particularly the objects of it; and the contributing
to the schooling of some, to the putting out to trades and husbandry the
children of others of the labouring or needy poor, and setting them
forward at the expiration of their servitude, were her great delights; as
was the giving good books to others; and, when she had opportunity, the
instructing the poorer sort of her honest neighbours, and father's
tenants, in the use of them.  'That charity,' she used to say, 'which
provides for the morals, as well as for the bodily wants of the poor,
gives a double benefit to the public, as it adds to the number of the
hopeful what it takes from that of the profligate.  And can there be, in
the eyes of that God, she was wont to say, who requires nothing so much
from us as acts of beneficence to one another, a charity more worthy?'

Her uncle Antony, when he came to settle in England with his vast fortune
obtained in the Indies, used to say, 'This girl by her charities will
bring down a blessing upon us all.'  And it must be owned they trusted
pretty much to this presumption.

But I need not say more on this head: nor perhaps was it necessary to say
so much; since the charitable bequests in her will sufficiently set forth
her excellence in this branch of duty.

She was extremely moderate in her diet.  'Quantity in food,' she used to
say, 'was more to be regarded than quality; that a full meal was the
great enemy both to study and industry: that a well-built house required
but little repairs.'

But this moderation in her diet, she enjoyed, with a delicate frame of
body, a fine state of health; was always serene, lively; cheerful, of
course.  And I never knew but of one illness she had; and that was by a
violent cold caught in an open chaise, by a sudden storm of hail and
rain, in a place where was no shelter; and which threw her into a fever,
attended with dangerous symptoms, that no doubt were lightened by her
temperance; but which gave her friends, who then knew her value, infinite
apprehensions for her.*


* In her common-place book she has the following note upon the
recollection of this illness in the time of her distress:

'In a dangerous illness, with which I was visited a few years before I
had the unhappiness to know this ungrateful man! [would to Heaven I had
died in it!] my bed was surrounded by my dear relations--father, mother,
brother, sister, my two uncles, weeping, kneeling, round me, then put up
their vows to Heaven for my recovery; and I, fearing that I should drag
down with me to my grave one or other of my sorrowing friends, wished and
prayed to recover for their sakes.--Alas! how shall parents in such cases
know what to wish for!  How happy for them, and for me, had I then been
denied to their prayers!  But now I am eased of that care.  All those
dear relations are living still--but not one of them (such as they think,
has been the heinousness of my error!) but, far from being grieved, would
rejoice to hear of my death.'


In all her readings, and her conversations upon them, she was fonder of
finding beauties than blemishes, and chose to applaud but authors and
books, where she could find the least room for it.  Yet she used to
lament that certain writers of the first class, who were capable of
exalting virtue, and of putting vice out of countenance, too generally
employed themselves in works of imagination only, upon subjects merely
speculative, disinteresting and unedifying, from which no useful moral or
example could be drawn.

But she was a severe censurer of pieces of a light or indecent turn,
which had a tendency to corrupt the morals of youth, to convey polluted
images, or to wound religion, whether in itself, or through the sides of
its professors, and this, whoever were the authors, and how admirable
soever the execution.  She often pitied the celebrated Dr. Swift for so
employing his admirable pen, that a pure eye was afraid of looking into
his works, and a pure ear of hearing any thing quoted from them.  'Such
authors,' she used to say, 'were not honest to their own talents, nor
grateful to the God who gave them.'  Nor would she, on these occasions,
admit their beauties as a palliation; on the contrary, she held it as an
aggravation of their crime, that they who are so capable of mending the
heart, should in any places show a corrupt one in themselves; which must
weaken the influences of their good works; and pull down with one hand
what they build up with the other.

All she said and all she did was accompanied with a natural ease and
dignity, which set her above affectation, or the suspicion of it;
insomuch that that degrading fault, so generally imputed to a learned
woman, was never laid to her charge.  For, with all her excellencies, she
was forwarder to hear than speak; and hence, no doubt, derived no small
part of her improvement.

Although she was well read in the English, French, and Italian poets, and
had read the best translations of the Latin classics; yet seldom did she
quote or repeat from them, either in her letters or conversation, though
exceedingly happy in a tenacious memory; principally through modesty, and
to avoid the imputation of that affectation which I have just mentioned.

Mr. Wyerley once said of her, she had such a fund of knowledge of her
own, and made naturally such fine observations upon persons and things,
being capable, by the EGG, [that was his familiar expression,] of judging
of the bird, that she had seldom either room or necessity for foreign
assistances.

But it was plain, from her whole conduct and behaviour, that she had not
so good an opinion of herself, however deserved; since, whenever she was
urged to give her sentiments on any subject, although all she thought fit
to say was clear an intelligible, yet she seemed in haste to have done
speaking.  Her reason for it, I know, was twofold; that she might not
lose the benefit of other people's sentiments, by engrossing the
conversation; and lest, as were her words, she should be praised into
loquaciousness, and so forfeit the good opinion which a person always
maintains with her friends, who knows when she has said enough.--It was,
finally, a rule with her, 'to leave her hearers wishing her to say more,
rather than to give them cause to show, by their inattention, an
uneasiness that she had said so much.'--

You are curious to know the particular distribution of her time; which
you suppose will help you to account for what you own yourself surprised
at; to wit, how so young a lady could make herself mistress of so many
accomplishments.

I will premise, that she was from infancy inured to rise early in a
morning, by an excellent, and, as I may say, a learned woman, Mrs.
Norton, to whose care, wisdom, and example, she was beholden for the
ground-work of her taste and acquirements, which meeting with such
assistances from the divines I have named, and with such a genius, made
it the less wonder that she surpassed most of her age and sex.

Her sex, did I say?  What honour to the other does this imply!  When one
might challenge the proudest pedant of them all, to say he has been
disciplined into greater improvement, than she had made from the mere
force of genius and application.  But it is demonstrable to all who know
how to make observations on their acquaintance of both sexes, arrogant as
some are of their superficialities, that a lady at eighteen, take the
world through, is more prudent and conversable than a man at twenty-five.
I can prove this by nineteen instances out of twenty in my own knowledge.
Yet how do these poor boasters value themselves upon the advantages their
education gives them!  Who has not seen some one of them, just come from
the university, disdainfully smile at a mistaken or ill-pronounced word
from a lady, when her sense has been clear, and her sentiments just; and
when he could not himself utter a single sentence fit to be repeated, but
what he had borrowed from the authors he had been obliged to study, as a
painful exercise to slow and creeping parts?  But how I digress:

This excellent young lady used to say, 'it was incredible to think what
might be done by early rising, and by long days well filled up.'

It may be added, that she had calculated according to the practice of too
many, she had actually lived more years at sixteen, than they had at
twenty-six.

She was of opinion, 'that no one could spend their time properly, who did
not live by some rule: who did not appropriate the hours, as nearly as
might be, to particular purposes and employments.'

In conformity to this self-set lesson, the usual distribution of the
twenty-four hours, when left to her own choice, were as follows:


      For REST she allotted SIX hours only.

She thought herself not so well, and so clear in her intellects, [so much
alive, she used to say,] if she exceeded this proportion.  If she slept
not, she chose to rise sooner.  And in winter had her fire laid, and a
taper ready burning to light it; not loving to give trouble to the
servants, 'whose harder work, and later hours of going to bed,' she used
to say, 'required consideration.'

I have blamed her for her greater regard to them than to herself.  But
this was her answer; 'I have my choice, who can wish for more?  Why
should I oppress others, to gratify myself?  You see what free-will
enables one to do; while imposition would make a light burden heavy.'


      Her first THREE morning hours

were generally passed in her study, and in her closet duties: and were
occasionally augmented by those she saved from rest: and in these passed
her epistolary amusements.

      Two hours she generally allotted to domestic management.

These, at different times of the day, as occasions required; all the
housekeeper's bills, in ease of her mother, passing through her hands.
For she was a perfect mistress of the four principal rules of arithmetic.

      FIVE hours to her needle, drawings, music, &c.

In these she included the assistance and inspection she gave to her own
servants, and to her sister's servants, in the needle-works required for
the family: for her sister, as I have above hinted, is a MODERN.  In
these she also included Dr. Lewen's conversation-visits; with whom
likewise she held a correspondence by letters.  That reverend gentleman
delighted himself and her twice or thrice a week, if his health
permitted, with these visits: and she always preferred his company to any
other engagement.

      Two hours she allotted to her two first meals.

But if conversation, or the desire of friends, or the falling in of
company or guests, required it to be otherwise, she never scrupled to
oblige; and would on such occasions borrow, as she called it, from other
distributions. And as she found it very hard not to exceed in this
appropriation, she put down

      ONE hour more to dinner-time conversation,

to be added or subtracted, as occasions offered, or the desire of her
friends required: and yet found it difficult, as she often said, to keep
this account even; especially if Dr. Lewen obliged them with his company
at their table; which, however he seldom did; for, being a
valetudinarian, and in a regimen, he generally made his visits in the
afternoon.

      ONE hour to visits to the neighbouring poor;

to a select number of whom, and to their children, she used to give brief
instructions, and good books; and as this happened not every day, and
seldom above twice a-week, she had two or three hours at a time to bestow
in this benevolent employment.

      The remaining FOUR hours

were occasionally allotted to supper, to conversation, or to reading
after supper to the family.  This allotment she called her fund, upon
which she used to draw, to satisfy her other debits; and in this she
included visits received and returned, shows, spectacles, &c. which, in a
country life, not occurring every day, she used to think a great
allowance, no less than two days in six, for amusements only; and she was
wont to say, that it was hard if she could not steal time out of this
fund, for an excursion of even two or three days in a month.

If it be said, that her relations, or the young neighbouring ladies, had
but little of her time, it will be considered, that besides these four
hours in the twenty-four, great part of the time she was employed in her
needle-works she used to converse as she worked; and it was a custom she
had introduced among her acquaintance, that the young ladies in their
visits used frequently, in a neighbourly way, (in the winter evenings
especially,) to bring their work with them; and one of half a dozen of her
select acquaintance used by turns to read to the rest as they were at
work.

This was her usual method, when at her own command, for six days in the
week.


      THE SEVENTH DAY

she kept as it ought to be kept; and as some part of it was frequently
employed in works of mercy, the hour she allotted to visiting the
neighbouring poor was occasionally supplied from this day, and added to
her fund.

But I must observe, that when in her grandfather's lifetime she was three
or four weeks at a time his housekeeper or guest, as also at either of
her uncles, her usual distribution of time was varied; but still she had
an eye to it as nearly as circumstances would admit.

When I had the happiness of having her for my guest, for a fortnight or
so, she likewise dispensed with her rules in mere indulgence to my
foibles, and idler habits; for I also, (though I had the benefit of an
example I so much admired) am too much of a modern.  Yet, as to morning
risings, I had corrected myself by such a precedent, in the summer-time;
and can witness to the benefit I found by it in my health: as also to the
many useful things I was enabled, by that means, with ease and pleasure,
to perform.  And in her account-book I have found this memorandum, since
her ever-to-be-lamented death:--'From such a day, to such a day, all
holidays, at my dear Miss Howe's.'--At her return--'Account resumed, such
a day,' naming it; and then she proceeded regularly, as before.

Once-a-week she used to reckon with herself; when, if within the 144
hours, contained in the six days, she had made her account even, she
noted it accordingly; if otherwise, she carried the debit to the next
week's account; as thus:--Debtor to the article of the benevolent visits,
so many hours.  And so of the rest.

But it was always an especial part of her care that, whether visiting or
visited, she showed in all companies an entire ease, satisfaction, and
cheerfulness, as if she had kept no such particular account, and as if
she did not make herself answerable to herself for her occasional
exceedings.

This method, which to others will appear perplexing and unnecessary, her
early hours, and custom, had made easy and pleasant to her.

And indeed, as I used to tell her, greatly as I admired her in all
methods, I could not bring myself to this, might I have had the world for
my reward.

I had indeed too much impatience in my temper, to observe such a
regularity in accounting between me and myself.  I satisfied myself in a
lump-account, as I may call it, if I had nothing greatly wrong to
reproach myself, when I looked back on a past week, as she had taught me
to do.

For she used indulgently to say, 'I do not think ALL I do necessary for
another to do; nor even for myself; but when it is more pleasant for me
to keep such an account, than to let it alone, why may I not proceed in
my supererogatories?--There can be no harm in it.  It keeps up my
attention to accounts; which one day may be of use to me in more material
instances.  Those who will not keep a strict account, seldom long keep
any.  I neglect not more useful employments for it.  And it teaches me to
be covetous of time; the only thing of which we can be allowably
covetous; since we live but once in this world; and, when gone, are gone
from it for ever.'

She always reconciled the necessity under which these interventions, as
she called them, laid her, of now-and-then breaking into some of her
appropriations; saying, 'That was good sense, and good manners too, in
the common lesson, When at Rome, do as they do at Rome.  And that to be
easy of persuasion, in matters where one could oblige without endangering
virtue, or worthy habits, was an apostolical excellency; since, if a
person conformed with a view of making herself an interest in her
friend's affections, in order to be heeded in greater points, it was
imitating His example, who became all things to all men, that He might
gain some.'  Nor is it to be doubted, had life been spared her, that the
sweetness of her temper, and her cheerful piety, would have made virtue
and religion appear so lovely, that her example would have had no small
influence upon the minds and manners of those who would have had the
honour of conversing with her.

O Mr. Belford!  I can write no further on this subject.  For, looking
into the account-book for other particulars, I met with a most affecting
memorandum; which being written on the extreme edge of the paper, with a
fine pen, and in the dear creature's smallest hand, I saw not before.--
This it is; written, I suppose, at some calamitous period after the day
named in it--help me to curse, to blast the monster who gave occasion for
it!----

      APRIL 10.   The account concluded!
      And with it all my worldly hopes and prospects!


***


I take up my pen; but not to apologize for my execration.--Once more I
pray to God to avenge me of him!--Me, I say--for mine is the loss--her's
the gain.

O Sir! you did not--you could not know her, as I knew her!  Never was
such an excellence!--So warm, yet so cool a friend!--So much what I wish
to be, but never shall be!--For, alas! my stay, my adviser, my monitress,
my directress, is gone!--for ever gone!--She honoured me with the title
of The Sister of her Heart; but I was only so in the love I bore her, (a
love beyond a sister's--infinitely beyond her sister's!) in the hatred I
have to every mean and sordid action; and in my love of virtue; for,
otherwise, I am of a high and haughty temper, as I have acknowledged
heretofore, and very violent in my passions.

In short, she was the nearest perfection of any creature I ever knew.
She never preached to me lessons which she practised not herself.  She
lived the life she taught.  All humility, meekness, self-accusing, others
acquitting, though the shadow of the fault was hardly hers, the substance
their's, whose only honour was their relation to her.

To lose such a friend--such a guide.--If ever my violence was
justifiable, it is upon this recollection!  For she lived only to make me
sensible of my failings, but not long enough to enable me to conquer
them; as I was resolved to endeavour to do.

Once more then let me execrate--but now violence and passion again
predominate!--And how can it be otherwise?

But I force myself from the subject, having lost the purpose for which I
resumed my pen.

A. HOWE.



LETTER LVI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
PARIS, OCT. 14.


      ---- ---- Timor & minae
      Scandunt eodum quo dominus; neque
            Decedit aerata triremi; &
               Post equitem sedet atra cura.

In a language so expressive as the English, I hate the pedantry of
tagging or prefacing what I write with Latin scraps; and ever was a
censurer of the motto-mongers among our weekly and daily scribblers.
But these verses of Horace are so applicable to my case, that, whether
on ship-board, whether in my post-chaise, or in my inn at night, I am
not able to put them out of my head.  Dryden once I thought said very
well in these bouncing lines:

      Man makes his fate according to his mind.
      The weak, low spirit, Fortune makes her slave:
      But she's a drudge, when hector'd by the brave.
      If Fate weave common thread, I'll change the doom,
      And with new purple weave a nobler loom.

And in these:

      Let Fortune empty her whole quiver on me,
      I have a soul, that, like an ample shield,
      Can take in all, and verge enough for more.
      Fate was not mine: nor am I Fate's----
      Souls know no conquerors.----

But in the first quoted lines, considering them closely, there is nothing
but blustering absurdity; in the other, the poet says not truth; for
CONSCIENCE is the conqueror of souls; at least it is the conqueror of
mine; and who ever thought it a narrow one?----But this is occasioned
partly by poring over the affecting will, and posthumous letter.  What an
army of texts has she drawn up in array against me in the letter!--But
yet, Jack, do they not show me, that, two or three thousand years ago,
there were as wicked fellows as myself?--They do--and that's some
consolation.

But the generosity of her mind displayed in both, is what stings me most.
And the more still, as it is now out of my power any way in the world to
be even with her.

I ought to have written to you sooner; but I loitered two days at Calais,
for an answer to a letter I wrote to engage my former travelling valet,
De la Tour; an ingenious, ready fellow, as you have heard me say.  I have
engaged him, and he is now with me.

I shall make no stay here; but intend for some of the Electoral Courts.
That of Bavaria, I think, will engage me longest.  Perhaps I may step out
of my way (if I can be out of my way any where) to those of Dresden and
Berlin; and it is not impossible that you may have one letter from me at
Vienna.  And then, perhaps, I may fall down into Italy by the Tyrol; and
so, taking Turin in my way, return to Paris; where I hope to see Mowbray
and Tourville; nor do I despair of you.

This a good deal differs from the plan I gave you.  But you may expect to
hear from me as I move; and whether I shall pursue this route or the
other.

I have my former lodgings in the Rue St. Antoine, which I shall hold,
notwithstanding my tour; so they will be ready to accommodate any two of
you, if you come hither before my return; and for this I have
conditioned.

I write to Charlotte; and that is writing to all my relations at once.

Do thou, Jack, inform me duly of every thing that passes.--Particularly,
how thou proceededst in thy reformation-scheme; how Mowbray and Tourville
go on in my absence; whether thou hast any chance for a wife; [I am the
more solicitous on this head, because thou seemest to think that thy
mortification will not be complete, nor thy reformation secure, till thou
art shackled;] how the Harlowes proceed in their penitentials; if Miss
Howe be married, or near being so; how honest Doleman goes on with his
empiric, now he has dismissed his regulars, or they him; and if any
likelihood of his perfect recovery.  Be sure be very minute; for every
trifling occurrence relating to those we value, becomes interesting, when
we are at a distance from them.  Finally, prepare thou to piece thy
broken thread, if thou wouldst oblige

Thy
LOVELACE.



LETTER LVII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
LONDON, OCT. 25.


I write to show you that I am incapable of slighting even the minutest
requests of an absent and distant friend.  Yet you may believe that there
cannot be any great alterations in the little time that you have been out
of England, with respect to the subjects of your inquiry.  Nevertheless I
will answer to each, for the reason above given; and for the reason you
mention, that even trifles, and chit-chat, are agreeable from friend to
friend, and of friends, and even of those to whom we give the importance
of deeming them our foes, when we are abroad.

First, then, as to my reformation-scheme, as you call it, I hope I go on
very well.  I wish you had entered upon the like, and could say so too.
You would then find infinitely more peace of mind, than you are likely
ever otherwise to be acquainted with.  When I look back upon the sweep
that has been made among us in the two or three past years, and forward
upon what may still happen, I hardly think myself secure; though of late
I have been guided by other lights than those of sense and appetite,
which have hurried so many of our confraternity into worldly ruin, if not
into eternal perdition.

I am very earnest in my wishes to be admitted into the nuptial state.
But I think I ought to pass some time as a probationary, till, by
steadiness in my good resolutions, I can convince some woman, whom I
could love and honour, and whose worthy example might confirm my morals,
that there is one libertine who had the grace to reform, before age or
disease put it out of his power to sin on.

The Harlowes continue inconsolable; and I dare say will to the end of
their lives.

Miss Howe is not yet married; but I have reason to think will soon.  I
have the honour of corresponding with her; and the more I know of her,
the more I admire the nobleness of her mind.  She must be conscious, that
she is superior to half our sex, and to most of her own; which may make
her give way to a temper naturally hasty and impatient; but, if she meet
with condescension in her man, [and who would not veil to a superiority
so visible, if it be not exacted with arrogance?] I dare say she will
make an excellent wife.

As to Doleman, the poor man goes on trying and hoping with his empiric.
I cannot but say that as the latter is a sensible and judicious man, and
not rash, opinionative, or over-sanguine, I have great hopes (little as I
think of quacks and nostrum-mongers in general) that he will do him good,
if his case will admit of it.  My reasons are--That the man pays a
regular and constant attendance upon him; watches, with his own eye,
every change and new symptom of his patient's malady; varies his
applications as the indications vary; fetters not himself to rules laid
down by the fathers of the art, who lived many hundred years ago, when
diseases, and the causes of them, were different, as the modes of living
were different from what they are now, as well as climates and accidents;
that he is to have his reward, not in daily fees; but (after the first
five guineas for medicines) in proportion as the patient himself shall
find amendment.

As to Mowbray and Tourville; what novelties can be expected, in so short
a time, from men, who have not sense enough to strike out or pursue new
lights, either good or bad; now, especially, that you are gone, who were
the soul of all enterprise, and in particular their soul.  Besides, I see
them but seldom.  I suppose they'll be at Paris before you can return
from Germany; for they cannot live without you; and you gave them such a
specimen of your recovered volatility, in the last evening's
conversation, as delighted them, and concerned me.

I wish, with all my heart, that thou wouldst bend thy course toward the
Pyraneans.  I should then (if thou writest to thy cousin Montague an
account of what is most observable in thy tour) put in for a copy of thy
letters.  I wonder thou wilt not; since then thy subjects would be as new
to thyself, as to

Thy
BELFORD.



LETTER LVIII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
PARIS, OCT. 16--27.


I follow my last of the 14/25th, on occasion of a letter just now come to
hand from Joseph Leman.  The fellow is conscience ridden, Jack; and tells
me, 'That he cannot rest either day or night for the mischiefs which he
fears he has been, or may still further be the means of doing.'  He
wishes, 'if it please God, and if it please me, that he had never seen my
Honour's face.'

And what is the cause of his present concern, as to his own particular?
What, but 'the slights and contempts which he receives from every one of
the Harlowes; from those particularly, he says, whom he has endeavoured
to serve as faithfully as his engagements to me would let him serve them?
And I always made him believe, he tells me, (poor weak soul as he was
from his cradle!) that serving me, was serving both, in the long run.--
But this, and the death of his dear young lady, is a grief, he declares,
that he shall never claw off, were he to love to the age of Matthew
Salem; althoff, and howsomever, he is sure, that he shall not live a
month to an end: being strangely pined, and his stomach nothing like what
it was; and Mrs. Betty being also (now she has got his love) very cross
and slighting.  But, thank his God for punishing her!--She is in a poor
way hersell.

'But the chief occasion of troubling my Honour now, is not his own griefs
only, althoff they are very great; but to prevent further mischiefs to
me; for he can assure me, that Colonel Morden has set out from them all,
with a full resolution to have his will of me; and he is well assured,
that he said, and swore to it, as how he was resolved that he would
either have my Honour's heart's-blood, or I should have his; or some
such-like sad threatenings: and that all the family rejoice in it, and
hope I shall come short home.

This is the substance of Joseph's letter; and I have one from Mowbray,
which has a hint to the same effect.  And I recollect now that you were
very importunate with me to go to Madrid, rather than to France and
Italy, the last evening we passed together.

What I desire of you, is, by the first dispatch, to let me faithfully
know all that you know on this head.

I can't bear to be threatened, Jack.  Nor shall any man, unquestioned,
give himself airs in my absence, if I know it, that shall make me look
mean in any body's eyes; that shall give friends pain for me; that shall
put them upon wishing me to change my intentions, or my plan, to avoid
him.  Upon such despicable terms as these, think you that I could bear to
live?

But why, if such were his purpose, did he not let me know it before I
left England?  Was he unable to work himself up to a resolution, till he
knew me to be out of the kingdom?

As soon as I can inform myself where to direct to him, I will write to
know his purpose; for I cannot bear suspense in such a case as this; that
solemn act, were it even to be marriage or hanging, which must be done
to-morrow, I had rather should be done to-day.  My mind tires and sickens
with impatience on ruminating upon scenes that can afford neither variety
nor certainty.  To dwell twenty days in expectation of an even that may
be decided in a quarter of an hour is grievous.

If he come to Paris, although I should be on my tour, he will very easily
find out my lodgings.  For I every day see some one or other of my
countrymen, and divers of them have I entertained here.  I go frequently
to the opera and to the play, and appear at court, and at all public
places.  And, on my quitting this city, will leave a direction whither my
letters from England, or elsewhere, shall from time to time be forwarded.
Were I sure that his intention is what Joseph Leman tells me it is, I
would stay here, or shorten his course to me, let him be where he would.

I cannot get off my regrets on account of this dear lady for the blood of
me.  If the Colonel and I are to meet, as he has done me no injury, and
loves the memory of his cousin, we shall engage with the same sentiments,
as to the object of our dispute; and that, you know, is no very common
case.

In short, I am as much convinced that I have done wrong, as he can be;
and regret it as much.  But I will not bear to be threatened by any man
in the world, however conscious I may be of having deserved blame.

Adieu, Belford!  Be sincere with me.  No palliation, as thou valuest

Thy
LOVELACE.



LETTER LIX

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
LONDON, OCT. 26.


I cannot think, my dear Lovelace, that Colonel Morden has either
threatened you in those gross terms mentioned by the vile Joseph Leman,
or intends to follow you.  They are the words of people of that fellow's
class, and not of a gentleman--not of Colonel Morden, I am sure.  You'll
observe that Joseph pretends not to say that he heard him speak them.

I have been very solicitous to sound the Colonel, for your sake, and for
his own, and for the sake of the injunctions of the excellent lady to me,
as well as to him, on that subject.  He is (and you will not wonder that
he should be) extremely affected; and owns that he has expressed himself
in terms of resentment on the occasion.  Once he said to me, that had his
beloved cousin's case been that of a common seduction, her own credulity
or weakness contributing to her fall, he could have forgiven you.  But,
in so many words, he assured me, that he had not taken any resolutions;
nor had he declared himself to the family in such a way as should bind
him to resent: on the contrary, he has owned, that his cousin's
injunctions have hitherto had the force upon him which I could wish they
should have.

He went abroad in a week after you.  When he took his leave of me, he
told me, that his design was to go to Florence; and that he would settle
his affairs there; and then return to England, and here pass the
remainder of his days.

I was indeed apprehensive that, if you and he were to meet, something
unhappy might fall out; and as I knew that you proposed to take Italy,
and very likely Florence, in your return to France, I was very solicitous
to prevail upon you to take the court of Spain into your plan.  I am
still so.  And if you are not to be prevailed upon to do that, let me
entreat you to avoid Florence or Leghorn in your return, since you have
visited both heretofore.  At least, let not the proposal of a meeting
come from you.

It would be matter of serious reflection to me, if the very fellow, this
Joseph Leman, who gave you such an opportunity to turn all the artillery
of his masters against themselves, and to play them upon one another to
favour your plotting purposes, should be the instrument, in the devil's
hand, (unwittingly too,) to avenge them all upon you; for should you even
get the better of the Colonel, would the mischief end there?--It would
but add remorse to your present remorse; since the interview must end in
death; for he would not, I am confident, take his life at your hand.  The
Harlowes would, moreover, prosecute you in a legal way.  You hate them;
and they would be gainers by his death; rejoicers in your's--And have you
not done mischief enough already?

Let me, therefore, (and through me all your friends,) have the
satisfaction to hear that you are resolved to avoid this gentleman.  Time
will subdue all things.  Nobody doubts your bravery; nor will it be known
that your plan is changed through persuasion.

Young Harlowe talks of calling you to account.  This is a plain evidence,
that Mr. Morden has not taken the quarrel upon himself for their family.

I am in no apprehension of any body but Colonel Morden.  I know it will
not be a mean to prevail upon you to oblige me, if I say that I am well
assured that this gentleman is a skillful swordsman; and that he is as
cool and sedate as skillful.  But yet I will add, that, if I had a value
for my life, he should be the last man, except yourself, with whom I
would choose to have a contention.

I have, as you required, been very candid and sincere with you.  I have
not aimed at palliation.  If you seek not Colonel Morden, it is my
opinion he will not seek you: for he is a man of principle.  But if you
seek him, I believe he will not shun you.

Let me re-urge, [it is the effect of my love for you!] that you know your
own guilt in this affair, and should not be again an aggressor.  It would
be pity that so brave a man as the Colonel should drop, were you and he
to meet: and, on the other hand, it would be dreadful that you should be
sent to your account unprepared for it, and pursuing a fresh violence.
Moreover, seest thou not, in the deaths of two of thy principal agents,
the hand-writing upon the wall against thee.

My zeal on this occasion may make me guilty of repetition.  Indeed I know
not how to quit the subject.  But if what I have written, added to your
own remorse and consciousness, cannot prevail, all that I might further
urge would be ineffectual.

Adieu, therefore!  Mayst thou repent of the past! and may no new
violences add to thy heavy reflections, and overwhelm thy future hopes!
are the wishes of

Thy true friend,
JOHN BELFORD.



LETTER LX.

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MUNICH, NOV. 11--22.


I received your's this moment, just as I was setting out for Vienna.

As to going to Madrid, or one single step out of the way to avoid Colonel
Morden, let me perish if I do!--You cannot think me so mean a wretch.

And so you own that he has threatened me; but not in gross and
ungentlemanly terms, you say.  If he has threatened me like a gentleman,
I will resent his threats like a gentleman.  But he has not done as a man
of honour, if he has threatened at all behind my back.  I would scorn to
threaten any man to whom I knew how to address myself either personally
or by pen and ink.

As to what you mention of my guilt; of the hand-writing on the wall; of a
legal prosecution, if he meet his fate from my hand; of his skill,
coolness, courage, and such-like poltroon stuff; what can you mean by it?
Surely you cannot believe that such insinuations as those will weaken
either my hands or my heart.--No more of this sort of nonsense, I beseech
you, in any of your future letters.

He had not taken any resolutions, you say, when you saw him.  He must and
will take resolutions, one way or other, very quickly; for I wrote to him
yesterday, without waiting for this or your answer to my last.  I could
not avoid it.  I could not (as I told you in that) live in suspense.  I
have directed my letter to Florence.  Nor could I suffer my friends to
live in suspense as to my safety.  But I have couched it in such moderate
terms, that he has fairly his option.  He will be the challenger, if he
take it in the sense in which he may so handsomely avoid taking it.  And
if he does, it will demonstrate that malice and revenge were the
predominant passions with him; and that he was determined but to settle
his affairs, and then take his resolutions, as you phrase it.--Yet, if we
are to meet [for I know what my option would be, in his case, on such a
letter, complaisant as it is] I wish he had a worse, I a better cause.
It would be a sweet revenge to him, were I to fall by his hand.  But what
should I be the better for killing him?

I will enclose a copy of the letter I sent him.


***


On re-perusing your's in a cooler moment, I cannot but thank you for your
friendly love, and good intentions.  My value for you, from the first
hour of our acquaintance till now, I have never found misplaced;
regarding at least your intention: thou must, however, own a good deal of
blunder of the over-do and under-do kind, with respect to the part thou
actest between me and the beloved of my heart.  But thou art really an
honest fellow, and a sincere and warm friend.  I could almost wish I had
not written to Florence till I had received thy letter now before me.
But it is gone.  Let it go.  If he wish peace, and to avoid violence, he
will have a fair opportunity to embrace the one, and shun the other.--If
not--he must take his fate.

But be this as it may, you may contrive to let young Harlowe know [he is
a menacer, too!] that I shall be in England in March next, at farthest.

This of Bavaria is a gallant and polite court.  Nevertheless, being
uncertain whether my letter may meet with the Colonel at Florence, I
shall quit it, and set out, as I intended, for Vienna; taking care to
have any letter or message from him conveyed to me there: which will soon
bring me back hither, or to any other place to which I shall be invited.

As I write to Charlotte I have nothing more to add, after compliments to
all friends, than that I am

Wholly your's,
LOVELACE.


***


MR. LOVELACE, TO WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
[ENCLOSED IN THE ABOVE.]
MUNICH, NOV. 10--21.


SIR,

I have heard, with a great deal of surprise, that you have thought fit to
throw out some menacing expressions against me.

I should have been very glad that you had thought I had punishment enough
in my own mind for the wrongs I have done to the most excellent of women;
and that it had been possible for two persons, so ardently joining in one
love, (especially as I was desirous to the utmost of my power, to repair
those wrongs,) to have lived, if not on amicable terms, in such a way as
not to put either to the pain of hearing of threatenings thrown out in
absence, which either ought to be despised for, if he had not spirit to
take notice of them.

Now, Sir, if what I have heard be owing only to warmth of temper, or to
sudden passion, while the loss of all other losses the most deplorable to
me was recent, I not only excuse, but commend you for it.  But if you are
really determined to meet me on any other account, [which, I own to you,
is not however what I wish,] it would be very blamable, and very unworthy
of the character I desire to maintain, as well with you as with every
other gentleman, to give you a difficulty in doing it.

Being uncertain when this letter may meet you, I shall set out to-morrow
for Vienna; where any letter directed to the post-house in the city, or
to Baron Windisgrat's (at the Favorita) to whom I have commendations,
will come to hand.

Mean time, believing you to be a man too generous to make a wrong
construction of what I am going to declare, and knowing the value which
the dearest of all creatures had for you, and your relation to her, I
will not scruple to assure you, that the most acceptable return will be,
that Colonel Morden chooses to be upon an amicable, rather than upon any
other footing, with

His sincere admirer, and humble servant,
R. LOVELACE.



LETTER LXI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
LINTZ, | NOV. 28.
       | DEC. 9.


I am now on my way to Trent, in order to meet Colonel Morden, in
pursuance of his answer to my letter enclosed in my last.  I had been
at Presburgh, and had intended to visit some other cities of Hungary:
but having obliged myself to return first to Vienna, I there met with
his letter, which follows:


MUNICH, | NOV. 21.
        | DEC. 2.


SIR,

Your letter was at Florence four days before I arrived there.

That I might not appear unworthy of your favour, I set out for this city
the very next morning.  I knew not but that the politeness of this court
might have engaged, beyond his intention, a gentleman who has only his
pleasure to pursue.

But being disappointed in my hope of finding you here, it becomes me to
acquaint you, that I have such a desire to stand well in the opinion of a
man of your spirit, that I cannot hesitate a moment upon the option,
which I am sure Mr. Lovelace in my situation (thus called upon) would
make.

I own, Sir, that I have on all occasions, spoken of your treatment of my
ever-dear cousin as it deserved.  It would have been very surprising if I
had not  And it behoves me (now you have given me so noble an opportunity
of explaining myself) to convince you, that no words fell from my lips,
of you, merely because you were absent.  I acquaint you, therefore, that
I will attend your appointment; and would, were it to the farthest part
of the globe.

I shall stay some days at this court; and if you please to direct for me
at M. Klienfurt's in this city, whether I remain here or not, your
commands will come safely and speedily to the hands of, Sir,

Your most humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.


***


So you see, Belford, that the Colonel by his ready, his even
eagerly-expressed acceptance of the offered interview, was determined.
And is it not much better to bring such a point as this to an issue,
than to give pain to friends for my safety, or continue in suspense
myself; as I must do, if I imagined that another had aught against me?

This was my reply:


VIENNA, | NOV. 25.
        | DEC. 6.


SIR,

I have this moment the favour of your's.  I will suspend a tour I was
going to take into Hungary, and instantly set out for Munich; and, if I
can find you not there, will proceed on to Trent.  This city, being on
the confines of Italy, will be most convenient, as I presume, to you, in
your return to Tuscany; and I shall hope to meet you in it on the 3/14th
of December.

I shall bring with me only a French valet and an English footman.  Other
particulars may be adjusted when I have the honour to see you.  Till
when, I am, Sir,

Your most obedient servant,
R. LOVELACE.


***


Now, Jack, I have no manner of apprehension of the event of this meeting.
And I think I must say he seeks me out; not I him.  And so let him take
the consequence.

What is infinitely nearer to my heart, is, my ingratitude to the most
excellent of women--My premeditated ingratitude!--Yet all the while
enabled to distinguish and to adore her excellencies, in spite of the
mean opinion of the sex which I had imbibed from early manhood.

But this lady has asserted the worthiness of her sex, and most gloriously
has she exalted it with me now.  Yet, surely, as I have said and written
an hundred times, there cannot be such another woman.

But as my loss in her departure is the greatest of any man's, and as she
was dearer to me than to any other person in the world, and once she
herself wished to be so, what an insolence in any man breathing to
pretend to avenge her on me!--Happy! happy! thrice happy! had I known how
to value, as I ought to have valued, the glory of such a preference!

I will not aggravate to myself this aggravation of the Colonel's
pretending to call me to account for my treatment of a lady so much my
own, lest, in the approaching interview, my heart should relent for one
so nearly related to her, and who means honour and justice to her memory;
and I should thereby give him advantages which otherwise he cannot have.
For I know that I shall be inclined to trust to my skill, to save a man
who was so much and so justly valued by her; and shall be loath to give
way to my resentment, as a threatened man.  And in this respect only I am
sorry for his skill, and his courage, lest I should be obliged, in my own
defence, to add a chalk to a score that is already too long.


***


Indeed, indeed, Belford, I am, and shall be, to my latest hour, the most
miserable of beings.  Such exalted generosity!--Why didst thou put into
my craving hands the copy of her will?  Why sentest thou to me the
posthumous letter?--What thou I was earnest to see the will? thou knewest
what they both were [I did not]; and that it would be cruel to oblige me.

The meeting of twenty Colonel Mordens, were there twenty to meet in turn,
would be nothing to me, would not give me a moment's concern, as to my
own safety: but my reflections upon my vile ingratitude to so superior an
excellence will ever be my curse.

Had she been a Miss Howe to me, and treated me as if I were a Hickman, I
had had a call for revenge; and policy (when I had intended to be an
husband) might have justified my attempts to humble her.  But a meek and
gentle temper was her's, though a true heroine, whenever honour or virtue
called for an exertion of spirit.

Nothing but my cursed devices stood in the way of my happiness.
Remembrest thou not how repeatedly, from the first, I poured cold water
upon her rising flame, by meanly and ungratefully turning upon her the
injunctions, which virgin delicacy, and filial duty, induced her to lay
me under before I got her into my power?*


* See Vol. III. Letter XV.  See also Letters XVII. XLV. XLVI. of that
volume, and many other places.


Did she not tell me, and did I not know it, if she had not told me, that
she could not be guilty of affectation or tyranny to the man whom she
intended to marry?* I knew, as she once upbraided me, that from the time
I had got her from her father's house, I had a plain path before me.**
True did she say, and I triumphed in the discovery, that from that time
I held her soul in suspense an hundred times.***  My ipecacuanha trial
alone was enough to convince an infidel that she had a mind in which love
and tenderness would have presided, had I permitted the charming buds to
put forth and blow.****


* See Vol. V. Letter XXXIV.--It may be observed further, that all
Clarissa's occasional lectures to Miss Howe, on that young lady's
treatment of Mr. Hickman, prove that she was herself above affectation
and tyranny.--See, more particularly, the advice she gives to that
friend of her heart, Letter XXXII. of Vol. VIII.--'O my dear,' says she,
in that Letter, 'that it had been my lot (as I was not permitted to live
single) to have met with a man by whom I could have acted generously and
unreservedly!' &c. &c.
** See Vol. V. Letters XXVI. and XXXIV.
*** Ibid. Letter XXXIV.
**** See Vol. V. Letters II. III.


She would have had no reserve, as once she told me, had I given her cause
of doubt.*  And did she not own to thee, that once she could have loved
me; and, could she have made me good, would have made me happy?**  O,
Belford! here was love; a love of the noblest kind!  A love, as she hints
in her posthumous letter,*** that extended to the soul; and which she not
only avowed in her dying hours, but contrived to let me know it after
death, in that letter filled with warnings and exhortations, which had
for their sole end my eternal welfare!


* Ibid. Letter XXXVI.
** See Vol. VIII. Letter LXIV.
*** See Letter XXXVI. of this volume.


The cursed women, indeed, endeavoured to excite my vengeance, and my
pride, by preaching to me of me.  And my pride was, at times, too much
excited by their vile insinuations.  But had it even been as they said;
well might she, who had been used to be courted and admired by every
desiring eye, and worshipped by every respectful heart--well might such
a woman be allowed to draw back, when she found herself kept in suspense,
as to the great question of all, by a designing and intriguing spirit;
pretending awe and distance, as reasons for reining-in a fervour, which,
if real, cannot be reined-in--Divine creature!  Her very doubts, her
reserves, (so justly doubting,) would have been my assurance, and my
glory!--And what other trial needed her virtue!  What other needed a
purity so angelic, (blessed with such a command in her passions in the
bloom of youth,) had I not been a villain--and a wanton, a conceited, a
proud fool, as well as a villain?

These reflections sharpened, rather than their edge by time abated,
accompany me in whatever I do, and wherever I go; and mingle with all
my diversions and amusements.  And yet I go into gay and splendid
company.  I have made new acquaintance in the different courts I have
visited.  I am both esteemed and sought after, by persons of rank and
merit.  I visit the colleges, the churches, the palaces.  I frequent
the theatre: am present at every public exhibition; and see all that is
worth seeing, that I had not see before, in the cabinets of the curious:
am sometimes admitted to the toilette of an eminent toast, and make one
with distinction at the assemblies of others--yet can think of nothing,
nor of any body, with delight, but of my CLARISSA.  Nor have I seen one
woman with advantage to herself, but as she resembles, in stature, air,
complexion, voice, or in some feature, that charmer, that only charmer
of my soul.

What greater punishment, than to have these astonishing perfections,
which she was mistress of, strike my remembrance with such force, when I
have nothing left me but the remorse of having deprived myself and the
world of such a blessing?  Now and then, indeed, am I capable of a gleam
of comfort, arising (not ungenerously) from the moral certainty which I
have of her everlasting happiness, in spite of all the machinations and
devices which I set on foot to ensnare her virtue, and to bring down so
pure a mind to my own level.

      For can I be, at worst, [avert that worst,
      O thou SUPREME, who only canst avert it!]
      So much a wretch, so very far abandon'd,
      But that I must, even in the horrid's gloom,
      Reap intervenient joy, at least some respite,
      From pain and anguish, in her bliss.--


***


If I find myself thus miserable abroad, I will soon return to England,
and follow your example, I think--turn hermit, or some plaguy thing or
other, and see what a constant course of penitence and mortification will
do for me.  There is no living at this rate--d--n me if there be!

If any mishap should befal me, you'll have the particulars of it from De
la Tour.  He indeed knows but little English; but every modern tongue is
your's.  He is a trusty and ingenious fellow; and, if any thing happen,
will have some other papers, which I have already sealed up, for you to
transmit to Lord M.  And since thou art so expert and so ready at
executorships, pr'ythee, Belford, accept of the office for me, as well as
for my Clarissa--CLARISSA LOVELACE let me call her.

By all that's good, I am bewitched to her memory.  Her very name, with
mine joined to it, ravishes my soul, and is more delightful to me than
the sweetest music.

Had I carried her [I must still recriminate] to any other place than that
accursed woman's--for the potion was her invention and mixture; and all
the persisted-in violence was at her instigation, and at that of her
wretched daughters, who have now amply revenged upon me their own ruin,
which they lay at my door--

But this looks so like the confession of a thief at the gallows, that
possibly thou wilt be apt to think I am intimidated in prospect of the
approaching interview.  But far otherwise.  On the contrary, most
cheerfully do I go to meet the Colonel; and I would tear my heart out
of my breast with my own hands, were it capable of fear or concern on
that account.

Thus much only I know, that if I should kill him, [which I will not do,
if I can help it,] I shall be far from being easy in my mind; that shall
I never more be.  But as the meeting is evidently of his own seeking,
against an option fairly given to the contrary, and I cannot avoid it,
I'll think of that hereafter.  It is but repenting and mortifying for all
at once; for I am sure of victory, as I am that I now live, let him be
ever so skillful a swordsman; since, besides that I am no unfleshed
novice, this is a sport that, when provoked to it, I love as well as my
food.  And, moreover, I shall be as calm and undisturbed as the bishop at
his prayers; while he, as is evident by his letter, must be actuated by
revenge and passion.

Doubt not, therefore, Jack, that I shall give a good account of this
affair.  Mean time, I remain,

Your's most affectionately, &c.
LOVELACE.



LETTER LXII

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TRENT, DEC. 3--14.


To-morrow is to be the day, that will, in all probability, send either
one or two ghosts to attend the manes of my CLARISSA.

I arrived here yesterday; and inquiring for an English gentleman of the
name of Morden, soon found out the Colonel's lodgings.  He had been in
town two days; and left his name at every probable place.

He was gone to ride out; and I left my name, and where to be found; and
in the evening he made me a visit.

He was plaguy gloomy.  That was not I.  But yet he told me that I had
acted like a man of true spirit in my first letter; and with honour, in
giving him so readily this meeting.  He wished I had in other respects;
and then we might have seen each other upon better terms than now we did.

I said there was no recalling what was passed; and that I wished some
things had not been done, as well as he.

To recriminate now, he said, would be as exasperating as unavailable.
And as I had so cheerfully given him this opportunity, words should give
place to business.--Your choice, Mr. Lovelace, of time, of place, of
weapon, shall be my choice.

The two latter be your's, Mr. Morden.  The time to-morrow, or next day,
as you please.

Next day, then, Mr. Lovelace; and we'll ride out to-morrow, to fix the
place.

Agreed, Sir.

Well: now, Mr. Lovelace, do you choose the weapon.

I said I believed we might be upon an equal footing with the single
rapier; but, if he thought otherwise, I had no objection to a pistol.

I will only say, replied he, that the chances may be more equal by the
sword, because we can neither of us be to seek in that; and you would
stand, says he, a worse chance, as I apprehend, with a pistol; and yet
I have brought two, that you may take your choice of either; for, added
he, I have never missed a mark at pistol-distance, since I knew how to
hold a pistol.

I told him, that he spoke like himself; that I was expert enough that
way, to embrace it, if he chose it; though not so sure of my mark as
he pretended to be.  Yet the devil's in it, Colonel, if I, who have slit
a bullet in two upon a knife's edge, hit not my man.  So I have no
objection to a pistol, if it be your choice.  No man, I'll venture to
say, has a steadier hand or eye than I have.

They may both be of use to you, Sir, at the sword, as well as at the
pistol: the sword, therefore, be the thing, if you please.

With all my heart.

We parted with a solemn sort of ceremonious civility: and this day I
called upon him; and we rode out together to fix upon the place: and
both being of one mind, and hating to put off for the morrow what could
be done to-day, would have decided it then: but De la Tour, and the
Colonel's valet, who attended us, being unavoidably let into the secret,
joined to beg we would have with us a surgeon from Brixen, whom La Tour
had fallen in with there, and who had told him he was to ride next
morning to bleed a person in a fever, at a lone cottage, which, by the
surgeon's description, was not far from the place where we then were, if
it were not that very cottage within sight of us.

They overtook so to manage it, that the surgeon should know nothing of
the matter till his assistance was called in.  And La Tour, being, as I
assured the Colonel, a ready contriving fellow, [whom I ordered to obey
him as myself, were the chance to be in his favour,] we both agreed to
defer the decision till to-morrow, and to leave the whole about the
surgeon to the management of our two valets; enjoining them absolute
secrecy: and so rode back again by different ways.

We fixed upon a little lone valley for the spot--ten to-morrow morning
the time--and single rapier the word.  Yet I repeatedly told him, that I
valued myself so much upon my skill in that weapon, that I would wish him
to choose any other.

He said it was a gentleman's weapon; and he who understood it not, wanted
a qualification that he ought to suffer for not having: but that, as to
him, one weapon was as good as another, throughout all the instruments of
offence.

So, Jack, you see I take no advantage of him: but my devil must deceive
me, if he take not his life or his death at my hands before eleven
to-morrow morning.

His valet and mine are to be present; but both strictly enjoined to be
impartial and inactive: and, in return for my civility of the like
nature, he commanded his to be assisting me, if he fell.

We are to ride thither, and to dismount when at the place; and his
footman and mine are to wait at an appointed distance, with a chaise to
carry off to the borders of the Venetian territories the survivor, if one
drop; or to assist either or both, as occasion may demand.

And thus, Belford, is the matter settled.

A shower of rain has left me nothing else to do; and therefore I write
this letter; though I might as well have deferred it till to-morrow
twelve o'clock, when I doubt not to be able to write again, to assure you
much I am

Yours, &c.
LOVELACE.



LETTER LXIV

TRANSLATION OF A LETTER FROM F.J. DE LA TOUR.

TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
NEAR SOHO-SQUARE, LONDON.
TRENT, DEC. 18, N.S.


SIR,

I have melancholy news to inform you of, by order of the Chevalier
Lovelace.  He showed me his letter to you before he sealed it;
signifying, that he was to meet the Chevalier Morden on the 15th.
Wherefore, as the occasion of the meeting is so well known to you, I
shall say nothing of it here.

I had taken care to have ready, within a little distance, a surgeon and
his assistant, to whom, under an oath of secrecy, I had revealed the
matter, (though I did not own it to the two gentlemen;) so that they were
prepared with bandages, and all things proper.  For well was I acquainted
with the bravery and skill of my chevalier; and had heard the character
of the other; and knew the animosity of both.  A post-chaise was ready,
with each of their footmen, at a little distance.

The two chevaliers came exactly at their time: they were attended by
Monsieur Margate, (the Colonel's gentleman,) and myself.  They had given
orders over night, and now repeated them in each other's presence, that
we should observe a strict impartiality between them: and that, if one
fell, each of us should look upon himself, as to any needful help or
retreat, as the servant of the survivor, and take his commands
accordingly.

After a few compliments, both the gentlemen, with the greatest presence
of mind that I ever beheld in men, stript to their shirts, and drew.

They parried with equal judgment several passes.  My chevalier drew the
first blood, making a desperate push, which, by a sudden turn of his
antagonist, missed going clear through him, and wounded him on the fleshy
part of the ribs of his right side; which part the sword tore out, being
on the extremity of the body; but, before my chevalier could recover
himself, the Colonel, in return, pushed him into the inside of the left
arm, near the shoulder; and the sword (raking his breast as it passed,)
being followed by a great effusion of blood, the Colonel said, Sir, I
believe you have enough.

My chevalier swore by G--d he was not hurt; 'twas a pin's point; and so
made another pass at his antagonist; which he, with a surprising
dexterity, received under his arm, and run my dear chevalier into the
body; who immediately fell; saying, The luck is your's, Sir--O my beloved
Clarissa!--Now art thou--inwardly he spoke three or four words more.  His
sword dropt from his hand.  Mr. Morden threw his down, and ran to him,
saying in French--Ah, Monsieur! you are a dead man!----Call to God for
mercy!

We gave the signal agreed upon to the footmen; and they to the surgeons;
who instantly came up.

Colonel Morden, I found, was too well used to the bloody work; for he was
as cool as if nothing extraordinary had happened, assisting the surgeons,
though his own wound bled much.  But my dear chevalier fainted away two
or three times running, and vomited blood besides.

However, they stopped the bleeding for the present; and we helped him
into the voiture; and then the Colonel suffered his own wound to be
dressed; and appeared concerned that my chevalier was between whiles
(when he could speak, and struggle,) extremely outrageous.--Poor
gentleman! he had made quite sure of victory!

The Colonel, against the surgeons' advice, would mount on horseback to
pass into the Venetian territories; and generously gave me a purse of
gold to pay the surgeons; desiring me to make a present to the footman;
and to accept of the remainder, as a mark of his satisfaction in my
conduct, and in my care and tenderness of my master.

The surgeons told him that my chevalier could not live over the day.

When the Colonel took leave of him, Mr. Lovelace said, You have well
revenged the dear creature.

I have, Sir, said Mr. Morden; and perhaps shall be sorry that you called
upon me to this work, while I was balancing whether to obey, or disobey,
the dear angel.

There is a fate in it! replied my chevalier--a cursed fate!--or this
could not have been!--But be ye all witnesses, that I have provoked my
destiny, and acknowledge that I fall by a man of honour.

Sir, said the Colonel, with the piety of a confessor, (wringing Mr.
Lovelace's hand,) snatch these few fleeting moments, and commend yourself
to God.

And so he rode off.

The voiture proceeded slowly with my chevalier; yet the motion set both
his wounds bleeding afresh; and it was with difficulty they again stopped
the blood.

We brought him alive to the nearest cottage; and he gave orders to me to
dispatch to you the packet I herewith send sealed up; and bid me write to
you the particulars of this most unhappy affair: and give you thanks, in
his name, for all your favours and friendship to him.

Contrary to all expectation, he lived over the night: but suffered much,
as well from his impatience and disappointment, as from his wounds; for
he seemed very unwilling to die.

He was delirious, at times, in the two last hours: and then several times
cried out, as if he had seen some frightful spectre, Take her away!  Take
her away! but named nobody.  And sometimes praised some lady, (that
Clarissa, I suppose, whom he had invoked when he received his death's
wound,) calling her Sweet Excellence!  Divine Creature!  Fair Sufferer!--
And once he said, Look down, Blessed Spirit, look down!--And there stopt;
--his lips, however, moving.

At nine in the morning he was seized with convulsions, and fainted away;
and it was a quarter of an hour before he came out of them.

His few last words I must not omit, as they show an ultimate composure;
which may administer some consolation to his honourable friends.

Blessed--said he, addressing himself no doubt to Heaven; for his dying
eyes were lifted up--a strong convulsion prevented him for a few moments
saying more--but recovering, he again, with great fervour, (lifting up
his eyes, and his spread hands,) pronounced the word blessed: Then, in a
seeming ejaculation, he spoke inwardly, so as not to be understood: at
last, he distinctly pronounced these three words,

      LET THIS EXPIATE!

And then, his head sinking on his pillow, he expired, at about half an
hour after ten.

He little thought, poor gentleman! his end so near: so had given no
direction about his body.  I have caused it to be embowelled, and
deposited in a vault, till I have orders from England.

This is a favour that was procured with difficulty; and would have been
refused, had he not been an Englishman of rank: a nation with reason
respected in every Austrian government--for he had refused ghostly
attendance, and the sacraments in the Catholic way.--May his soul be
happy, I pray God!

I have had some trouble also, on account of the manner of his death, from
the magistracy here: who have taken the requisite informations in the
affair.  And it has cost some money.  Of which, and of the dear
chevalier's effects, I will give you a faithful account in my next.  And
so, waiting at this place your commands, I am, Sir,

Your most faithful and obedient servant,
F.J. DE LA TOUR.



CONCLUSION

SUPPOSED TO BE WRITTEN BY MR. BELFORD


What remains to be mentioned for the satisfaction of such of the readers
as may be presumed to have interested themselves in the fortunes of those
other principals in the story, who survived Mr. Lovelace, will be found
summarily related as follows:

The news of Mr. LOVELACE's unhappy end was received with as much grief by
his own relations, as it was with exultation by the Harlowe family, and
by Miss Howe.  His own family were most to be pitied, because, being
sincere admirers of the inimitable lady, they were greatly grieved for
the injustice done her; and now had the additional mortification of
losing the only male of it, by a violent death.

That his fate was deserved, was still a heightening of their calamity, as
they had, for that very reason, and his unpreparedness for it, but too
much ground for apprehension with regard to his future happiness.  While
the other family, from their unforgiving spirit, and even the noble young
lady above mentioned, from her lively resentments, found his death some
little, some temporary, alleviation of the heavy loss they had sustained,
principally through his means.

Temporary alleviation, we repeat, as to the Harlowe family; for THEY were
far from being happy or easy in their reflections upon their own conduct.
--And still the less, as the inconsolable mother rested not till she had
procured, by means of Colonel Morden, large extracts from some of the
letters that compose this history, which convinced them all that the very
correspondence which Clarissa, while with them, renewed with Mr.
Lovelace, was renewed for their sakes, more than for her own: that she
had given him no encouragement contrary to her duty and to that prudence
for which she was so early noted: that had they trusted to a discretion
which they owned she had never brought into question, she would have
extricated them and herself (as she once proposed* to her mother) from
all difficulties as to Lovelace: that she, if any woman ever could, would
have given a glorious instance of a passion conquered, or at least kept
under by reason and by piety; the man being too immoral to be implicitly
beloved.


* See Vol. I. Letter XVII.


The unhappy parents and uncles, from the perusal of these extracts, too
evidently for their peace, saw that it was entirely owing to the avarice,
the ambition, the envy, of her implacable brother and sister, and to the
senseless confederacy entered into by the whole family, to compel her to
give her hand to a man she must despise, or she had not been a CLARISSA,
and to their consequent persecution of her, that she ever thought of
quitting her father's house: and that even when she first entertained
such a thought, it was with intent, if possible, to procure for herself a
private asylum with Mrs. Howe, or at some other place of safety, (but not
with Mr. Lovelace, nor with any of the ladies of his family, though
invited by the latter,) from whence she might propose terms which ought
to have been complied with, and which were entirely consistent with her
duty--that though she found herself disappointed of the hoped-for refuge
and protection, she intended not, by meeting Mr. Lovelace, to put herself
into his power; all that she aimed at by taking that step being to
endeavour to pacify so fierce a spirit, lest he should (as he indeed was
determined to do) pay a visit to her friends, which might have been
attended with fatal consequences; but was spirited away by him in such a
manner, as made her an object of pity rather than of blame.

These extracts further convinced them all that it was to her unaffected
regret that she found that marriage was not in her power afterwards for a
long time; and at last, but on one occasion, when their unnatural cruelty
to her (on a new application she had made to her aunt Hervey, to procure
mercy and pardon) rendered her incapable of receiving his proffered hand;
and so obliged her to suspend the day: intending only to suspend it till
recovered.

They saw with equal abhorrence of Lovelace, and of their own cruelty, and
with the highest admiration of her, that the majesty of her virtue had
awed the most daring spirit in the world, so that he durst not attempt to
carry his base designs into execution, till, by wicked potions, he had
made her senses the previous sacrifice.

But how did they in a manner adore her memory!  How did they recriminate
upon each other! when they found, that she had not only preserved herself
from repeated outrage, by the most glorious and intrepid behaviour, in
defiance, and to the utter confusion of all his libertine notions, but
had the fortitude, constantly, and with a noble disdain, to reject him.--
Whom?--Why, the man she once could have loved, kneeling for pardon, and
begging to be permitted to make her the best reparation then in his power
to make her; that is to say, by marriage.  His fortunes high and
unbroken.  She his prisoner at the time in a vile house: rejected by all
her friends; upon repeated application to them, for mercy and
forgiveness, rejected--mercy and forgiveness, and a last blessing,
afterwards imploring; and that as much to lighten their future remorses,
as for the comfort of her own pious heart--yet, though savagely refused,
on a supposition that she was not so near her end as she was represented
departed, forgiving and blessing them all!

Then they recollected that her posthumous letters, instead of reproaches,
were filled with comfortings: that she had in her last will, in their own
way, laid obligations upon them all; obligations which they neither
deserved nor expected; as if she thought to repair the injustice which
self-partiality made some of them conclude done to them by her
grandfather in his will.

These intelligences and recollections were perpetual subjects of
recrimination to them: heightened their anguish for the loss of a child
who was the glory of their family; and not seldom made them shun each
other, (at the times they were accustomed to meet together,) that they
might avoid the mutual reproaches of eyes that spoke, when tongues were
silent--their stings also sharpened by time!  What an unhappy family was
this!  Well might Colonel Morden, in the words of Juvenal, challenge all
other miserable families to produce such a growing distress as that of
the Harlowes (a few months before so happy!) was able to produce.

      Humani generis mores tibi nosse volenti
      Sufficit una domus: paucos consume dies, &
      Dicere te miserum, postquam illinc veneris, aude.

Mrs. HARLOWE lived about two years and an half after the lamented death
of her CLARISSA.

Mr. HARLOWE had the additional affliction to survive his lady about half
a year; her death, by new pointing his former anguish and remorse,
hastening his own.

Both, in their last hours, however, comforted themselves, that they
should be restored to their BLESSED daughter, as they always (from the
time they were acquainted with the above particulars of her story, and
with her happy exit) called her.

They both lived, however, to see their son James, and their daughter
Arabella, married: but not to take joy in either of their nuptials.

Mr. JAMES HARLOWE married a woman of family, an orphan; and is obliged,
at a very great expense, to support his claim to estates, which were his
principal inducement to make his addresses to her; but which, to this
day, he has not recovered; nor is likely to recover; having powerful
adversaries to contend with, and a title to assert, which admits of
litigation; and he not blessed with so much patience as is necessary to
persons embarrassed in law.

What is further observable, with regard to him, is, that the match was
entirely of his own head, against the advice of his father, mother, and
uncles, who warned him of marrying in this lady a law-suit for life.  His
ungenerous behaviour to his wife, for what she cannot help, and for what
is as much her misfortune as his, has occasioned such estrangements
between them (she being a woman of spirit) as, were the law-suits
determined, even more favourably than probably they will be, must make
him unhappy to the end of his life.  He attributes all his misfortunes,
when he opens himself to the few friends he has, to his vile and cruel
treatment of his angelic sister.  He confesses these misfortunes to be
just, without having temper to acquiesce in the acknowledged justice.
One month in every year he puts on mourning, and that month commences
with him on the 7th of September, during which he shuts himself up from
all company.  Finally, he is looked upon, and often calls himself,

      THE MOST MISERABLE OF BEINGS.

ARABELLA'S fortune became a temptation to a man of quality to make his
addresses to her: his title an inducement with her to approve of him.
Brothers and sisters, when they are not friends, are generally the
sharpest enemies to each other.  He thought too much was done for in the
settlements.  She thought not enough.  And for some years past, they have
so heartily hated each other, that if either know a joy, it is in being
told of some new misfortune or displeasure that happens to the other.
Indeed, before they came to an open rupture, they were continually
loading each other, by way of exonerating themselves (to the additional
disquiet of the whole family) with the principal guilt of their
implacable behaviour and sordid cruelty to their admirable sister.--May
the reports that are spread of this lady's farther unhappiness from her
lord's free life; a fault she justly thought so odious in Mr. Lovelace
(though that would not have been an insuperable objection with her to his
addresses); and of his public slights and contempt of her, and even
sometimes of his personal abuses, which are said to be owing to her
impatient spirit, and violent passions; be utterly groundless--For, what
a heart must that be, which would wish she might be as great a torment
to herself, as she had aimed to be to her sister?  Especially as she
regrets to this hour, and declares that she shall to the last of her
life, her cruel treatment of that sister; and (as well as her brother) is
but too ready to attribute to that her own unhappiness.

Mr. ANTONY and Mr. JOHN HARLOWE are still (at the writing of this)
living: but often declare, that, with their beloved niece, they lost all
the joy of their lives: and lament, without reserve, in all companies,
the unnatural part they were induced to take against her.

Mr. SOLMES is also still living, if a man of his cast may be said to
live; for his general behaviour and sordid manners are such as justify
the aversion the excellent lady had to him.  He has moreover found his
addresses rejected by several women of far inferior fortunes (great as
his own are) to those of the lady to whom he was encouraged to aspire.

Mr. MOWBRAY and Mr. TOURVILLE having lost the man in whose conversation
they so much delighted; shocked and awakened by the several unhappy
catastrophes before their eyes; and having always rather ductile and
dictating hearts; took their friend Belford's advice: converted the
remainder of their fortunes into annuities for life; and retired, the one
into Yorkshire, the other into Nottinghamshire, of which counties they
are natives: their friend Belford managing their concerns for them, and
corresponding with them, and having more and more hopes, every time he
sees them, (which is once or twice a year, when they come to town,) that
they will become more and more worthy of their names and families.

As those sisters in iniquity, SALLY MARTIN and POLLY HORTON, had
abilities and education superior to what creatures of their cast
generally can boast of; and as their histories are no where given in the
preceding papers, in which they are frequently mentioned; it cannot fail
of gratifying the reader's curiosity, as well as answering the good ends
designed by the publication of this work, to give a brief account of
their parentage, and manner of training-up, preparative to the vile
courses they fell into, and of what became of them, after the dreadful
exit of the infamous Sinclair.

SALLY MARTIN was the daughter of a substantial mercer at the court-end
of the town; to whom her mother, a grocer's daughter in the city, brought
a handsome fortune; and both having a gay turn, and being fond of the
fashions which it was their business to promote; and which the wives and
daughters of the uppermost tradesmen (especially in that quarter of the
town) generally affect to follow; it was no wonder that they brought up
their daughter accordingly: nor that she, who was a very sprightly and
ready-witted girl, and reckoned very pretty and very genteel, should
every year improve upon such examples.

She early found herself mistress of herself.  All she did was right: all
she said was admired.  Early, very early, did she dismiss blushes from
her cheek.  She could not blush, because she could not doubt: and
silence, whatever was the subject, was as much a stranger to her as
diffidence.

She never was left out of any party of pleasure after she had passed her
ninth year; and, in honour of her prattling vein, was considered as a
principal person in the frequent treats and entertainments which her
parents, fond of luxurious living, gave with a view to increase their
acquaintance for the sake of their business; not duly reflecting, that
the part they suffered her to take in what made for their interest, would
probably be a mean to quicken their appetites, and ruin the morals of
their daughter, for whose sake, as an only child, they were solicitous to
obtain wealth.

The CHILD so much a woman, what must the WOMAN be?

At fifteen or sixteen, she affected, both in dress and manners, to ape
such of the quality as were most apish.  The richest silks in her
father's shop were not too rich for her.  At all public diversions, she
was the leader, instead of the led, of all her female kindred and
acquaintances, though they were a third older than herself.  She would
bustle herself into a place, and make room for her more bashful
companions, through the frowns of the first possessors, at a crowded
theatre, leaving every one near her amazed at her self-consequence,
wondering she had no servant to keep place for her; whisperingly
inquiring who she was; and then sitting down admiring her fortitude.

She officiously made herself of consequence to the most noted players;
who, as one of their patronesses, applied to her for her interest on
their benefit-nights.  She knew the christian, as well as sur name of
every pretty fellow who frequented public places; and affected to speak
of them by the former.

Those who had not obeyed the call her eyes always made upon all of them
for notice at her entrance, or before she took her seat, were spoken of
with haughtiness, as, Jacks, or Toms; wile her favourites, with an
affectedly-endearing familiarity, and a prettiness of accent, were
Jackeys and Tommys; and if they stood very high in her graces, dear
devils, and agreeable toads.

She sat in judgment, and an inexorable judge she was upon the actions
and conduct of every man and woman of quality and fashion, as they became
the subjects of conversation.  She was deeply learned in the scandalous
chronicle: she made every character, every praise, and every censure,
serve to exalt herself.  She should scorn to do so or so!--or, That was
ever her way; and Just what she did, or liked to do; and judging herself
by the vileness of the most vile of her sex, she wiped her mouth, and sat
down satisfied with her own virtue.

She had her chair to attend her wherever she went, and found people among
her betters, as her pride stooped to call some of the most insignificant
people in the world, to encourage her visits.

She was practised in all the arts of the card-table: a true Spartan girl;
and had even courage, occasionally, to wrangle off a detection.  Late
hours (turning night into day, and day into night) were the almost
unavoidable consequences of her frequent play.  Her parents pleased
themselves that their Sally had a charming constitution: and, as long as
she suffered not in her health, they were regardless of her morals.

The needle she hated: and made the constant subjects of her ridicule the
fine works that used to employ, and keep out of idleness, luxury, and
extravagance, and at home (were they to have been of no other service)
the women of the last age, when there were no Vauxhalls, Ranelaghs,
Marybones, and such-like places of diversion, to dress out for, and gad
after.

And as to family-management, her parents had not required any knowledge
of that sort from her; and she considered it as a qualification only
necessary for hirelings, and the low-born, and as utterly unworthy of the
attention of a modern fine lady.

Although her father had great business, yet, living in so high and
expensive a way, he pretended not to give her a fortune answerable to it.
Neither he nor his wife having set out with any notion of frugality could
think of retrenching.  Nor did their daughter desire that they should
retrench.  They thought glare or ostentation reputable.  They called it
living genteely.  And as they lifted their heads above their neighbours,
they supposed their credit concerned to go forward rather than backward
in outward appearances.  They flattered themselves, and they flattered
their girl, and she was entirely of their opinion, that she had charms
and wit enough to attract some man of rank; of fortune at least: and yet
this daughter of a mercer-father and grocer-mother could not bear the
thoughts of a creeping cit; encouraging herself with the few instances
(comcommon ones, of girls much inferior to herself in station, talents,
education, and even fortune, who had succeeded--as she doubted not to
succeed.  Handsome settlements, and a chariot, that tempting gewgaw to
the vanity of the middling class of females, were the least that she
proposed to herself.  But all this while, neither her parents nor herself
considered that she had appetites indulged to struggle with, and a turn
of education given her, as well as a warm constitution, unguarded by
sound principles, and unbenefitted by example, which made her much better
qualified for a mistress than a wife.

Her twentieth year, to her own equal wonder and regret, passed over her
head, and she had not one offer that her pride would permit her to accept
of.  A girl from fifteen to eighteen, her beauty then beginning to
blossom, will, as a new thing, attract the eyes of men: but if she make
her face cheap at public places, she will find, that new faces will draw
more attention than fine faces constantly seen.  Policy, therefore, if
nothing else were considered, would induce a young beauty, if she could
tame her vanity, just to show herself, and to be talked of, and then
withdrawing, as if from discretion, (and discreet it will be to do so,)
expect to be sought after, rather than to be thought to seek for; only
reviving now-and-then the memory of herself, at the public places in
turn, if she find herself likely to be forgotten; and then she will be
new again.  But this observation ought young ladies always to have in
their heads, that they can hardly ever expect to gratify their vanity,
and at the same time gain the admiration of men worthy of making partners
for life.  They may, in short, have many admirers at public places, but
not one lover.

Sally Martin knew nothing of this doctrine.  Her beauty was in its bloom,
and yet she found herself neglected.  'Sally Martin, the mercer's
daughter: she never fails being here;' was the answer, and the
accompanying observation, made to every questioner, Who is that lady?

At last, her destiny approached.  It was at a masquerade that she first
saw the gay, the handsome Lovelace, who was just returned from his
travels.  She was immediately struck with his figure, and with the
brilliant things that she heard fall from his lips as he happened to sit
near her.  He, who was not then looking out for a wife, was taken with
Sally's smartness, and with an air that at the same time showed her to be
equally genteel and self-significant; and signs of approbation mutually
passing, he found no difficulty in acquainting himself where to visit her
next day.  And yet it was some mortification to a person of her
self-consequence, and gay appearance, to submit to be known by so fine a
young gentleman as no more than a mercer's daughter.  So natural is it
for a girl brought up as Sally was, to be occasionally ashamed of those
whose folly had set her above herself.

But whatever it might be to Sally, it was no disappointment to Mr.
Lovelace, to find his mistress of no higher degree; because he hoped to
reduce her soon to the lowest condition that an unhappy woman can fall
into.

But when Miss Martin had informed herself that her lover was the nephew
and presumptive heir of Lord M. she thought him the very man for whom she
had been so long and so impatiently looking out; and for whom it was
worth her while to spread her toils.  And here it may not be amiss to
observe, that it is very probable that Mr. Lovelace had Sally Martin in
his thoughts, and perhaps two or three more whose hopes of marriage from
him had led them to their ruin, when he drew the following whimsical
picture, in a letter to his friend Belford, not inserted in the preceding
collection:

'Methinks,' says he, 'I see a young couple in courtship, having each a
design upon the other: the girl plays off: she is very happy as she is:
she cannot be happier: she will not change her single state: the man, I
will suppose, is one who does not confess, that he desires not that she
should: she holds ready a net under her apron; he another under his coat;
each intending to throw it over the other's neck; she over his, when her
pride is gratified, and she thinks she can be sure of him; he over her's,
when the watched-for yielding moment has carried consent too far.  And
suppose he happens to be the more dexterous of the two, and whips his net
over her, before she can cast her's over him; how, I would fain know, can
she cast her's over him; how, I would fain know, can she be justly
entitled to cry out upon cruelty, barbarity, deception, sacrifices, and
all the rest of the exclamatory nonsense, with which the pretty fools, in
such a case, are wont to din the ears of their conquerors?  Is it not
just, thinkest thou, when she makes her appeal to gods and men, that both
gods and men should laugh at her, and hitting her in the teeth with her
own felonious intentions, bid her sit down patiently under her deserved
disappointment?'

In short, Sally's parents, as well as herself, encouraged Mr. Lovelace's
visits.  They thought they might trust to a discretion in he which she
herself was too wise to doubt.  Pride they knew she had; and that, in
these cases, is often called discretion.--Lord help the sex, says
Lovelace, if they had not pride!--Nor did they suspect danger from that
specious air of sincerity, and gentleness of manners, which he could
assume or lay aside whenever he pleased.

The second masquerade, which was no more than their third meeting abroad,
completed her ruin, from so practised, though so young a deceiver; and
that before she well knew she was in danger; for, having prevailed on her
to go off with him about twelve o'clock to his aunt Forbes's, a lady of
honour and fortune, to whom he had given reason to expect her future
niece, [the only hint of marriage he ever gave her,] he carried her off
to the house of the wicked woman, who bears the name of Sinclair in these
papers; and there, by promises, which she understood in the favourable
sense, (for where a woman loves she seldom doubts enough for her safety,)
obtained an easy conquest over a virtue that was little more than
nominal.

He found it not difficult to induce her to proceed in the guilty
commerce, till the effects of it became to apparent to be hid.  Her
parents then (in the first fury of their disappointment, and vexation for
being deprived of all hopes of such a son-in-law) turned her out of
doors.

Her disgrace thus published, she became hardened; and, protected by her
seducer, whose favourite mistress she then was, she was so incensed
against her parents for an indignity so little suiting with her pride,
and the head they had always given her, that she refused to return to
them, when, repenting of their passionate treatment of her, they would
have been reconciled to her: and, becoming the favourite daughter of her
mother Sinclair, at the persuasions of that abandoned woman she practised
to bring on an abortion, which she effected, though she was so far gone
that it had like to have cost her her life.

Thus, unchastity her first crime, murder her next, her conscience became
seared; and, young as she was, and fond of her deceiver, soon grew
indelicate enough, having so thorough-paced a school-mistress, to do all
she could to promote the pleasures of the man who had ruined her;
scrupling not, with a spirit truly diabolical, to endeavour to draw in
others to follow her example.  And it is hardly to be believed what
mischiefs of this sort she was the means of effecting; woman confiding in
and daring woman; and she a creature of specious appearance, and great
art.

A still viler wickedness, if possible, remains to be said of Sally
Martin.

Her father dying, her mother, in hopes to reclaim her, as she called it,
proposed her to quit the house of the infamous Sinclair, and to retire
with her into the country, where her disgrace, and her then wicked way of
life, would not be known; and there so to live as to save appearances;
the only virtue she had ever taught her; besides that of endeavouring
rather to delude than be deluded.

To this Sally consented; but with no other intention, as she often owned,
(and gloried in it,) than to cheat her mother of the greatest part of her
substance, in revenge for consenting to her being turned out of doors
long before, and by way of reprisal for having persuaded her father, as
she would have it, to cut her off, in his last will, from any share in
his fortune.

This unnatural wickedness, in half a year's time, she brought about; and
then the serpent retired to her obscene den with her spoils, laughing at
what she had done; even after it had broken her mother's heart, as it did
in a few months' time: a severe, but just punishment for the unprincipled
education she had given her.

It ought to be added, that this was an iniquity of which neither Mr.
Lovelace, nor any of his friends, could bear to hear her boast; and
always checked her for it whenever she did; condemning it with one voice.
And it is certain that this, and other instances of her complicated
wickedness, turned early Lovelace's heart against her; and, had she not
been subservient to him in his other pursuits, he would not have endured
her: for, speaking of her, he would say, Let not any one reproach us,
Jack: there is no wickedness like the wickedness of a woman.*


* Eccles. xxv. 19.


A bad education was the preparative, it must be confessed; and for this
Sally Martin had reason to thank her parents; as they had reason to thank
themselves for what followed: but, had she not met with a Lovelace, she
had avoided a Sinclair; and might have gone on at the common rate of
wives so educated, and been the mother of children turned out to take
their chance in the world, as she was; so many lumps of soft wax, fit to
take any impression that the first accidents gave them; neither happy,
nor making happy; every thing but useful, and well off, if not extremely
miserable.

POLLY HORTON was the daughter of a gentlewoman, well descended; whose
husband, a man of family and of honour, was a Captain in the Guards.

He died when Polly was about nine years of age, leaving her to the care
of her mother, a lively young lady of about twenty-six; with a genteel
provision for both.

Her mother was extremely fond of her Polly; but had it not in herself to
manifest the true, the genuine fondness of a parent, by a strict and
guarded education; dressing out, and visiting, and being visited by the
gay of her own sex, and casting her eye abroad, as one very ready to try
her fortune again in the married state.

This induced those airs, and a love to those diversions, which make a
young widow, of so lively a turn, the unfittest tutoress in the world,
even to her own daughter.

Mrs. Horton herself having had an early turn to music, and that sort of
reading which is but an earlier debauchery for young minds, preparative
to the grosser at riper years; to wit, romances and novels, songs and
plays, and those without distinction, moral or immoral, she indulged her
daughter in the same taste; and at those hours, when they could not take
part in the more active and lively amusements and kill-times, as some
call them, used to employ Miss to read to her, happy enough, in her own
imagination, that while she was diverting her own ears, and sometimes, as
the piece was, corrupting her own heart, and her child's too, she was
teaching Miss to read, and improve her mind; for it was the boast of
every tea-table half-hour, That Miss Horton, in propriety, accent, and
emphasis, surpassed all the young ladies her age; and, at other times,
complimenting the pleased mother--Bless me, Madam, with what a surprising
grace Miss Horton reads!--she enters into the very spirit of her subject
--this she could have from nobody but you!  An intended praise; but, as
the subjects were, would have been a severe satire in the mouth of an
enemy!--While the fond, the inconsiderate mother, with a delighted air,
would cry, Why, I cannot but say, Miss Horton does credit to her
tutoress!  And then a Come hither, my best Love! and, with a kiss of
approbation, What a pleasure to your dear papa, had he lived to see your
improvements, my Charmer!  Concluding with a sigh of satisfaction, her
eyes turning round upon the circle, to take in all the silent applauses
of theirs!  But little though the fond, the foolish mother, what the
plant would be, which was springing up from these seeds!  Little imagined
she, that her own ruin, as well as her child's, was to be the consequence
of this fine education; and that, in the same ill-fated hour, the honour
of both mother and daughter was to become a sacrifice to the intriguing
invader.

This, the laughing girl, when abandoned to her evil destiny, and in
company with her sister Sally, and others, each recounting their
settings-out, their progress, and their fall, frequently related to be
her education and manner of training-up.

This, and to see a succession of humble servants buzzing about a mother,
who took too much pride in addresses of that kind, what a beginning, what
an example, to a constitution of tinder, so prepared to receive the spark
struck, from the steely forehead and flinty heart of such a libertine as
at last it was their fortune to be encountered by!

In short, as Miss grew up under the influences of such a directress, and
of books so light and frothy, with the inflaming additions of music,
concerts, operas, plays, assemblies, balls, and the rest of the rabble of
amusements of modern life, it is no wonder that, like early fruit, she
was soon ripened to the hand of the insidious gatherer.

At fifteen, she owned she was ready to fancy herself the heroine of every
novel and of every comedy she read, so well did she enter into the spirit
of her subject; she glowed to become the object of some hero's flame; and
perfectly longed to begin an intrigue, and even to be run away with by
some enterprising lover: yet had neither confinement nor check to
apprehend from her indiscreet mother, which she thought absolutely
necessary to constitute a Parthenissa!

Nevertheless, with all these fine modern qualities, did she complete her
nineteenth year, before she met with any address of consequence; one half
of her admirers being afraid, because of her gay turn, and but middling
fortune, to make serious applications for her favour; while others were
kept at a distance, by the superior airs she assumed; and a third sort,
not sufficiently penetrating the foibles either of mother or daughter,
were kept off by the supposed watchful care of the former.

But when the man of intrepidity and intrigue was found, never was heroine
so soon subdued, never goddess so easily stript of her celestials!  For,
at the opera, a diversion at which neither she nor her mother ever missed
to be present, she beheld the specious Lovelace--beheld him invested with
all the airs of heroic insult, resenting a slight affront offered to his
Sally Martin by two gentlemen who had known her in her more hopeful
state, one of whom Mr. Lovelace obliged to sneak away with a broken head,
given with the pummel of his sword, the other with a bloody nose; neither
of them well supporting that readiness of offence, which, it seems, was a
part of their known character to be guilty of.

The gallantry of this action drawing every by-stander on the side of the
hero, O the brave man! cried Polly Horton, aloud, to her mother, in a
kind of rapture, How needful the protection of the brave to the fair!
with a softness in her voice, which she had taught herself, to suit her
fancied high condition of life.

A speech so much in his favour, could not but take the notice of a man
who was but too sensible of the advantages which his fine person, and
noble air, gave him over the gentler hearts, who was always watching
every female eye, and who had his ear continually turned to every
affected voice; for that was one of his indications of a proper subject
to be attempted--Affectation of every sort, he used to say, is a certain
sign of a wrong turned head; of a faulty judgment; and upon such a basis
I seldom build in vain.

He instantly resolved to be acquainted with a young creature, who seemed
so strongly prejudiced in his favour.  Never man had a readier invention
for all sorts of mischief.  He gave his Sally her cue.  He called her
sister in their hearing; and Sally, whisperingly, gave the young lady and
her mother, in her own way, the particulars of the affront she had
received; making herself an angel of light, to cast the brighter ray upon
the character of her heroic brother.  She particularly praised his known
and approved courage; and mingled with her praises of him such
circumstances relating to his birth, his fortune, and endowments, as left
him nothing to do but to fall in love with the enamoured Polly.

Mr. Lovelace presently saw what turn to give his professions.  So brave a
man, yet of manners so gentle! hit the young lady's taste: nor could she
suspect the heart that such an aspect covered.  This was the man! the
very man! she whispered to her mother.  And, when the opera was over, his
servant procuring a coach, he undertook, with his specious sister, to set
them down at their own lodgings, though situated a quite different way
from his: and there were they prevailed upon to alight, and partake of a
slight repast.

Sally pressed them to return the favour to her at her aunt Forbes's, and
hoped it would be before her brother went to his own seat.

They promised her, and named their evening.

A splendid entertainment was provided.  The guests came, having in the
interim found all that was said of his name, and family, and fortune to
be true.  Persons of so little strictness in their own morals, took it
not into their heads to be very inquisitive after his.

Music and dancing had their share in the entertainment.  These opened
their hearts, already half opened by love: The aunt Forbes, and the
lover's sister, kept them open by their own example.  The hero sung,
vowed, promised.  Their gratitude was moved, their delights were
augmented, their hopes increased, their confidence was engaged, all their
appetites up in arms; the rich wines co-operating, beat quite off their
guard, and not thought enough remaining for so much as suspicion--Miss,
detached from her mother by Sally, soon fell a sacrifice to the
successful intriguer.

The widow herself, half intoxicated, and raised as she was with artful
mixtures, and inflamed by love, unexpectedly tendered by one of the
libertines, his constant companions, (to whom an opportunity was
contrived to be given to be alone with her, and that closely followed by
importunity, fell into her daughter's error.  The consequences of which,
in length of time, becoming apparent, grief, shame, remorse, seized her
heart, (her own indiscretion not allowing her to arraign her daughter's,)
and she survived not her delivery, leaving Polly with child likewise;
who, when delivered, being too fond of the gay deluder to renounce his
company, even when she found herself deluded, fell into a course of
extravagance and dissoluteness; ran through her fortune in a very little
time, and, as an high preferment, at last, with Sally, was admitted a
quarter partner with the detestable Sinclair.

All that is necessary to add to the history of these unhappy women, will
be comprised in a very little compass.

After the death of the profligate Sinclair, they kept on the infamous
trade with too much success; till an accident happened in the house--a
gentleman of family killed in it in a fray, contending with another for
a new-vamped face.  Sally was accused of holding the gentleman's arm,
while his more-favoured adversary ran him through the heart, and then
made off.  And she being tried for her life narrowly escaped.

This accident obliged them to break up house-keeping; and not having been
frugal enough of their ill-gotten gains, (lavishing upon one what they
got by another,) they were compelled, for subsistence sake, to enter
themselves as under-managers at such another house as their own had been.
In which service, soon after, Sally died of a fever and surfeit got by a
debauch; and the other, about a month after, by a violent cold,
occasioned through carelessness in a salivation.


Happier scenes open for the remaining characters; for it might be
descending too low to mention the untimely ends of Dorcas, and of
William, Mr. Lovelace's wicked servant; and the pining and consumptive
one's of Betty Barnes and Joseph Leman, unmarried both, and in less than
a year after the happy death of their excellent young lady.

The good Mrs. NORTON passed the small remainder of her life, as happily
as she wished, in her beloved foster-daughter's dairy-house, as it used
to be called: as she wished, we repeat; for she had too strong
aspirations after another life, to be greatly attached to this.

She laid out the greatest part of her time in doing good by her advice,
and by the prudent management of the fund committed to her direction.
Having lived an exemplary life from her youth upwards; and seen her son
happily settled in the world; she departed with ease and calmness,
without pang or agony, like a tired traveller, falling into a sweet
slumber: her last words expressing her hope of being restored to the
child of her bosom; and to her own excellent father and mother, to whose
care and pains she owed that good education to which she was indebted for
all her other blessings.

The poor's fund, which was committed to her care, she resigned a week
before her death, into the hands of Mrs. Hickman, according the direction
of the will, and all the accounts and disbursements with it; which she
had kept with such an exactness, that the lady declares, that she will
follow her method, and only wishes to discharge the trust as well.

Miss HOWE was not to be persuaded to quit her mourning for her dear
friend, until six months were fully expired: and then she made Mr.
HICKMAN one of the happiest men in the world.  A woman of her fine sense
and understanding, married to a man of virtue and good-nature, (who had
no past capital errors to reflect upon, and to abate his joys, and whose
behaviour to Mrs. Hickman is as affectionate as it was respectful to Miss
Howe,) could not do otherwise.  They are already blessed with two fine
children; a daughter, to whom, by joint consent, they have given the name
of her beloved friend; an a son, who bears that of his father.

She has allotted to Mr. Hickman, who takes delight in doing good, (and
that as much for its own sake, as to oblige her,) his part of the
management of the poor's fund; to be accountable for it, as she
pleasantly says, to her.  She has appropriated every Thursday morning for
her part of that management; and takes so much delight in the task, that
she declares it to be one of the most agreeable of her amusements.  And
the more agreeable, as she teaches every one whom she benefits, to bless
the memory of her departed friend; to whom she attributes the merit of
all her own charities, as well as the honour of those which she dispenses
in pursuance of her will.

She has declared, That this fund shall never fail while she lives.  She
has even engaged her mother to contribute annually to it.  And Mr.
Hickman has appropriated twenty pounds a year to the same.  In
consideration of which she allows him to recommend four objects yearly to
partake of it.--Allows, is her style; for she assumes the whole
prerogative of dispensing this charity; the only prerogative she does or
has occasion to assume.  In every other case, there is but one will
between them; and that is generally his or her's, as either speaks first,
upon any subject, be it what it will.  MRS. HICKMAN, she sometimes as
pleasantly as generously tells him, must not quite forget that she was
once MISS HOWE, because if he had not loved her as such, and with all her
foibles, she had never been MRS. HICKMAN.  Nevertheless she seriously, on
all occasions, and that to others as well as to himself, confesses that
she owes him unreturnable obligations for his patience with her in HER
day, and for his generous behaviour to her in HIS.

And still more the highly does she esteem and love him, as she reflects
upon his past kindness to her beloved friend; and on that dear friend's
good opinion of him.  Nor is it less grateful to her, that the worthy
man joins most sincerely with her in all those respectful and
affectionate recollections, which make the memory of the departed
precious to survivors.

Mr. BELFORD was not so destitute of humanity and affection, as to be
unconcerned at the unhappy fate of his most intimate friend.  But when
he reflects upon the untimely ends of several of his companions, but just
mentioned in the preceding history*--On the shocking despondency and
death of his poor friend Belton--On the signal justice which overtook the
wicked Tomlinson--On the dreadful exit of the infamous Sinclair--On the
deep remorses of his more valued friend--And, on the other hand, on the
example set him by the most excellent of her sex--and on her blessed
preparation, and happy departure--And when he considers, as he often does
with awe and terror, that his wicked habits were so rooted in his
depraved heart, that all these warnings, and this lovely example, seemed
to be but necessary to enable him to subdue them, and to reform; and that
such awakening-calls are hardly ever afforded to men of his cast, or (if
they are) but seldom attended the full vigour of constitution:--When he
reflects upon all these things, he adores the Mercy, which through these
calls has snatched him as a brand out of the fire: and thinks himself
obliged to make it his endeavours to find out, and to reform, any of
those who may have been endangered by his means; as well as to repair, to
the utmost of his power, any damage or mischiefs which he may have
occasioned to others.


* See Letters XLI. and LVII. of this volume.


With regard to the trust with which he was honoured by the inimitable
lady, he had the pleasure of acquitting himself of it in a very few
months, to every body's satisfaction; even to that of the unhappy family;
who sent him their thanks on the occasion.  Nor was he, at delivering up
his accounts, contented without resigning the legacy bequeathed to him,
to the uses of the will.  So that the poor's fund, as it is called, is
become a very considerable sum: and will be a lasting bank for relief of
objects who best deserve relief.

There was but one earthly blessing which remained for Mr. Belford to wish
for, in order, morally speaking, to secure to him all his other
blessings; and that was, the greatest of all worldly ones, a virtuous and
prudent wife.  So free a liver as he had been, he did not think that he
could be worthy of such a one, till, upon an impartial examination of
himself, he found the pleasure he had in his new resolutions so great,
and his abhorrence of his former courses so sincere, that he was the less
apprehensive of a deviation.

Upon this presumption, having also kept in his mind some encouraging
hints from Mr. Lovelace; and having been so happy as to have it in his
power to oblige Lord M. and that whole noble family, by some services
grateful to them (the request for which from his unhappy friend was
brought over, among other papers, with the dead body, by De la Tour); he
besought that nobleman's leave to make his addresses to Miss CHARLOTTE
MONTAGUE, the eldest of his Lordship's two nieces: and making at the same
time such proposals of settlements as were not objected to, his Lordship
was pleased to use his powerful interest in his favour.  And his worthy
niece having no engagement, she had the goodness to honour Mr. Belford
with her hand; and thereby made him as completely happy as a man can be,
who has enormities to reflect upon, which are out of his power to atone
for, by reason of the death of some of the injured parties, and the
irreclaimableness of others.

'Happy is the man who, in the time of health and strength, sees and
reforms the error of his ways!--But how much more happy is he, who has no
capital and wilful errors to repent of!--How unmixed and sincere must the
joys of such a one come to him!'

Lord M. added bountifully in his life-time, as did also the two ladies
his sisters, to the fortune of their worthy niece.  And as Mr. Belford
had been blessed with a son by her, his Lordship at his death [which
happened just three years after the untimely one of his unhappy nephew]
was pleased to devise to that son, and to his descendents for ever (and
in case of his death unmarried, to any other children of his niece) his
Hertfordshire estate, (designed for Mr. Lovelace,) which he made up to
the value of a moiety of his real estates; bequeathing also a moiety
of his personal to the same lady.

Miss PATTY MONTAGUE, a fine young lady [to whom her noble uncle, at his
death, devised the other moiety of his real and personal estates,
including his seat in Berkshire] lives at present with her excellent
sister, Mrs. Belford; to whom she removed upon Lord M.'s death: but, in
all probability, will soon be the lady of a worthy baronet, of ancient
family, fine qualities, and ample fortunes, just returned from his
travels, with a character superior to the very good one he set out with:
a case that very seldom happens, although the end of travel is
improvement.

Colonel MORDEN, who, with so many virtues and accomplishments, cannot be
unhappy, in several letters tot eh executor, with whom he corresponds
from Florence, [having, since his unhappy affair with Mr. Lovelace
changed his purpose of coming so soon to reside in England as he had
intended,] declares, That although he thought himself obliged either to
accept of what he took to be a challenge, as such; or tamely to
acknowledge, that he gave up all resentment of his cousin's wrongs; and
in a manner to beg pardon for having spoken freely of Mr. Lovelace behind
his back; and although at the time he owns he was not sorry to be called
upon, as he was, to take either the one course or the other; yet now,
coolly reflecting upon his beloved cousin's reasonings against duelling;
and upon the price it had too probably cost the unhappy man; he wishes he
had more fully considered those words in his cousin's posthumous letter--
'If God will allow him time for repentance, why should you deny it him?'*


* Several worthy persons have wished, that the heinous practice of
duelling had been more forcibly discouraged, by way of note, at the
conclusion of a work designed to recommend the highest and most important
doctrines of christianity.  It is humbly presumed, that these persons
have not sufficiently attended to what is already done on that subject in
Vol. II. Letter XII. and in this volume, Letter XVI. XLIII. XLIV. and
XLV.


To conclude--The worthy widow Lovick continues to live with Mr. Belford;
and, by her prudent behaviour, piety, and usefulness, has endeared
herself to her lady, and to the whole family.



POSTSCRIPT

REFERRED TO IN THE PREFACE

In which several objections that have been made, as well to the
      catastrophe, as to different parts of the preceding history,
      are briefly considered.


The foregoing work having been published at three different periods of
time, the author, in the course of its publication, was favoured with
many anonymous letters, in which the writers differently expressed their
wishes with regard to the apprehended catastrophe.

Most of those directed to him by the gentler sex, turned in favour of
what they called a fortunate ending.  Some of the fair writers,
enamoured, as they declared, with the character of the heroine, were
warmly solicitous to have her made happy; and others, likewise of their
mind, insisted that poetical justice required that it should be so.  And
when, says one ingenious lady, whose undoubted motive was good-nature and
humanity, it must be concluded that it is in an author's power to make
his piece end as he pleases, why should he not give pleasure rather than
pain to the reader whom he has interested in favour of his principal
characters?

Others, and some gentlemen, declared against tragedies in general, and in
favour of comedies, almost in the words of Lovelace, who was supported in
his taste by all the women at Mrs. Sinclair's and by Sinclair herself.
'I have too much feeling, said he.*  There is enough in the world to make
our hearts sad, without carrying grief into our diversions, and making
the distresses of others our own.'


* See Vol. IV. Letter XL.


And how was this happy ending to be brought about?  Why, by this very
easy and trite expedient; to wit, by reforming Lovelace, and marrying him
to Clarissa--not, however, abating her one of her trials, nor any of her
sufferings, [for the sake of the sport her distresses would give to the
tender-hearted reader, as she went along,] the last outrage excepted:
that, indeed, partly in compliment to Lovelace himself, and partly for
her delicacy-sake, they were willing to spare her.

But whatever were the fate of his work, the author was resolved to take a
different method.  He always thought that sudden conversions, such,
especially, as were left to the candour of the reader to suppose and make
out, has neither art, nor nature, nor even probability, in them; and that
they were moreover of a very bad example.  To have a Lovelace, for a
series of years, glory in his wickedness, and think that he had nothing
to do, but as an act of grace and favour to hold out his hand to receive
that of the best of women, whenever he pleased, and to have it thought
that marriage would be a sufficient amends for all his enormities to
others as well as to her--he could not bear that.  Nor is reformation, as
he has shown in another piece, to be secured by a fine face; by a passion
that has sense for its object; nor by the goodness of a wife's heart, nor
even example, if the heart of the husband be not graciously touched by
the Divine finger.

It will be seen, by this time, that the author had a great end in view.
He had lived to see the scepticism and infidelity openly avowed, and even
endeavoured to be propagated from the press; the greatest doctrines of
the Gospel brought into question; those of self-denial and mortification
blotted out of the catalogue of christian virtues; and a taste even to
wantonness for out-door pleasure and luxury, to the general exclusion of
domestic as well as public virtue, industriously promoted among all ranks
and degrees of people.

In this general depravity, when even the pulpit has lost great part of
its weight, and the clergy are considered as a body of interested men,
the author thought he should be able to answer it to his own heart, be
the success what it would, if he threw in his mite towards introducing a
reformation so much wanted: and he imagined, that if in an age given up
to diversion and entertainment, if he could steal in, as may be said, and
investigate the great doctrines of Christianity under the fashionable
guise of an amusement; he should be most likely to serve his purpose,
remembering that of the Poet:--

      A verse may find him who a sermon flies,
      And turn delight into a sacrifice.

He was resolved, therefore, to attempt something that never yet had been
done.  He considered that the tragic poets have as seldom made their
heroes true objects of pity, as the comics theirs laudable ones of
imitation: and still more rarely have made them in their deaths look
forward to a future hope.  And thus, when they die, they seem totally to
perish.  Death, in such instances, must appear terrible.  It must be
considered as the greatest evil.  But why is death set in such shocking
lights, when it is the universal lot?

He has, indeed, thought fit to paint the death of the wicked, as terrible
as he could paint it.  But he has endeavoured to draw that of the good in
such an amiable manner, that the very Balaams of the world should not
forbear to wish that their latter end might be like that of the heroine.

And after all, what is the poetical justice so much contended for by
some, as the generality of writers have managed it, but another sort of
dispensation than that with which God, by revelation, teaches us, He has
thought fit to exercise mankind; whom placing here only in a state of
probation, he hath so intermingled good and evil, as to necessitate us to
look forward for a more equal dispensation of both?

The Author of the History (or rather Dramatic Narrative) of Clarissa, is
therefore well justified by the christian system, in deferring to
extricate suffering virtue to the time in which it will meet with the
completion of its reward.

But not absolutely to shelter the conduct observed in it under the
sanction of Religion, [an authority, perhaps, not of the greatest weight
with some of our modern critics,] it must be observed, that the Author is
justified in its catastrophe by the greatest master of reason, and best
judge of composition, that ever lived.  The learned reader knows we must
mean ARISTOTLE; whose sentiments in this matter we shall beg leave to
deliver in the words of a very amiable writer of our own country:

'The English writers of Tragedy,' says Mr. Addison,* 'are possessed with
a notion, that when they represent a virtuous or innocent person in
distress, they ought not to leave him till they have delivered him out of
his troubles, or made him triumph over his enemies.


* Spectator, Vol. I. No. XL.


'This error they have been led into by a ridiculous doctrine in modern
criticism, that they are obliged to an equal distribution of rewards and
punishments, and an impartial execution of poetical justice.

'Who were the first that established this rule, I know not; but I am sure
it has no foundation in NATURE, in REASON, or in the PRACTICE OF THE
ANTIENTS.

'We find that good and evil happen alike unto ALL MEN on this side the
grave: and as the principal design of tragedy is to raise commiseration
and terror in the minds of the audience, we shall defeat this great end,
if we always make virtue and innocence happy and successful.

'Whatever crosses and disappoints a good man suffers in the body of the
tragedy, they will make but small impression on our minds, when we know,
that, in the last act, he is to arrive at the end of his wishes and
desires.

'When we see him engaged in the depth of his afflictions, we are apt to
comfort ourselves, because we are sure he will find his way out of them,
and that his grief, however great soever it may be at present, will soon
terminate in gladness.

'For this reason, the antient writers of tragedy treated men in their
plays, as they are dealt with in the world, by making virtue sometimes
happy and sometimes miserable, as they found it in the fable which they
made choice of, or as it might affect their audience in the most
agreeable manner.

'Aristotle considers the tragedies that were written in either of those
kinds; and observes, that those which ended unhappily had always pleased
the people, and carried away the prize, in the public disputes of the
state, from those that ended happily.

'Terror and commiseration leave a pleasing anguish in the mind, and fix
the audience in such a serious composure of thought, as is much more
lasting and delightful, than any little transient starts of joy and
satisfaction.

'Accordingly, we find, that more of our English tragedies have succeeded,
in which the favourites of the audience sink under their calamities, than
those in which they recover themselves out of them.

'The best plays of this kind are The Orphan, Venice Preserved, Alexander
the Great, Theodosius, All for Love, Oedipus, Oroonoko, Othello, &c.

'King Lear is an admirable tragedy of the same kind, as Shakespeare wrote
it: but as it is reformed according to the chimerical notion of POETICAL
JUSTICE, in my humble opinion it has lost half its beauty.

'At the same time I must allow, that there are very noble tragedies which
have been framed upon the other plan, and have ended happily; as indeed
most of the good tragedies which have been written since the starting of
the above-mentioned criticism, have taken this turn: The Mourning Bride,
Tamerlane,* Ulysses, Phaedra and Hippolitus, with most of Mr. Dryden's.  I
must also allow, that many of Shakespeare's, and several of the
celebrated tragedies of antiquity, are cast in the same form.  I do not,
therefore, dispute against this way of writing tragedies; but against the
criticism that would establish this as the only method; and by that means
would very much cramp the English tragedy, and perhaps give a wrong bent
to the genius of our writers.'


* Yet, in Tamerlane, two of the most amiable characters, Moneses and
Arpasia, suffer death.


This subject is further considered in a letter to the Spectator.*


* See Spect. Vol. VII. No. 548.


'I find your opinion,' says the author of it, 'concerning the
late-invented term called poetical justice, is controverted by some
eminent critics.  I have drawn up some additional arguments to strengthen
the opinion which you have there delivered; having endeavoured to go to
the bottom of that matter. . . .

'The most perfect man has vices enough to draw down punishments upon his
head, and to justify Providence in regard to any miseries that may befall
him.  For this reason I cannot but think that the instruction and moral
are much finer, where a man who is virtuous in the main of his character
falls into distress, and sinks under the blows of fortune, at the end of
a tragedy, than when he is represented as happy and triumphant.  Such an
example corrects the insolence of human nature, softens the mind of the
beholder with sentiments of pity and compassion, comforts him under his
own private affliction, and teaches him not to judge of men's virtues by
their successes.*  I cannot think of one real hero in all antiquity so
far raised above human infirmities, that he might not be very naturally
represented in a tragedy as plunged in misfortunes and calamities.  The
poet may still find out some prevailing passion or indiscretion in his
character, and show it in such a manner as will sufficiently acquit
Providence of any injustice in his sufferings: for, as Horace observes,
the best man is faulty, though not in so great a degree as those whom
we generally call vicious men.**


* A caution that our Blessed Saviour himself gives in the case of the
eighteen person killed by the fall of the tower of Siloam, Luke xiii. 4.
**       Vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille,
         Qui minimis urgentur.----


'If such a strict poetical justice (proceeds the letter-writer,) as some
gentlemen insist upon, were to be observed in this art, there is no
manner of reason why it should not be so little observed in Homer, that
his Achilles is placed in the greatest point of glory and success, though
his character is morally vicious, and only poetically good, if I may use
the phrase of our modern critics.  The AEnead is filled with innocent
unhappy persons.  Nisus and Euryalus, Lausus and Pallas, come all to
unfortunate ends.  The poet takes notice in particular, that in the
sacking of Troy, Ripheus fell, who was the most just character among the
Trojans:

      '----Cadit & Ripheus, justissimus unus
      Qui fuit in Teucris, & servantissimus aequi.
      Diis aliter visum est.--

      'The gods thought fit.--So blameless Ripheus fell,
      Who lov'd fair Justice, and observ'd it well.'

'And that Pantheus could neither be preserved by his transcendent piety,
nor by the holy fillets of Apollo, whose priest he was:

      '--Nec te tua plurima, Pantheu,
      Labentum pietas, nec Apollinis infula texit.  AEn. II.

      'Nor could thy piety thee, Pantheus, save,
      Nor ev'n thy priesthood, from an early grave.'

'I might here mention the practice of antient tragic poets, both Greek
and Latin; but as this particular is touched upon in the paper
above-mentioned, I shall pass it over in silence.  I could produce
passages out of Aristotle in favour of my opinion; and if in one place he
says, that an absolutely virtuous man should not be represented as
unhappy, this does not justify any one who should think fit to bring in
an absolutely virtuous man upon the stage.  Those who are acquainted with
that author's way of writing, know very well, that to take the whole
extent of his subject into his divisions of it, he often makes use of
such cases as are imaginary, and not reducible to practice. . . .

'I shall conclude,' says this gentleman, 'with observing, that though the
Spectator above-mentioned is so far against the rule of poetical justice,
as to affirm, that good men may meet with an unhappy catastrophe in
tragedy, it does not say, that ill men may go off unpunished.  The reason
for this distinction is very plain; namely, because the best of men [as
is said above,] have faults enough to justify Providence for any
misfortunes and afflictions which may befall them; but there are many men
so criminal, that they can have no claim or pretence to happiness.  The
best of men may deserve punishment; but the worst of men cannot deserve
happiness.'

Mr. Addison, as we have seen above, tells us, that Aristotle, in
considering the tragedies that were written in either of the kinds,
observes, that those which ended unhappily had always pleased the people,
and carried away the prize, in the public disputes of the stage, from
those that ended happily.  And we shall take leave to add, that this
preference was given at a time when the entertainments of the stage were
committed to the care of the magistrates; when the prizes contended for
were given by the state; when, of consequence, the emulation among
writers was ardent; and when learning was at the highest pitch of glory
in that renowned commonwealth.

It cannot be supposed, that the Athenians, in this their highest age of
taste and politeness, were less humane, less tender-hearted, than we of
the present.  But they were not afraid of being moved, nor ashamed of
showing themselves to be so, at the distresses they saw well painted and
represented.  In short, they were of the opinion, with the wisest of men,
that it was better to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of
mirth; and had fortitude enough to trust themselves with their own
generous grief, because they found their hearts mended by it.

Thus also Horace, and the politest Romans in the Augustan age, wished to
be affected:

      Ac ne forte putes me, quae facere ipse recusem,
      Cum recte tractant alii, laudere maligne;
      Ille per extentum funem mihi posse videtur
      Ire poeta, meum qui pectus inaniter angit,
      Irritat, mulcet; falsis terroribus implet,
      Ut magus; & modo me Thebis, modo point Athenis.

Thus Englished by Mr. Pope:

      Yet, lest thou think I rally more than teach,
      Or praise malignly arts I cannot reach;
      Let me, for once, presume t'instruct the times
      To know the poet from the man of rhymes.
      'Tis he who gives my breast a thousand pains:
      Can make me feel each passion that he feigns;
      Enrage--compose--with more than magic art,
      With pity and with terror tear my heart;
      And snatch me o'er the earth, or through the air,
      To Thebes, to Athens, when he will, and where.

Our fair readers are also desired to attend to what a celebrated critic*
of a neighbouring nation says on the nature and design of tragedy, from
the rules laid down by the same great antient.


* Rapin, on Aristotle's Poetics.


'Tragedy,' says he, makes man modest, by representing the great masters
of the earth humbled; and it makes him tender and merciful, by showing
him the strange accidents of life, and the unforeseen disgraces, to which
the most important persons are subject.

'But because man is naturally timorous and compassionate, he may fall
into other extremes.  Too much fear may shake his constancy of mind, and
too much of tragedy to regulate these two weaknesses.  It prepares and
arms him against disgraces, by showing them so frequent in the most
considerable persons; and he will cease to fear extraordinary accidents,
when he sees them happen to the highest part of mankind.  And still more
efficacious, we may add, the example will be, when he sees them happen
to the best.

'But as the end of tragedy is to teach men not to fear too weakly common
misfortunes, it proposes also to teach them to spare their compassion for
objects that deserve it.  For there is an injustice in being moved at the
afflictions of those who deserve to be miserable.  We may see, without
pity, Clytemnestra slain by her son Orestes in AEschylus, because she had
murdered Agamemnon her husband; yet we cannot see Hippolytus die by the
plot of his step-mother Phaedra, in Euripides, without compassion, because
he died not, but for being chaste and virtuous.

These are the great authorities so favourable to the stories that end
unhappily.  And we beg leave to reinforce this inference from them, that
if the temporary sufferings of the virtuous and the good can be accounted
for and justified on Pagan principles, many more and infinitely stronger
reasons will occur to a Christian reader in behalf of what are called
unhappy catastrophes, from the consideration of the doctrine of future
rewards; which is every where strongly enforced in the History of
Clarissa.

Of this, (to give but one instance,) an ingenious modern, distinguished
by his rank, but much more for his excellent defence of some of the most
important doctrines of Christianity, appears convinced in the conclusion
of a pathetic Monody, lately published; in which, after he had deplored,
as a man without hope, (expressing ourselves in the Scripture phrase,)
the loss of an excellent wife; he thus consoles himself:

      Yet, O my soul! thy rising murmurs stay,
      Nor dare th' All-wise Disposer to arraign,
         Or against his supreme decree
            With impious grief complain.
      That all thy full-blown joys at once should fade,
      Was his most righteous will: and be that will obey'd.
         Would thy fond love his grace to her controul,
         And in these low abodes of sin and pain
                  Her pure, exalted soul,
         Unjustly, for thy partial good detain?
         No--rather strive thy grov'ling mind to raise
            Up to that unclouded blaze,
         That heav'nly radiance of eternal light,
         In which enthron'd she now with pity sees,
            How frail, how insecure, how slight,
               Is every mortal bliss.

But of infinitely greater weight than all that has been above produced
on this subject, are the words of the Psalmist:

'As for me, says he,* my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh
slipt: for I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the
wicked.  For their strength is firm: they are not in trouble as other
men; neither are they plagued like other men--their eyes stand out with
fatness: they have more than their heart could wish--verily I have
cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence; for all
the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.  When I
thought to know this, it was too painful for me.  Until I went into the
sanctuary of God; then understood I their end--thou shalt guide me with
thy counsel, and afterwards receive me to glory.'


* Psalm lxxiii.


This is the Psalmist's comfort and dependence.  And shall man, presuming
to alter the common course of nature, and, so far as he is able, to elude
the tenure by which frail mortality indispensably holds, imagine that he
can make a better dispensation; and by calling it poetical justice,
indirectly reflect on the Divine?

The more pains have been taken to obviate the objections arising from the
notion of poetical justice, as the doctrine built upon it had obtained
general credit among us; and as it must be confessed to have the
appearance of humanity and good nature for its supports.  And yet the
writer of the History of Clarissa is humbly of opinion, that he might
have been excused referring to them for the vindication of his
catastrophe, even by those who are advocates for the contrary opinion;
since the notion of poetical justice, founded on the modern rules, has
hardly ever been more strictly observed in works of this nature than in
the present performance.

For, is not Mr. Lovelace, who could persevere in his villanous views,
against the strongest and most frequent convictions and remorses that
ever were sent to awaken and reclaim a wicked man--is not this great,
this wilful transgressor condignly punished; and his punishment brought
on through the intelligence of the very Joseph Leman whom he had
corrupted;* and by means of the very woman whom he had debauched**--is
not Mr. Belton, who had an uncle's hastened death to answer for***--are
not the infamous Sinclair and her wretched partners--and even the wicked
servants, who, with their eyes open, contributed their parts to the
carrying on of the vile schemes of their respective principals--are they
not all likewise exemplarily punished?


* See Letter LVIII. of this volume.
** Ibid. Letter LXI.
*** See Vol. VIII. Letter XVI.


On the other hand, is not Miss HOWE, for her noble friendship to the
exalted lady in her calamities--is not Mr. HICKMAN, for his
unexceptionable morals, and integrity of life--is not the repentant and
not ungenerous BELFORD--is not the worthy NORTON--made signally happy?

And who that are in earnest in their professions of Christianity, but
will rather envy than regret the triumphant death of CLARISSA; whose
piety, from her early childhood; whose diffusive charity; whose steady
virtue; whose Christian humility, whose forgiving spirit; whose meekness,
and resignation, HEAVEN only could reward?*


* And here it may not be amiss to remind the reader, that so early in the
work as Vol. II. Letter XXXVIII. the dispensations of Providence are
justified by herself.  And thus she ends her reflections--'I shall not
live always--may my closing scene be happy!'--She had her wish.  It was
happy.


We shall now, according to the expectation given in the Preface to this
edition, proceed to take brief notice of such other objections as have
come to our knowledge: for, as is there said, 'This work being addressed
to the public as a history of life and manners, those parts of it which
are proposed to carry with them the force of example, ought to be as
unobjectionable as is consistent with the design of the whole, and with
human nature.'

Several persons have censured the heroine as too cold in her love, too
haughty, and even sometimes provoking.  But we may presume to say, that
this objection has arisen from want of attention to the story, to the
character of Clarissa, and to her particular situation.

It was not intended that she should be in love, but in liking only, if
that expression may be admitted.  It is meant to be every where
inculcated in the story for example sake, that she never would have
married Mr. Lovelace, because of his immoralities, had she been left to
herself; and that of her ruin was principally owing to the persecutions
of her friends.

What is too generally called love, ought (perhaps as generally) to be
called by another name.  Cupidity, or a Paphian stimulus, as some women,
even of condition, have acted, are not words too harsh to be substituted
on the occasion, however grating they may be to delicate ears.  But take
the word love in the gentlest and most honourable sense, it would have
been thought by some highly improbable, that Clarissa should have been
able to show such a command of her passions, as makes so distinguishing
a part of her character, had she been as violently in love, as certain
warm and fierce spirits would have had her to be.  A few observations are
thrown in by way of note in the present edition, at proper places to
obviate this objection, or rather to bespeak the attention of hasty
readers to what lies obviously before them.  For thus the heroine
anticipates this very objection, expostulating with Miss Howe on her
contemptuous treatment of Mr. Hickman; which (far from being guilty of
the same fault herself) she did, on all occasions, and declares she would
do so, whenever Miss Howe forgot herself, although she had not a day to
live:

'O my dear,' says she, 'that it had been my lot (as I was not permitted
to live single) to have met with a man, by whom I could have acted
generously and unreservedly!

'Mr. Lovelace, it is now plain, in order to have a pretence against me,
taxed my behaviour to him with stiffness and distance.  You, at one time,
thought me guilty of some degree of prudery.  Difficult situations should
be allowed for: which often make seeming occasions for censure
unavoidable.  I deserved not blame from him, who made mine difficult.
And you, my dear, had I any other man to deal with than Mr. Lovelace, or
had he but half the merit which Mr. Hickman has, would have found, that
my doctrine on this subject, should have governed my whole practice.'
See this whole Letter, No. XXXII. Vol. VIII.  See also Mr. Lovelace's
Letter, Vol. VIII. No. LIX. and Vol. IX. No. XLII. where, just before his
death, he entirely acquits her conduct on this head.

It has been thought, by some worthy and ingenious persons, that if
Lovelace had been drawn an infidel or scoffer, his character, according
to the taste of the present worse than sceptical age, would have been
more natural.  It is, however, too well known, that there are very many
persons, of his cast, whose actions discredit their belief.  And are not
the very devils, in Scripture, said to believe and tremble?

But the reader must have observed, that, great, and, it is hoped, good
use, has been made throughout the work, by drawing Lovelace an infidel,
only in practice; and this as well in the arguments of his friend
Belford, as in his own frequent remorses, when touched with temporary
compunction, and in his last scenes; which could not have been made, had
either of them been painted as sentimental unbelievers.  Not to say that
Clarissa, whose great objection to Mr. Wyerley was, that he was a
scoffer, must have been inexcusable had she known Lovelace to be so, and
had given the least attention to his addresses.  On the contrary, thus
she comforts herself, when she thinks she must be his--'This one
consolation, however, remains; he is not an infidel, an unbeliever.  Had
he been an infidel, there would have been no room at all for hope of him;
but (priding himself as he does in his fertile invention) he would have
been utterly abandoned, irreclaimable, and a savage.'*  And it must be
observed, that scoffers are too witty, in their own opinion, (in other
words, value themselves too much upon their profligacy,) to aim at
concealing it.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXXIX. and Vol. V. Letter VIII.


Besides, had Lovelace added ribbald jests upon religion, to his other
liberties, the freedoms which would then have passed between him and his
friend, must have been of a nature truly infernal.

And this father hint was meant to be given, by way of inference, that the
man who allowed himself in those liberties either of speech or action,
which Lovelace thought shameful, was so far a worse man than Lovelace.
For this reason he is every where made to treat jests on sacred things
and subjects, even down to the mythology of the Pagans, among Pagans, as
undoubted marks of the ill-breeding of the jester; obscene images and
talk, as liberties too shameful for even rakes to allow themselves in;
and injustice to creditors, and in matters of Meum and Tuum, as what it
was beneath him to be guilty of.

Some have objected to the meekness, to the tameness, as they will have it
to be, of Mr. Hickman's character.  And yet Lovelace owns, that he rose
upon him with great spirit in the interview between them; once, when he
thought a reflection was but implied on Miss Howe;* and another time,
when he imagined himself treated contemptuously.**  Miss Howe, it must be
owned, (though not to the credit of her own character,) treats him
ludicrously on several occasions.  But so she does her mother.  And
perhaps a lady of her lively turn would have treated as whimsically any
man but a Lovelace.  Mr. Belford speaks of him with honour and
respect.***  So does Colonel Morden.****  And so does Clarissa on every
occasion.  And all that Miss Howe herself says of him, tends more to his
reputation than discredit,***** as Clarissa indeed tells her.******


* See Vol. VII. Letter XXVIII.
** Ibid.
*** Ibid. Letter XLVIII.
**** See Letter XLVI. of this volume.
***** See Vol. II. Letter II. and Vol. III. Letter XL.
****** See Vol. II. Letter XI.


And as to Lovelace's treatment of him, the reader must have observed,
that it was his way to treat every man with contempt, partly by way of
self-exaltation, and partly to gratify the natural gaiety of his
disposition.  He says himself to Belford,* 'Thou knowest I love him not,
Jack; and whom we love not, we cannot allow a merit to; perhaps not the
merit they should be granted.'  'Modest and diffident men,' writes
Belford, to Lovelace, in praise of Mr. Hickman, 'wear not soon off those
little precisenesses, which the confident, if ever they had them,
presently get over.'**


* See Vol. VII. Letter XXVIII.
** Ibid. Letter XLVIII.


But, as Miss Howe treats her mother as freely as she does her lover; so
does Mr. Lovelace take still greater liberties with Mr. Belford than he
does with Mr. Hickman, with respect to his person, air, and address, as
Mr. Belford himself hints to Mr. Hickman.*  And yet is he not so readily
believed to the discredit of Mr. Belford, by the ladies in general, as he
is when he disparages Mr. Hickman.  Whence can this particularity arise?


* See Letter XXXVI. of this volume.


Mr. Belford had been a rake: but was in a way of reformation.

Mr. Hickman had always been a good man.

And Lovelace confidently says, That the women love a man whose regard for
      them is founded in the knowledge of them.*


* See Vol. V. Letter XVIII.


Nevertheless, it must be owned, that it was not purposed to draw Mr.
Hickman, as the man of whom the ladies in general were likely to be very
fond.  Had it been so, goodness of heart, and gentleness of manners,
great assiduity, and inviolable and modest love, would not of themselves
have been supposed sufficient recommendations.  He would not have been
allowed the least share of preciseness or formality, although those
defects might have been imputed to his reverence for the object of his
passion; but in his character it was designed to show, that the same man
could not be every thing; and to intimate to ladies, that in choosing
companions for life, they should rather prefer the honest heart of a
Hickman, which would be all their own, than to risk the chance of
sharing, perhaps with scores, (and some of those probably the most
profligate of the sex,) the volatile mischievous one of a Lovelace: in
short, that they should choose, if they wished for durable happiness, for
rectitude of mind, and not for speciousness of person or address; nor
make a jest of a good man in favour of a bad one, who would make a jest
of them and of their whole sex.

Two letters, however, by way of accommodation, are inserted in this
edition, which perhaps will give Mr. Hickman's character some heightening
with such ladies as love spirit in a man; and had rather suffer by it,
than not meet with it.--

      Women, born to be controul'd,
      Stoop to the forward and the bold,

Says Waller--and Lovelace too!


Some have wished that the story had been told in the usual narrative way
of telling stories designed to amuse and divert, and not in letters
written by the respective persons whose history is given in them.  The
author thinks he ought not to prescribe to the taste of others; but
imagined himself at liberty to follow his own.  He perhaps mistrusted his
talents for the narrative kind of writing.  He had the good fortune to
succeed in the epistolary way once before.  A story in which so many
persons were concerned either principally or collaterally, and of
characters and dispositions so various, carried on with tolerable
connection and perspicuity, in a series of letters from different
persons, without the aid of digressions and episodes foreign to the
principal end and design, he thought had novelty to be pleaded for it;
and that, in the present age, he supposed would not be a slight
recommendation.

Besides what has been said above, and in the Preface, on this head, the
following opinion of an ingenious and candid foreigner, on this manner of
writing, may not be improperly inserted here.

'The method which the author had pursued in the History of Clarissa, is
the same as in the Life of Pamela: both are related in familiar letters
by the parties themselves, at the very time in which the events happened:
and this method has given the author great advantages, which he could not
have drawn from any other species of narration.  The minute particulars
of events, the sentiments and conversation of the parties, are, upon this
plan, exhibited with all the warmth and spirit that the passion supposed
to be predominant at the very time could produce, and with all the
distinguishing characteristics which memory can supply in a history of
recent transactions.

'Romances in general, and Marivaux's amongst others, are wholly
improbable; because they suppose the History to be written after the
series of events is closed by the catastrophe: a circumstance which
implies a strength of memory beyond all example and probability in the
persons concerned, enabling them, at the distance of several years, to
relate all the particulars of a transient conversation: or rather, it
implies a yet more improbable confidence and familiarity between all
these persons and the author.

'There is, however, one difficulty attending the epistolary method; for
it is necessary that all the characters should have an uncommon taste for
this kind of conversation, and that they should suffer no event, not even
a remarkable conversation to pass, without immediately committing it to
writing.  But for the preservation of the letters once written, the
author has provided with great judgment, so as to render this
circumstance highly probable.'*


* This quotation is translated from a CRITIQUE on the HISTORY OF
CLARISSA, written in French, and published at Amsterdam.  The whole
Critique, rendered into English, was inserted in the Gentleman's Magazine
of June and August, 1749.  The author has done great honour in it to the
History of Clarissa; and as there are Remarks published with it, which
answer several objections made to different passages in the story by that
candid foreigner, the reader is referred to the aforesaid Magazine for
both.


It is presumed that what this gentleman says of the difficulties
attending a story thus given in the epistolary manner of writing, will
not be found to reach the History before us.  It is very well accounted
for in it, how the two principal female characters came to take so great
a delight in writing.  Their subjects are not merely subjects of
amusement; but greatly interesting to both: yet many ladies there are who
now laudably correspond, when at distance from each other, on occasions
that far less affect their mutual welfare and friendships, than those
treated of by these ladies.  The two principal gentlemen had motives of
gaiety and vain-glory for their inducements.  It will generally be found,
that persons who have talents for familiar writing, as these
correspondents are presumed to have, will not forbear amusing themselves
with their pens on less arduous occasions than what offer to these.
These FOUR, (whose stories have a connection with each other,) out of the
great number of characters who are introduced in this History, are only
eminent in the epistolary way: the rest appear but as occasional writers,
and as drawn in rather by necessity than choice, from the different
relations in which they stand with the four principal persons.

The length of the piece has been objected to by some, who perhaps looked
upon it as a mere novel or romance; and yet of these there are not
wanting works of equal length.

They were of opinion, that the story moved too slowly, particularly in
the first and second volumes, which are chiefly taken up with the
altercations between Clarissa and the several persons of her family.

But is it not true, that those altercations are the foundation of the
whole, and therefore a necessary part of the work?  The letters and
conversations, where the story makes the slowest progress, are presumed
to be characteristic.  They give occasion, likewise, to suggest many
interesting personalities, in which a good deal of the instruction
essential to a work of this nature is conveyed.  And it will, moreover,
be remembered, that the author, at his first setting out, apprized the
reader, that the story (interesting as it is generally allowed to be) was
to be principally looked upon as the vehicle to the instruction.

To all which we may add, that there was frequently a necessity to be very
circumstantial and minute, in order to preserve and maintain that air of
probability, which is necessary to be maintained in a story designed to
represent real life; and which is rendered extremely busy and active by
the plots and contrivances formed and carried on by one of the principal
characters.

Some there are, and ladies too! who have supposed that the excellencies
of the heroine are carried to an improbable, and even to an
impracticable, height in this history.  But the education of Clarissa,
from early childhood, ought to be considered as one of her very great
advantages; as, indeed, the foundation of all her excellencies: and, it
is to be hoped, for the sake of the doctrine designed to be inculcated by
it, that it will.

She had a pious, a well-read, a not meanly-descended woman for her nurse,
who with her milk, as Mrs. Harlowe says,* gave her that nurture which no
other nurse could give her.  She was very early happy in the
conversation-visits of her learned and worthy Dr. Lewen, and in her
correspondencies, not with him only, but with other divines mentioned in
her last will.  Her mother was, upon the whole, a good woman, who did
credit to her birth and fortune; and both delighted in her for those
improvements and attainments which gave her, and them in her, a
distinction that caused it to be said, that when she was out of the
family it was considered but as a common family.**  She was, moreover, a
country lady; and, as we have seen in Miss Howe's character of her,***
took great delight in rural and household employments; though qualified
to adorn the brightest circle.


* See Vol. IV. Letter XXVIII.
** See her mother's praises of her to Mrs. Norton, Vol. I. Letter XXXIX.
*** See Letter LV. of this volume.


It must be confessed that we are not to look for Clarissa's name among
the constant frequenters of Ranelagh and Vauxhall, nor among those who
may be called Daughters of the card-table.  If we do, the character of
our heroine may then, indeed, only be justly thought not improbable, but
unattainable.  But we have neither room in this place, nor inclination,
to pursue a subject so invidious.  We quit it, therefore, after we have
repeated that we know there are some, and we hope there are many, in the
British dominions, (or they are hardly any where in the European world,)
who, as far as occasion has called upon them to exert the like humble and
modest, yet steady and useful, virtues, have reached the perfections of a
Clarissa.

Having thus briefly taken notice of the most material objections that
have been made to different parts of this history, it is hoped we may be
allowed to add, that had we thought ourselves at liberty to give copies
of some of the many letters that have been written on the other side of
the question, that is to say, in approbation of the catastrophe, and of
the general conduct and execution of the work, by some of the most
eminent judges of composition in every branch of literature; most of what
has been written in this Postscript might have been spared.

But as the principal objection with many has lain against the length of
the piece, we shall add to what we have said above on that subject, in
the words of one of those eminent writers: 'That if, in the history
before us, it shall be found that the spirit is duly diffused throughout;
that the characters are various and natural; well distinguished and
uniformly supported and maintained; if there be a variety of incidents
sufficient to excite attention, and those so conducted as to keep the
reader always awake! the length then must add proportionably to the
pleasure that every person of taste receives from a well-drawn picture
of nature.  But where the contrary of all these qualities shock the
understanding, the extravagant performance will be judged tedious, though
no longer than a fairy-tale.'

FINIS





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Clarissa Harlowe, Volume 9 (of 9)
by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA HARLOWE, VOLUME 9 (OF 9) ***

***** This file should be named 12398.txt or 12398.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/3/9/12398/

Produced by Julie C. Sparks

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


